* 0439711
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exploring the Bases of Social Hierarchy in the Jamastran Valley, Southeastern Honduras
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2006
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2006
* USD 11,974.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Robert D. Drennan, Eva Martinez will carry out a
full-coverage systematic survey of the Jamastren Valley, in southeastern
Honduras to explore the bases of social inequality in the regions. It is useful
to approach the emergence of social differentiation from the perspective of
aspiring elites striving to improve their social positions through various
political strategies. There is considerable debate over the extent to which such
aggrandizers must achieve economic control over those they subordinate. Some
argue that no substantial inequality emerges without firm economic control as
its base, while others hold that exalted social positions can be based on
prestige in the absence of much accumulation of wealth. This research attempts
to contribute to the discussion by evaluating the relative importance of two
kinds of strategy for gaining social rank: 1) those based on economic control
over either basic agricultural resources or the production of utilitarian craft
items, and 2) those focused on enhancing prestige by manipulating connections to
elites in neighboring regions and symbolically-charged prestige
goods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to evaluate the relative importance of
these two kinds of strategy Ms. Martinez will focus on elite involvement in
three activities: 1) agricultural production; 2) local craft production and
exchange; and 3) interregional interaction. The Jamastran Valley provides an
ideal setting to explore the functioning and interplay of these activities. For
the first, it offers highly productive agricultural land, able to support large
permanent human populations and potentially subject to elite control. Related to
both the second and third, a rare source of obsidian, widely traded for making
cutting tools in prehispanic times, is located close to the Jamastran Valley.
This obsidian could have been exploited for local use and/or export by residents
of the valley, with or without elite control. And pottery, textiles, and other
craft goods manufactured from locally available resources might have been
produced by practically every family or in much concentrated and specialized
fashion, again with or without elite control. The proposed research will provide
documentation of the nature and pacing of social change in the Jamastran Valley
so that its relationship to these economic and potentially non-economic factors
can be evaluated. It will then also be possible to compare the trajectory of
social change in the Jamastran Valley to those of neighboring regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also have a broader impact in that it
will be a crucial element in the training of the doctoral candidate, and it will
further the training of Honduran students who will participate in the fieldwork.
It will also provide documentation of cultural remains currently threatened with
destruction by agricultural development, and will strengthen ties of
international scholarly collaboration, since it will cooperate closely with
salvage efforts in the region by the Instituto Hondures de Antropologia e
Historia. &lt;br/&gt;