* 0439026
* Quantum Fluctuations of the Order Parameter in Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Leonid Glazman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2008
* USD 270,000.00

This grant supports theoretical research in fundamental condensed matter
physics. In the past decade a strong experimental effort was devoted to
mesoscopic superconductivity. Currently, the interest in this field has
increased even more because of the search for viable schemes in quantum
computing. The parallel work in theory until recently was concentrated mostly on
equilibrium characteristics and linear response properties of superconducting
and hybrid structures. However, there is a clear need, dictated by experiments,
to understand the properties of hybrid structures far from equilibrium. This
research will explore these properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project
deals with dynamic properties of circuits of small Josephson junctions subject
to parametric excitation. The driven junctions system may be brought to the
regime of classical or quantum dynamic chaos. Quantum effects become important
if the junctions are small enough to allow for charge quantization. We will
explore the chaos in a system of two junctions. It appears that investigation of
such a simple model may be intellectually challenging and technically involved,
in part because it requires understanding of the system properties far from
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project is devoted to the study of
non-equilibrium properties of a junction consisting of superconducting leads
connected by a mesoscopic normal metal bridge. In such SNS junctions, deviations
from equilibrium arise inevitably, even in the limit of the smallest applied
biases; developing an adequate theory is important for many applications. At the
same time, it presents a serious challenge , as currently there are no
convenient theoretical tools for predicting the behavior of strongly non-
equilibrium states of SNS structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third project
aims at obtaining estimates of the decoherence rate for a superconducting qubit
coupled to a quantized radiation field. We will concentrate on mechanisms
associated with the quasiparticle excitations in the superconducting grains
forming the qubit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is relevant to experiment
and may resolve several existing puzzles. Advances will aid further development
of several analytical techniques. Graduate students will be trained. Results of
the research will affect a number of fields including mesoscopic
superconductivity, cold atomic gases and quantum
chaos.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical research explores a number of
topics related to non-equilibrium properties of superconducting junctions and
their relation to chaos, structures of involving superconductors and their
potential use in quantum computers. Students will be trained and connections
made to experiment.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;