* 0439906
* Collaborative Research: Abandoned Elephant Seal Colonies in Antarctica: Integration of Genetic, Isotopic, and Geologic Approaches toward Understanding Holocene Environmental Change
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2009
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 08/31/2009
* USD 117,641.00

During previous NSF-sponsored research, the PI's discovered that southern
elephant seal colonies once existed along the Victoria Land coast (VLC) of
Antarctica, a region where they are no longer observed. Molted seal skin and
hair occur along 300 km of coastline, more than 1000 km from any extant colony.
The last record of a seal at a former colony site is at ~A.D. 1600. Because
abandonment occurred prior to subantarctic sealing, disappearance of the VLC
colony probably was due to environmental factors, possibly cooling and
encroachment of land-fast, perennial sea ice that made access to haul-out sites
difficult. The record of seal inhabitation along the VLC, therefore, has
potential as a proxy for climate change. Elephant seals are a predominantly
subantarctic species with circumpolar distribution. Genetic studies have
revealed significant differentiation among populations, particularly with regard
to that at Macquarie I., which is the extant population nearest to the abandoned
VLC colony. Not only is the Macquarie population unique genetically, but it is
has undergone unexplained decline of 2%/yr over the last 50 years3. In a pilot
study, genetic analyses showed a close relationship between the VLC seals and
those at Macquarie I. An understanding of the relationship between the two
populations, as well as of the environmental pressures that led to the demise of
the VLC colonies, will provide a better understanding of present-day population
genetic structure, the effect of environmental change on seal populations, and
possibly the reasons underlying the modern decline at Macquarie
Island.&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses several key research problems: (1) Why
did elephant seals colonize and then abandon the VLC? (2) What does the elephant
seal record reveal about Holocene climate change and sea-ice conditions? (3)
What were the foraging strategies of the seals and did these strategies change
over time as climate varied? (4) How does the genetic structure of the VLC seals
relate to extant populations? (5) How did genetic diversity change over time and
with colony decline? (6) Using ancient samples to estimate mtDNA mutation rates,
what can be learned about VLC population dynamics over time? (7) What was the
ecological relationship between elephant seals and Adelie penguins that occupied
the same sites, but apparently at different times? The proposed work includes
the professional training of young researchers and incorporation of data into
graduate and undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;