* 0439269
* The Oxidation State of Hawaiian Magmas
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2007
* John Rhodes, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2007
* USD 141,068.00

The oxygen fugacity of basaltic magma is a fundamental intensive variable that
controls the iron redox state (Fe2O3/FeO + Fe2O3) of the melt, and has a strong
influence on the sequence and composition of minerals that crystallize from a
cooling magma, and therefore on the composition of a fractionated melt. More
importantly, the oxygen fugacity of basaltic magma is thought to reflect the
oxygen fugacity of the mantle source or, at the very least, to place an upper
limit on that of the source. The oxygen fugacity of Hawaiian magmas is widely
accepted as being close to the FMQ (fayalite-magnetite-quartz) buffer. This
assumption is based largely on analyses of lavas from Kilauea volcano. There are
very few published measurements on lavas from other Hawaiian volcanoes, and
those that do exist may be suspect. The lavas may well have undergone subaerial
or near-surface oxidation during eruption, with the consequence that the
reported values may be too high. That is, the oxygen fugacities may be lower
than FMQ and closer to MW (magnetite-wustite buffer). This research will attempt
to clarify this situation. Carefully selected, rapidly quenched samples will be
analyzed for FeO and Fe2O3 in order to estimate the oxygen fugacity. Major
elements, trace elements and sulfur abundances will also be determined on the
same samples. Sulfur will be measured to test the hypothesis that sulfur
degassing results in the reduction of the magma. The samples will include
quenched lavas, spatter, hyaloclastites, and glassy pillow margins from Mauna
Loa, Kilauea, Mauna Kea and Loihi volcanoes. This data should provide a firm
base for establishing the oxygen fugacity of Hawaiian magmas and show whether or
not there are significant differences in oxygen fugacity of lavas from different
volcanoes. It will place limits on the oxidation state of the Hawaiian plume,
and contribute to the vigorous debate on the oxidation state of the mantle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last twenty five years there has been
a vigorous debate on the oxidation state of the earth's mantle, partly because
it has relevance to the origin of the earth's atmosphere through volcanic
degassing, and therefore ultimately to the development and evolution of life.
Basaltic magmas, which are produced by melting of the earth's mantle are thought
to provide information on the oxidation state of their mantle source. Those
erupted on Hawaiian volcanoes are thought to have their origins in a hot, mantle
plume that may have originated as deep as the core-mantle boundary. It is
speculated that this plume material is a mixture of primitive mantle and re-
cycled crustal material from subduction zones along the earth's plate margins.
An understanding of its oxidation state is therefore of some importance. By
precisely measuring the amounts of ferric and ferrous iron in basaltic lava it
is possible to estimate the oxidation state of the magma, and from this arrive
at inferences concerning the oxidation state of the mantle plume. The work done
to date, suggests that Hawaiian magmas are relatively oxidized, more so than
magmas erupted along the Earth's spreading mid-ocean ridges. These results may
be in error. This is because basaltic magmas are prone to oxidation during
eruption and transportation in lava flows. Our preliminary results indicate that
the oxidation of a lava is critically dependent on how, when and where it is
sampled. Lavas that have cooled slowly, or have traveled some distance from the
vents are invariably oxidized. Only lavas that have been quenched rapidly,
and/or have been sampled at the eruptive vent, retain their original oxidation
state, which is much lower than has previously been supposed. This research will
focus on determining the oxidation state of rapidly quenched lavas from Mauna
Loa, Kilauea, Mauna Kea and Loihi volcanoes in an attempt to rectify this
situation.&lt;br/&gt;