* 0439882
* The Colima Deep Seismic Experiment: Imaging the Magmatic Root of Colima Volcano
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Michael West, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2009
* USD 255,365.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Most of the world's explosive volcanism occurs at
widely-spaced volcanic centers&lt;br/&gt;along convergent margins. Basaltic
magmas from the subduction wedge are&lt;br/&gt;channeled to volcanoes separated
by tens or hundreds of kilometers and evolve&lt;br/&gt;into silica-rich
compositions associated with dome growth, pyroclastic flows&lt;br/&gt;and
explosive eruptions. Decades of geochemical research have outlined a
suite&lt;br/&gt;of processes which control the chemical and spatial evolution of
these&lt;br/&gt;volcanoes. These ideas, which rely heavily on processes in the
lowermost crust,&lt;br/&gt;have evolved with limited input from geophysics
because the deep crust has been&lt;br/&gt;difficult to probe with seismics,
gravity, and/or electromagnetics. The Colima&lt;br/&gt;Deep Seismic Experiment
is one of the first to target the deep crustal&lt;br/&gt;processes which create
discrete volcanoes and ultimately control eruptive&lt;br/&gt;behavior. In
conjunction with the Observatorio Vulcanologico of Colima&lt;br/&gt;University
in Mexico, the PI will install and maintain a seismic array for
18&lt;br/&gt;months in the vicinity of Colima Volcano. The Observatorio is
responsible for&lt;br/&gt;monitoring Colima Volcano, which is in the midst of an
on-going eruption cycle,&lt;br/&gt;and seismicity throughout the state of Colima
which has had two earthquakes&lt;br/&gt;greater than magnitude 7.5 in the last
ten years. This project will be&lt;br/&gt;co-deployed with the arc-scale network
of Grand and Ni (EAR #0335782) which is&lt;br/&gt;serendipitously centered on
Colima. This array of intermediate-band instruments&lt;br/&gt;will be wider than
a typical volcano monitoring array and is designed to&lt;br/&gt;optimize seismic
tomography and receiver functions of the deep crust.&lt;br/&gt;Teleseismic data,
together with seismicity in the local crust and subducting&lt;br/&gt;slab, will
be used to map the temperature and melt conditions beneath
Colima&lt;br/&gt;Volcano. The results will be interpreted in the context of
existing geochemical&lt;br/&gt;models for the Colima complex to address two
primary questions. (i) Is the&lt;br/&gt;location and longevity of an arc volcano
governed principally by diapirism in&lt;br/&gt;the mantle wedge or by deep
crustal conditions and Moho topography? (ii) What&lt;br/&gt;are the relative
roles of magma ponding at the base of the crust and magma&lt;br/&gt;storage in
the lower crust in controlling the evolution of subduction
basalts&lt;br/&gt;into more silicic arc volcanics? These questions, though
ideally suited to&lt;br/&gt;Colima, have implications at all arc volcanoes. This
project is co-sponsored by&lt;br/&gt;the Americas Program in the International
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;