* 0439493
* Collaborative Research:  Developing the Next Generation of Middle School Science Materials--Investigating and Questioning Our World through Science and Technology
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Brian Reiser, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,719,205.00

Building on the work that "Investigating and Questioning our World through
Science and Technology (IQWST)" completed in Phase I, a comprehensive science
curriculum for grades 6-8 is developed in Phase II. A learning-goals-driven
design is used in which learning performances that drive the design of
activities and assessments specify how students should be able to use the
scientific ideas and skills outlined in standards. The materials are organized
around driving questions that provide a context to motivate students as they use
their knowledge and skills in scientific practices -- such as modeling,
designing investigations, explanation and argumentation and data gathering,
analysis and interpretation -- to acquire understandings of the concepts,
principles and habits of mind articulated in national science standards. The
materials contain hands-on experiences, technology tools and reading materials
that extend students' first-hand experiences of phenomena and support science
literacy. All four science disciplines are studied for about one-quarter of each
year. The physics topics for grades 6, 7 and 8 are description of motion,
conservation and transformation of energy, and laws of motion respectively; in
Earth science, the topics are Earth surface processes, climate and weather and
objects in space; for biology, organisms and systems, genetics and the
environment, and ecosystems and natural selection; and for chemistry,
particulate nature of matter, chemical reactions of substances, and chemical
reactions all around us. Teacher materials support teacher learning of the
science content and pedagogical approaches. The materials include an on-line
system that provides video examples of student work and pedagogy in action. The
project also includes development of resources for the community so that
learning opportunities linked to classroom activities can occur outside of
school. Particular attention is paid to developing reading literacy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;