* 0439622
* Biomedical, Industrial and Human Factors Engineering Design Projects for Persons with Disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Chandler Phillips, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 12/31/2010
* USD 146,016.00

0439622 Phillips

The objectives of this five-year project are: (1) to allow undergraduate
biomedical engineering and human factors engineering students to conduct their
senior-year design projects in the area of rehabilitation engineering, and (2)
to focus the design projects toward specific elementary school students (Gorman
Elementary School) and other individuals who have significant orthopedic and
neurological disabilities. Wright State University's (WSU) Department of
Biomedical, Industrial and Human Factors Engineering, offers two senior-year
design course sequences required of all departmental majors prior to graduation.
Since 1987, through support from the National Science Foundation, ninety-two
undergraduate bioengineering design projects have been successfully completed.
These projects have involved a total of two hundred and twenty-two WSU senior
engineering students. A written report about the newly completed design projects
will be submitted annually for the NSF-funded review of Engineering Senior
Design Projects to Aid Persons with Disabilities, published from 1989 to the
present.

Intellectual Merit: This design projects activity will advance knowledge and
understanding of rehabilitation engineering and two other engineering fields:
human factors engineering and industrial systems engineering. The human factors
engineering students and the industrial systems engineering students are team-
members with the biomedical engineering students in a focused, design project
endeavor that allows the creative interaction of engineering students (of
different specialties) toward their common goal.

Broader Impacts: By overcoming significant orthopedic and neurological
disabilities in otherwise intellectually competent individuals, students will
benefit more fully from their educational experience, and other individuals
would participate more fully in activities of daily living. By exposing
undergraduate engineering students to the field of rehabilitation engineering at
a formative stage in their education, the national need for significantly more
rehabilitation engineers is to be addressed.

Gilbert B. Devey Program Director November 24, 2004