* 0439859
* Accommodating Oblique Plate Motion in the California Continental Borderland: The Interaction Between Rotating and Non-Rotating Domains
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Craig Nicholson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2008
* USD 150,748.00

Understanding continental structure and plate boundary deformation is an
important problem in earth science. This project is part of a coordinated effort
to conduct integrated studies of crustal structure and deformation in the
Continental Borderland offshore of southern California. The Borderland was the
locus of Pacific-North America plate motion for about 70% of its displacement
history, and recent GPS data suggest that up to 20% of current plate motion is
still occurring offshore. Much of this plate motion has been carried by
predominantly NW-striking right-slip faults that terminate against the southern
front of the rotating western Transverse Ranges province. How this dextral
motion is transformed into clockwise rotation at fault terminations, and the
fault and fold geometry at these transitions are little understood. These active
offshore structures also represent a largely as yet unknown hazard to many
California coastal communities, and provide important analogs to active buried
(less-accessible) onshore structures that may produce large, damaging
earthquakes in the Los Angeles basin area.

This project is using grids of high-quality industry multichannel seismic
reflection data (originally collected for hydrocarbon exploration) to
investigate the crustal deformation and tectonic evolution of the offshore
portion of the plate boundary. Digital fault surfaces and stratigraphic
reference horizons are being produced to define active fault and fold geometry
in 3D, and to help quantify the finite strain field with time. A prime objective
is to document how the crustal architecture offshore accommodates plate boundary
transpression, differential rotation, spatial variations in fault slip and the
termination of faults. This includes a better understanding of how active faults
interact to partition oblique motion on systems of intersecting high- and low-
angle structures. Our results are complementing land-based studies and provide a
more synoptic view of the active plate boundary, including how, within such a
diffuse plate boundary system, two distinct tectonic regimes (the rotating
western Transverse Ranges province and the non-rotating northern Continental
Borderland) interact to absorb the same overall plate motion.