* 0439592
* Collaborative Research: Paleomagnetism and Geochronology of the Mono Lake Event [?] Recorded in the Lava Section at Santa Maria Volcano, Guatemala
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Bradley Singer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 50,092.00

Michigan Technological University and the University of Wisconsin-Madison have
initiated a collaborative research project to test the hypothesis that the lava
flows exposed in the crater wall of Santa Maria Volcano record a geomagnetic
excursion known as the Mono Lake Event and that this event is global in extent.
The Mono Lake is one of many proposed short-lived periods of geomagnetic
instability that riddle Earth's geomagnetic field within longer intervals of
constant normal or reversed polarity. Some of these short-lived instabilities
affect the geomagnetic field globally whereas others are more local in extent.
In either case, these periods of instability or excursions of the geomagnetic
field are generally expressed in the rock record by paleomagnetic directions
whose variation is outside the normal bounds of secular variation to the point
of being almost fully reversed. Excursions which are global and have been dated
precisely are important stratigraphic markers and are critical to understanding
geodynamo processes. To date, there remains considerable debate as to whether
the Mono Lake excursion is a global event as previous studies either are from
sediments where dating is problematic and directional data not as reliable as
from volcanic rocks or are from studies on volcanic rocks which either lack
precise radioisotopic ages, or are based on incomplete paleomagnetic data.
Therefore, the objective of this research is to fully characterize the
geomagnetic variations (and therefore the Mono Lake Event) recorded by the lava
flows exposed in the crater wall of Santa Maria Volcano using paleomagnetic
techniques and to precisely determine age of the geomagnetic event using the
40Ar/39Ar incremental heating method. If the 40Ar/39Ar ages bear out the
hypothesis that the Santa Maria lava flows record the Mono Lake event, then
there is unequivocal evidence that this geomagnetic excursion is global in
extent. An addition, well-defined 40Ar/39Ar ages for the lava flows at Santa
Maria will place important boundary conditions on the volcanic flux for the
latter stages of growth of the Santa Maria's cone.

As for broader aspects of this research, Michigan Tech has worked closely with
Guatemalan volcanologists at monitoring and hazards agencies (INSIVUMEH and
CONRED) for more than 35 years, developing a synergistic relationship where the
University has provided access to advanced laboratory and research applications
and these volcanologists supply strong field context for obtaining relevant
samples. In recent years, several Central American volcanologists have obtained
degrees at Michigan Tech. This research will continue that tradition bringing a
Guatemalan volcanologist to the United States to study both in the
paleomagnetism laboratory at Michigan Tech and to participate in the dating of
the Santa Maria lava flows at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. After
completing his MS degree, this volcanologist will return to Guatemala where he
is expected to provide leadership in important volcanic hazards work for
decades.