* 0439666
* SGER:    Novel Near-Wall Thermometry Techniques with Submicron Resolution
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Minami Yoda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 02/28/2006
* USD 44,118.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0439666 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: MINAMI YODA INSTITUTION:
GEORGIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

SGER: NOVEL NEAR WALL THERMOMETRY TECHNIQUES WITH SUBMICRON RESOLUTION

This is an exploratory research program for the development of a technique for
measuring fluid temperature to within 100 nm of the wall of a micro-channel. The
goal is develop and demonstrate a technique using Dual-Field Fluorescence
Thermometry to measure water temperature with 100 micron resolution and within
100 nm from the wall in a micro-channel flow. The intellectual merit of the
proposed activity is to enable the non-intrusive measurement of wall temperature
in micro-scale devices such as micro-channels with high spatial resolution.
Although the technique in principle measures temperature in the fluid, the
proximity of the measuring volume (100 nm from wall) is such that the wall
temperature can be accurately implied from the near wall fluid temperature.
There are currently no proven ways to accurately measure the wall temperature in
small-scale internal flows. If successful, the proposed techniques will increase
the diagnostic capabilities for analyzing and developing non-isothermal cooling
devices such as micro-channel heat sinks. Availability of this new diagnostic
tool will have a broad impact on research and application of micro-scale devices
that are non-isothermal. Examples principally include devices for cooling high
powered electronic processors. Up to now, thermal measurements in internal
micro-channel flows have been non-existent. Future development of efficient
highly localized cooling solutions for electronics cooling requires improved
understanding of these types of flows and the proposed technique adds an
important tool to the available diagnostics. The PI is developing a 12-hour
introduction to micro- and nano-fluidics to be taught in a 4th year course in
applications of fluid mechanics. Results of this project will be included in the
proposed course.

