* 0439955
* 2nd International Conference on Pathways, Networks, and Systems:   Theory and Experiments; October 15-20, 2004; Heraklion, Greece
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2005
* Joseph Nadeau, Aegean Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2005
* USD 40,000.00

ABSTRACT NSF-0439955

Systems biology seeks to understand fundamental mechanisms of organismal biology
in humans and other species at the level above individual reactions and
structures. Large, complex data sets must be obtained at various levels of
biological functions from transcription to end-phenotypes. This involves not
only heterogeneous data but these studies must also include time-series and
perturbations as they must assess homeostasis and genetic variation. Computer
science, statistical and analytical methods must all be developed and applied
for managing, distributing, representing, analyzing and modeling these large
complex datasets. Networks and pathways must be determined and then annotated
with genetic, molecular, biological and pharmacological attributes. Finally,
networks and pathways must be engineered to test hypotheses about systems
biology in complex organisms.

Because the field is inevitably interdisciplinary, many different kinds of
effort are required. This is the second year of the conference, with an agenda
based on identifying theoretical and experimental platforms for systems biology.
Members of underrepresented groups are actively encouraged to attend and
present, including students. Sponsors of the conference include the Center for
Computational Genomics and Systems Biology (J. Nadeau, CWRU, Cleveland), the
Institute for Systems Biology (L. Hood, Seattle), Systemscope (M. Roux and C.
Auffray, Paris), Center for Bioinformatics and Systems Biology (S. Surbramaniam,
San Diego), and the Keck Graduate Institute (D. Galas, Claremont).

