* 0439583
* Ninth International Conference on Computer-Aided Scheduling of Public Transport (CASPT) 2004
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Mark Hickman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas A. Birkland
* 07/31/2005
* USD 16,000.00

Proposal to the National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;9th
International Conference on Computer-Aided Scheduling of Public
Transport&lt;br/&gt;(CASPT
2004)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 9th International
Conference on Computer-Aided Scheduling of Public Transport (CASPT) is a forum
for recent research and cutting-edge applications of computer-aided methods for
scheduling and operating public transport service. The focus of the conference
is the field of public transit service planning and operations. Within this
field, specific technical topics for the conference cover the areas of
information management, network and route planning, vehicle and crew scheduling,
and vehicle operations monitoring and management. This conference has been held
every 3-4 years since 1975, and has highlighted the interface of academic
research with state-of-the-art models and tools used in practice. Historically,
the conference has typically drawn 100-150 participants, including
internationally recognized researchers, software developers, and practitioners.
As such, this conference is by far the most relevant and focused technical
conference in public transport service planning and operations in the world. The
proceedings from previous CASPT conferences are considered the primary technical
reference in this subject area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In its role in promoting
fundamental research and advancement of new technical methods, we are requesting
financial support from the NSF to conduct this conference. The overall budget
for the conference is estimated to be $47,500. We are requesting $16,000 from
the NSF to support travel expenses for key participants, to provide reduced
conference registration costs for students, and to support the development and
distribution of the conference proceedings to
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is planned for August 9-11,
2004, in San Diego, California. The conference will include both plenary
sessions and two parallel tracks for presentation and discussion of technical
papers. In this format, we expect that approximately 40 full papers will be
presented and discussed at the conference. Those who wish to have their papers
accepted for the conference proceedings will be subject to peer review. The
selected papers will then be published by Springer-Verlag in their series,
Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems. All conference attendees
will receive a copy of the proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;