* 0439976
* Collaborative Research:  Imaging the Upper Mantle Beneath the Western Tibetan Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2012
* Steven Roecker, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2012
* USD 583,659.00

Tibet is key to understanding the large-scale dynamics of continental
collisions, yet a substantial part of the mantle beneath Tibet has been probed
only with relatively low-resolution techniques. We know enough to say that on
average seismic wavespeeds in the vast western part of the plateau are unusually
high, but we lack sufficient information to discriminate among a large number of
plausible scenarios for what is causing these anomalies and what role they might
play in the dynamics of mountain building. For example, are these high wavespeed
(i.e., relatively cold) masses indigenous to the Tibetan lithosphere, sinking
beneath the plateau and drawing adjacent mantle material into it, or do they
represent the leading edge a subducting Indian plate that provides a distant
push from the side? The primary objective of this project is to map the
distribution of these high wavespeed masses in the upper mantle beneath Tibet in
order to distinguish among these competing hypotheses. This mapping will be done
by analyzing a seismological dataset gathered by deploying a multi-stage, quasi-
linear array of broadband stations across the western plateau that combines long
period (2-3 year) recording of lower frequency arrivals with shorter period (1
year) staged recording of higher frequency arrivals. A combination of
traditional and recently developed techniques, based mostly on variations of
arrival time tomography and receiver function analysis, will be used in the
processing. This project will be carried out by 3 PIs and 2 or more graduate and
undergraduate students in the US in collaboration with a substantial number of
coworkers (scientists, technicians, students) from China, mostly from the
Chinese Seismology Bureau in Beijing but also from the Tibetan Bureau of
Seismology in Lhasa. Additionally, colleagues from the National Geophysical
Research Institute in Hyderabad will extend our coverage across the border by
carrying out a simultaneous deployment in India.