* 0439922
* The Precessionally-Driven Dynamo
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2008
* Paul Roberts, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 11/30/2008
* USD 410,000.00

More than a half century ago, Sir Edward Bullard conjectured that the motions
necessary to generate the Earth's magnetic field in the Earth's electrically-
conducting fluid core might be driven by the luni-solar precession. All that has
been unequivocally established in the intervening 55 years is that precession
can in principle supply the geodynamo with abundant power. The question of
whether it can draw on this power is still unanswered, and this provides the
challenging target that is the basis of the intellectual merit of this proposal.

Much has been learned during the last decade about the structure and stability
of precessionally-driven flows, but only when magnetic fields are absent. In
analogy with parallel studies of convectively-driven system studies, it is
anticipated that the character and strength of a precessionally-driven flow will
be dramatically different in the presence of a "sufficiently-strong" magnetic
field meaning, in the geophysical context, a field of strength comparable with
that inferred for the Earth's core. The proponents to investigate this matter as
part of a systematic study of such magnetoprecessional dynamos", and also to see
if they provide a new example of so-called strong field dynamo action".

The main theoretical tool to be used in the proposed research is a computer code
that has been under development at UCLA for the past 18 months. It employs the
grid point based "method of overlapping grids". This is very suitable for
rotationally flattened bodies of fluid such as Earth's core. The method has been
generalized here so that it solves the full magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) dynamo
equations in 3 dimensions. The code is on the verge of completion and this
proposal mainly seeks support to parallelize it and to improve its efficiency so
that Bullard's proposal can be thoroughly evaluated.

The broader impact of the completed code will exceed its application to
precession. Without major modification, precessional driving can be replaced by
buoyant forcing, so putting the model in competition with other codes currently
under development for spherical convective dynamos. Without further change it
could be used to study dynamos operating in rotationally flattened objects
(Saturn, galactic discs,. . . ). The investigators plan to make these
generalizations. It would also be possible to generalize to tidally distorted
objects such as extra-solar planets. Even if Bullard's speculation has to be
abandoned, it will be easy to investigate how a convectively-driven geodynamo is
influenced by precession.