* 0439765
* Rapid Decompression of Bubble-Bearing Magma and Implications for Eruption Style and Explosive Potential: An Experimental Study With Analogue Fluids
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Michael Manga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2009
* USD 139,480.00

One of the most important unresolved problems in physical volcanology is
understanding what controls the style of volcanic eruptions, and in particular,
the transition between effusive and explosive eruption styles. Currently, this
transition is thought to be controlled by two key processes: fragmentation and
degassing. Through fragmentation, magma is broken into discrete pieces. The
viscous magma containing melt and bubbles is thus transformed into a much less
viscous gas flow that can erupt rapidly and explosively. Degassing refers to the
loss of dissolved and exsolved volatiles from the magma. Because the driving
force of eruptions is often dominated by the expansion of exsolved gases,
degassing should act to suppress explosive eruption. The main goal of the
project is to determine experimentally the relationship between fragmentation
and degassing during the rapid decompression of magmas. The experiments will be
done in a shock tube apparatus, designed and built at the University of
California, Berkeley. Analogue fluids will be used in order to control
properties of the fluids, bubbles, and bubble growth. The experimental study
will allow the determination of the relative importance of 1) preexisting
bubbles, 2) exsolution, 3) conduit geometry, and 4) decompression rate on the
processes that lead to explosive eruption. The experimental results will be
interpreted in the context of theoretical models, which will then allow the
scaling of laboratory results to volcanoes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most
important long-term impact of this work will be a better physical basis for
estimating hazard. As a specific example, one implication of the experimental
results obtained so far is that the bubble content of magmas is the primary
control on whether rapid decompression will lead to explosive eruptions.
Determining the vesicularity of domes or subsurface magma bodies (using some
remote method) can thus be used to estimate the hazard posed by these magma
bodies. This project will provide a training opportunity for a graduate student,
a postdoc, and an introduction to research for undergraduates. Outreach will
take place through classes at UC Berkeley, scientific conferences and refereed
publications. It is expected that this project to lead to new interdisciplinary
collaborations between the engineering and volcanology communities. &lt;br/&gt;