* 0439406
* SGER - Genesis and Diagenesis of an Enigmatic Precambrian Carbonate cement: an Investigation using Microanalytical and Experimental Techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Linda Kah, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2006
* USD 20,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY Intellectual Merit: Molar-tooth (MT) is an enigmatic carbonate
fabric marked by variously shaped voids filled with a uniform, equant microspar.
To date, research has focused largely on deciphering mechanisms of void
formation and delineating MT distribution in time and space. MT preservation,
however, is intimately linked to precipitation of MT microspar, about which we
know little. MT microspar consists of uniform, equant, non-interlocking crystals
that under cathodoluminescence (CL) show dully-luminescent, subspherical cores
(5-7 m diameter) and luminescent overgrowths. Conditions favoring precipitation
were common in the Mesoproterozoic and early Neoproterozoic (1600-750 Ma), where
MT microspar comprises >90% of individual beds and 5-25% of preserved carbonate
(volumetrically equivalent to Paleozoic skeletal grains). The objective of this
project is to investigate an unusual, yet volumetrically significant, morphology
of carbonate, termed molar-tooth (MT) microspar, whose widespread occurrence in
the Mesoproterozoic and early Neoproterozoic suggests linkages between carbonate
precipitation and the broad-scale geochemical evolution of marine environments.
This proposal will address three questions: (1) What are the nucleation and
growth mechanisms of this unusual carbonate microspar? (2) Was vaterite the
original mineralogy of this microspar, as has been previously proposed? and (3)
What can this unusual carbonate morphology tell us about the composition of
Proterozoic marine systems? Unfortunately, small crystal sizes inhibit use of
many traditional techniques in further examining microspar origins. I propose a
multidisciplinary approach wherein high-resolution CL and SEM imaging will be
used to define morphologic endmembers, reconstruct crystal size distributions,
and interpret nucleation and growth mechanisms; laser-Raman spectroscopy will be
used to document lattice structure to help constrain mineralogical change; and
combined high- resolution SIMS trace element imaging, Raman spectroscopy, and
crystal growth experiments will be used to constrain initial fluid compositions
and precipitation conditions. Ultimately, deciphering the genesis of MT
microspar will help identify chemical environments of formation and will aid in
understanding the sedimentary impact of long-term chemical changes in the
Earth.s biosphere. Broader Impacts: This project aims to advance discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning by expanding the
breadth of carbonate-based research at the University of Tennessee, adding
research opportunities for undergraduate students, involving students directly
in the process of scientific inquiry, encouraging scientific activity in which
undergraduates will assist and be mentored by graduate students and faculty, and
encouraging student participation in regional and national meetings. Currently,
I have 3 students lined up for this project [1 M.S. (male) and 2 B.S. (female);
2 of them non-traditional students returning to school after starting families].
This project will also enhance the research and education infrastructure at the
UT by supporting initiatives to expand use of multi-user facilities and
establish interdisciplinary collaboration within the University (Geology-
Chemistry) and with Oak Ridge National Labs. Finally, the project aims to
broaden participation of under-represented groups through continued research-
and equipment-based collaboration with the State University of West Georgia, a
non- Ph.D. granting institution. Such collaboration raises student awareness of
opportunities in the Earth Sciences and strengthens UT.s ability to attract new
graduate students.