* 0439706
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Study of  Issues in Collaborative Global Engineering Design: Planning Grant
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* P. Raju, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

0439706&lt;br/&gt;Raju &lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports the
U.S.-India Planning Visit entitled Study of Issues in Collaborative Global
Engineering Design. Support will enable Professors P.K. Raju and Chetan Sankar,
Auburn University and a graduate student to make a two-week visit to Chennai,
India where they will meet with faculty members of India's premier engineering
school, the Indian Institute of Technology Chennai, and local industry leaders.
They will obtain data to create a new multi-media case study on collaborative
global design that will be used to develop innovative educational materials for
engineering classrooms in the U.S. Considering the growing demand for global
design performed by engineering teams in the U.S. and abroad, there is a need
for U.S. engineers to work more effectively with foreign counterparts and
customers, manage research teams, improve business processes, and produce
quality products. The PIs will document issues that arise in performing design
activities between engineers in the U.S. and India. The findings will be
included in engineering and business classes taught at Auburn University and at
the Indian Institute of Technology Chennai. &lt;br/&gt;Scope: The PIs are
leaders of engineering education in the U.S. With funding from the NSF and
private industry, Dr. Raju established the Laboratory for Innovative Technology
and Engineering Education, Auburn University where he developed integrative,
interactive instructional methodologies that bring real world issues into
engineering classrooms. He has developed award-winning case studies that
integrate engineering theory, design and practice. This grant adds an
international dimension &lt;br/&gt;to DUE-9950514. In addition to developing
educational materials, the PIs will produce a paper to showcase how U.S. and
Indian companies work together to design and manufacture innovative products. It
will contribute to the pursuit of other NSF grant opportunities through
developing a multi-media case study showcasing Indo-US collaborative engineering
design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;