* 0439940
* Grammars of Wandala and Giziga
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2004,05/31/2009
* Erin Shay, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2009
* USD 239,999.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Zygmunt Frajzyngier and
Dr. Erin Shay will write complete descriptions of two Central Chadic languages,
Wandala and Giziga. Wandala is spoken in Nigeria and in the Far North Province
of Cameroon. Giziga is spoken only in the Far North Province of Cameroon. The
existing documentation of those languages is scant, and the available
fragmentary materials are not always accurate. The Chadic branch is the largest
and most diversified family within the Afroasiatic phylum. Some Afroasiatic
languages, such as Egyptian and Semitic, are of special significance for Western
culture and have long been studied. However, out of some 150 Chadic languages,
fewer than 40 have been the object of grammatical descriptions, and some of
these are very sketchy. Chadic languages are divided into three or four
branches. They are spoken in Nigeria, Northern Cameroon, Chad, and Niger. The
two languages chosen for description within the current project differ
significantly from each other in their syntax, morphology, and phonology. They
also differ significantly from already described Chadic languages. The
descriptions of the two languages will be useful for comparative studies of
Chadic languages and of the Afroasiatic phylum. These descriptions can serve as
a basis for the development of literacy materials and will contribute to the
preservation of Wandala and Giziga cultural patrimony.&lt;br/&gt; The
description of undocumented languages not only enriches the set of linguistic
facts but also forces revisions of many theoretical assumptions about the nature
of language. It also provides scholars in other disciplines with information
necessary for the study of cultural and regional
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;