* 0439034
* SGER:    Bargaining in Computer Games
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Jane Veeder, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2005
* USD 48,206.00

Bargaining is a major alternative to violence in actual situations of human
conflict but is rarely available to players of the computer and console games
where our youth spend so much of their time. It has been pointed out that
today's children, physically confined by urban conditions, are finding virtual
play spaces in console and computer games for the sort of adventure, risk
taking, challenges, and problem solving vital to identity formation. The role
of, special purpose computational engines included in a computer or console game
product (e.g., dynamics engines that provide game developers with ready models
of simulated physical motion) is well established. In this project, the PI team
will investigate the application potential and the feasibility of a "bargaining
engine" that would simulate and assist bargaining behavior in computer games. To
address the application potential aspects, the PI team will carry out a survey
and analysis of the instances and forms (representation and interaction) of
bargaining and proto-bargaining in contemporary computer/console games. They
will use those results in a sample of interviews with game designers and
marketers, who will be asked to project what a sophisticated bargaining model
could contribute to game play, character, and plot. The result will be a report
incorporating the survey, analysis, and interviews. The overall goal will be to
develop an accurate picture of bargaining in games today and to assess the
potential for bargaining in games of the future. To address feasibility aspects,
the PI team will produce an MS Windows application that implements continuous-
time (as opposed to turn-based) bargaining on a single divisible issue with
perfect information. Continuous-time bargaining game theoretic models are a
relatively recent development that may be particularly relevant to many of the
newer computer games that involve continuous-time play. Bargaining behavior is
represented by a Markov strategy that combines offers with a holding-time
stochastic process to describe the chances of acceptance as a function of
elapsed time. Players' preferences are classically represented by utility
functions to be expressed before bargaining takes place. The members of the PI
team bring complementary, interdisciplinary expertise and experience to this
subject, and are uniquely qualified to undertake this research.

Broader Impact: The PI argues that adding bargaining to the repertoire of skills
such virtual experiences can offer could enrich the value of interactive
entertainment for children and widen their perspective on meeting real-life
challenges. Yet, bargaining as a capability cannot simply be grafted onto
existing game content, structure, or interaction. One must start by analyzing
where even primitive forms of bargaining exist now, researching where the
potential lies for expansion and depth, projecting what forms this might take,
and identifying directions for research and experimental prototyping.