* 0439750
* Collaborative Research: Magma-Host Rock Interaction Processes of Assimilation in the Mid-Crustal Hortav√¶r Intrusive Complex, North Central Norway
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Calvin Barnes, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2008
* USD 229,235.00

The 456 Ma Hortavar intrusive complex is part of the Caledonian-age Bindal
Batholith in north-central Norway. It consists of alkaline rocks emplaced as
hundreds or thousands of dike-like bodies into diverse host rocks (migmatite,
quartzite, marble, and calc-silicate gneiss). The range of the igneous rocks,
from olivine gabbro through syenite, their chemical variation, and their carbon
isotope signatures indicates that the magmas assimilated calc-silicate and
silicate rocks in situ. Recognition of in situ assimilation at Hortavar makes it
an ideal place to address the mechanisms that control interactions between
magmas and their host rocks in the middle crust: Are host rocks assimilated en
masse? Or are solids assimilated according to their ability to dissolve in the
magma undergoing contamination? Alternatively, are host rocks partly melted
first, with only the melt component assimilated? We will use integrated field
and microanalytical methods to test the hypothesis that carbonate + silicate
assimilation was important during early magma evolution, but that silicate
assimilation dominated later evolution. Because carbonate assimilation in a
closed system is ineffectual, we will also test the likelihood that such
assimilation occurred in an open system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
involve an international team of faculty and students. It will provide all
participants with a rich, collaborative venture in new cultural and academic
environments. It will also involve collaboration with scientists and students
from the Norwegian Geological Survey and the Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, and a local middle school teacher and amateur
geologist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;