* 0440074
* Atmospheric Particulate Organic Nitrates by Photoelectron Resonance Capture Ionization-Mass Spectrometry
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Richard Kamens, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 01/31/2009
* USD 375,659.00

This project develops an analytical system using photoelectric resonance
electron capture ionization mass spectrometry (PERCI-MS), a technique based on
soft-ionization which minimizes the fragmentation of the analyte ions. The
system design will enable the measurement of nitrated organics including nitro-
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (NPAHs) in atmospheric particulates, useful in
gauging the health effects and environmental impact of organics bound to ambient
particulate matter. Resonance electron capture profiles will be measured for a
number of nitrated organic compounds in order to study radical-initiated
particle-phase mechanisms of NPAH formation. In collaboration with the
University of North Carolina, an outdoor reaction chamber will be used to
analyze organic nitrates formed during secondary aerosol formation. The PERCI-MS
system will also be used to make measurements of ambient NPAHs during selected
field deployments. The broader impacts of this project include direct relevance
to atmospheric processes important to air quality and human health, the value of
developing this soft-ionization technique as an analytical tool for atmospheric
trace compounds, and support of education and professional development of
undergraduate and graduate students in an important area of scientific research.
The Division of Atmospheric Sciences Atmospheric Chemistry Program in the
Geosciences Directorate and the Division of Chemistry Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Cluster in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate support
this award jointly.