* 0440299
* SGER:    Proposal forModeling the Dynamics of Shape Change in Liquid Crystal Elastomer Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Michael Shelley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/28/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Liquid crystal elastomers (LCEs) are rubbers whose&lt;br/&gt;constituent
molecules are orientationally ordered, with their&lt;br/&gt;salient feature
being a strong coupling between the orientational&lt;br/&gt;order and mechanical
strain. A characteristic feature of LCEs is&lt;br/&gt;that relatively small
external effects, such as changes in&lt;br/&gt;temperature or onset of
illumination, can produce huge and rapid&lt;br/&gt;deformations. LCEs will
likely assume real technological&lt;br/&gt;importance due of their softness and
their ready responsiveness&lt;br/&gt;to applied fields, yielding applications in
microfluidic pumping&lt;br/&gt;and switching, and helping to answer basic
questions in&lt;br/&gt;locomotion. By extending the theory of rubber networks,
the&lt;br/&gt;investigators develop and explore continuum descriptions of
these&lt;br/&gt;materials, and study how LCEs behave in the bulk and
in&lt;br/&gt;interaction with an external fluid, and begin to
develop&lt;br/&gt;simulational methods for these systems. Parallel to
the&lt;br/&gt;theoretical study is an experimental program that involves
the&lt;br/&gt;applications of LCEs, such as to locomotion, but also to
new&lt;br/&gt;materials synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Liquid crystal
elastomers (LCEs) are active flexible&lt;br/&gt;materials whose constituent
molecules can be reoriented or&lt;br/&gt;disordered by applying electric or
temperature fields. A&lt;br/&gt;consequence of this is that relatively small
external effects,&lt;br/&gt;say in temperature changes or an onset of
illumination, can&lt;br/&gt;produce huge and rapid deformations of the material.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators have already demonstrated that LCEs can
have&lt;br/&gt;fascinating dynamics when interacting with a fluidic
environment,&lt;br/&gt;such as the observed "swimming" of floating LCE samples
away from&lt;br/&gt;an illuminated region. These materials may be of
technological&lt;br/&gt;importance due of their softness and responsiveness,
suggesting&lt;br/&gt;applications in microfluidic pumping and switching, and
helping&lt;br/&gt;to answer basic questions in locomotion. To fully exploit
these&lt;br/&gt;materials the development of soundly based mathematical models
is&lt;br/&gt;crucial. The investigators develop mathematical descriptions
of&lt;br/&gt;these materials, and seek to understand the ways in which
LCEs&lt;br/&gt;interact with applied fields and with their environment.
&lt;br/&gt;Parallel to the theoretical studies is an experimental
program&lt;br/&gt;that involves the applications of LCEs, such as to
locomotion,&lt;br/&gt;but also to new materials synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;