* 0440508
* Diffuse Matter in the Galaxy - An International Conference; Conference, August 30- September 2,2004  Arreibo Puerto Rico
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Thomas Troland, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 01/31/2006
* USD 14,400.00

AST 0440508&lt;br/&gt;Troland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide
funding for partial conference travel support of students and early career
scientists at U.S. institutions to the meeting, Diffuse Matter in the Galaxy:
Observations Confront Theory, at Arecibo Observatory, Puerto Rico; August 30 -
September 2, 2004. An important objective of the meeting is to facilitate close
interactions among established researchers engaged in the study of the
interstellar medium (ISM) and their more junior colleagues. These younger
investigators will ensure the future development of this fundamental research
field. Financial assistance for travel expenses of early career researchers will
assure that this objective can be met. There will also be partial travel support
for a very limited number of senior participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
theoretical concept of the ISM in the Milky Way as a multi-component environment
is useful because it allows calculations to be made of the ionization structure,
the temperature structure and the energy balance that characterizes this
material. These physical quantities, in turn, can be related to the presumed
sources of energy input to the ISM - luminous stars, stellar winds and
supernovae. Finally, one can check for consistency with observation and assess
the need for an increasing sophistication of the theoretical models. Recent
observations of the ISM, using a wide variety of new techniques, have
underscored the extreme diversity of this medium. A significant mass fraction of
the ISM exists as cold gas with temperatures less than 100 K, a comparable mass
fraction (but much larger volume fraction) exists as warm gas, and a large
volume is filled with very dilute gas having temperatures of hundreds of
thousands or even&lt;br/&gt;millions of K. The nature of each of these regions
is being probed by specially-designed telescopes and detectors. Moreover, each
is being studied theoretically using the physics&lt;br/&gt;relevant to the gas
densities and temperatures observed. But less progress has been made
in&lt;br/&gt;understanding the connections that exist among these phases of the
ISM and the processes that&lt;br/&gt;transform one phase into another.
Understanding these connections is a primary goal of the&lt;br/&gt;meeting
Diffuse Matter in the Galaxy: Observations Confront
Theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As mentioned above, an important objective of the
meeting is to bring together established ISM researchers and their junior
colleagues. Interactions between these two groups will stimulate future research
collaborations, formal or informal. And interactions like these are essential if
the field of ISM research is to remain active and vital in the future.
Obviously, this goal cannot be met unless a substantial number of younger
researchers attend the meeting. A second objective of this meeting is to create
a conference publication of lasting value. The expected publication will consist
of at least seven comprehensive reviews of the conference session topics
outlined in this proposal. Such a publication should be suitable as a basic
textbook for introductory graduate courses in observations and theory of the
ISM.&lt;br/&gt;