* 0440945
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences:  Nonlinear Dispersive and Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2006
* Joseph Lakey, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/2006
* USD 31,329.00

Immensely important applications of nonlinear dispersive equations range from
condensed matter to non-linear and laser optics, and their mathematical study
dates to well over 100 years. Even so, many fundamental mathematical questions -
including well-posedness - have been rigorously addressed only in the last few
years. During this time, new techniques and break-through ideas, largely from
harmonic analysis, have opened the door to the resolution of such problems.
Professor Terence Tao of the University of California, Los Angeles has made
ground-breaking contributions in the applications of harmonic analysis to the
related areas of the Korteweg de Vries equation, nonlinear Schroedinger
equations, and wave maps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Tao will deliver a
series of 10 lectures entitled "Nonlinear Dispersive and Wave Equations" at New
Mexico State University in Las Cruces. While the techniques due to Tao and
others are fairly new and still hold tremendous potential for new applications,
a number of the key ideas can now be deemed `principles'. These will be laid out
in Tao's lectures. Some of the main applications to this stage, as well as open
problems, will also be discussed. The lectures should be of interest to anyone
working in harmonic analysis, partial differential equations, or the
mathematical physics of wave propagation, veterans and newcomers
alike.&lt;br/&gt;