* 0440648
* U.S.-Mexico International Research Experience for Undergraduates:  Insect Biodiversity and Anthropogenic Change in the Sonoran Desert
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Therese Markow, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

0440648&lt;br/&gt;Markow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico research
experiences for undergraduates activity, organized by professor Therese A.
Markow of the University of Arizona, intends to bring together students from the
United States and Mexico to conduct original research in the Sonoran desert on
the U.S.-Mexico border. Funding will help to support an initial intensive two-
week research course offered annually in Guaymas, Sonora, Mexico to six students
from the U.S. and follow-up activities that will offer the students a variety of
related research activities in which to participate. These activities will be
divided among research activities in both the U.S. and Mexico. The U.S. students
will be joined by a similar number of students from Mexico supported by Mexican
and other sources, to promote a truly binational research experience on the
topic of insect biodiversity and anthropogenic change in the Sonoran Desert. The
project explores insect biodiversity and its interaction with an ecosystem that
is experiencing rapid land conversion. The research will also examine the
relationship of biodiversity to ecosystem health, climate, economics, disease
and anthropogenic change. In addition, the activity will provide students with
an understanding of the insect fauna of the region and will explore the effects
of habitat loss while encouraging research-based learning of biological
concepts. &lt;br/&gt;