* 0440176
* Seismic Study of the Offshore Portion of the Cameroon Volcanic Line, Gulf of Guinea, West Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2007
* Robert Pulliam, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2007
* USD 95,364.00

Volcanic lineaments are a ubiquitous feature of our planet but their role in the
mass transfer between mantle and crust and in the plate tectonic framework is
still debated. The Cameroon Volcanic Line (CVL) is a 1600-km-long, SW to NE,
Y-shaped chain of volcanic centers and plutons that splits into two branches as
it reaches the Adamawa Plateau on the Cameroon-Chad border. Roughly half the
total length of the CVL lies on the African continent; the other half extends
southeastward into the Gulf of Guinea and the Atlantic Ocean. The offshore
portion of the CVL is comprised, from northwest to southeast, of the islands of
Bioko, Principe, Sao Tome, and Pagalu. The composition of young basaltic lavas
is identical in the oceanic and continental portions of the line, indicating
similar parental magmas and little contamination from the crustal rocks, yet
there is a significant disparity between the ages of earliest volcanism that
created the islands of Bioko and Principe and there is a systematic decrease in
radiogenic Pb ratios in either direction along the line from the continent-ocean
boundary (Halliday et al., 1990). This suggests that an important change in
properties and/or processes occurs between the islands of Bioko and Principe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of an obvious age progression in the CVL (Fitton
and Dunlop, 1985; Meyers et al., 1998) has led some authors to refer to it as a
"hotline" and invoke Rayleigh-Bernard convection in the upper mantle to explain
its odd timing, geochemical characteristics and apparently reactivated volcanism
(Meyers et al., 1998; King and Anderson, 1998; King and Ritsema, 2000). However,
a modified plume model, perhaps one that involves multiple plumes or lateral
transport of material along topography on the base of the lithosphere, might
also satisfy the constraints (Burke et al., 1971). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will
conduct a complementary seismic study offshore to the large-scale, temporary
deployment of broadband seismographs scheduled to begin in Cameroon in 2005.
Integrating the results of seismic studies on the CVL islands with the results
from Cameroon will help distinguish between various models for the genesis of
the CVL and its relationship to convection in the mantle. &lt;br/&gt;