* 0440605
* Track 2, GK-12:  Human Impact Along the Front Range of Colorado
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2005,01/31/2007
* David Swift, University of Northern Colorado
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 01/31/2007
* USD 792,005.00

0440605&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Northern Colorado (UNC), Colorado
State University (CSU), the Weld County School District 6, and the Poudre School
District Track 2 award is developing, sustaining, and institutionalizing its
current GK-12 program entitled Human Impact Along the Front Range of Colorado.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project integrates science and
math content standards using the rapid regional growth and its impacts on land
use, climate and biodiversity. The project links K-12 instruction, teacher
professional development, and graduate education with STEM research, exposing
K-12 teachers and students to current research, and graduate and undergraduate
fellows to K-12 classrooms and instruction. The project supports 24 graduate and
10 undergraduate fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has 3 goals. Goal 1:
Deliver and refine the GK-12 program. The project forms teaching-research teams
comprised of K-12 teachers, GK-12 fellows, K-12 students and researchers that
interact throughout the year. During the summer, the teachers, fellows, and
students work together on research. During the academic year the fellows work
with teachers in the classroom. Teaching and research workshops and symposia are
held to familiarize researchers and fellows with the K-12 culture (led by
teachers), and teachers with the research culture (led by researchers and
fellows). Teachers and fellows established long-term Schoolyard Ecology research
plots on school grounds or local environmental centers as a focal point of
learning. Teachers and fellows develop and deliver standards-based science and
mathematics modules. Goal 2: Institutionalize and sustain the GK-12 program
across the partnership. The project builds on the successes by securing the
space, the seminar series, and the schoolyard plots. Goal 3: Evaluate the
effectiveness of the GK-12 program. An external evaluator leads the evaluation,
in concert with GK12 participants by assessing the content and process knowledge
of teachers, fellows and students; changes in the instructional practices of
teachers and fellows; the effectiveness in increasing minority participation in
STEM research, education, and careers; the programs effectiveness in creating
teacher leaders; and its effect on the degree programs and career choices of
fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The program impacts districts
(Weld County and Poudre) of 45,000 students, high percentages of whom are from
groups under-represented in STEM disciplines (47% and 20%), low income (47% and
20%) and/or English Language Learners (10%). The project focuses on teacher
professional development designed to increase content knowledge of teachers, the
training of fellows on how to engage K-12 students, research opportunities for
minority students, and the preparation teacher leaders to initiate long-term
systemic change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;