* 0440322
* Noninvasive Imaging of Near-Surface Preferential Flow Pathways and Dynamics in Carbonate Vadose Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2010
* Sarah Kruse, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cuenca
* 03/31/2010
* USD 377,991.00

0440322&lt;br/&gt;Grasmueck&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noninvasive Imaging of Near-
Surface Preferential Flow Pathways and Dynamics in Carbonate Vadose
Zone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivation: The vadose zone - where air, water, soil,
and rock interact to support life - is a highly dynamic environment with complex
flow and transport processes that remain poorly understood. Vadose zone
hydrological studies struggle to resolve scale related dichotomies emerging
between point measurements and 'broad-brush' geophysical methods. Field methods
are needed to accurately describe flow and transport in the vadose zone to
bridge the observational gap in scales from centimeters to meters and provide a
three dimensional picture of flow processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives:
(1) To characterize and quantify vadose zone flow and transport in the Miami
carbonate environment at scales from centimeter to meters; and (2) to develop
and disseminate 4D Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) methodology and workflow for
application in other vadose zone environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods: A
hydrological framework will be assembled by combining repeated high resolution
3D GPR surveys with borehole logging and direct sampling. A three-stage approach
will be implemented in each study site: The first stage focuses on identifying
key factors, particularly the role of water, influencing GPR reflections, using
both laboratory measurements and synthetic GPR modeling. The second stage
entails repeated 3D GPR surveys of field sites to quantify hydraulic parameters
based on dynamic changes of water content caused by natural rainfall and
controlled injection. The third stage involves inverse flow modeling with field
data to estimate 3D hydraulic conductivity volumes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit and Broader Impact: The proposed
research advances knowledge of vadose zone flow pathways and dynamics in
carbonates at the field scale. Availability of a uniquely efficient 3D GPR
system, combined with the proximity of field sites allows for rapid and
efficient data collection and facilitates involvement of both undergraduate and
graduate students in this research. The resulting 3D hydrological data will be
available in unprecedented detail and at unique bridging scales. Data sharing
and technology transfer efforts will help the near-surface community examine
other vadose zones for improved understanding of groundwater recharge,
contaminant migration, carbonate diagenesis and chemical / microbiological
processes. Society will benefit from the accurate description of flow and
transport in the vadose zone helping to protect drinking water
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;