* 0440886
* Quaternary Diatom Paleoenvironmental Records from Three Lakes in Taylor Valley, McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Reed Scherer, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 03/31/2008
* USD 128,488.00

This award supports the study of diatom and chrysophyte cyst assemblages in
sediment cores recently collected from lakes in the Dry Valleys of Antarctica to
understand local and global climate cycles over the past two million years.
Diatoms are powerful paleoenvironmental indicators because of their ubiquity,
preservation, and the environmentally restricted occurrences of different
species. As many as one thousand samples will be analyzed to determine lake
history with respect to water level, light penetration, and nutrient cycling.
These cores represent the first non-glacial stratigraphic record from Antarctica
that spans several full glacial cycles, and they may offer a nearly continuous
record of environmental change from the late Pleistocene to present day. This
record will permit correlation with regional paleoclimate records, such as those
from Lake Vostok and deep-sea sediments. This work represents integrated,
multidisciplinary research touching on geology, biology, glaciology, and
climatology. In terms of broader impacts, it will improve society's
understanding of global climate change from the perspective of a unique,
terrestrial record that covers key recent periods. It also supports the
education of postdoctoral and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;