* 0440715
* Collaborative Research:    Aging in Weddell Seals:    Proximate Mechanisms of Age-Related Changes in Adaptation to Breath-Hold Hunting in an Extreme Environment
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Jo-Ann Mellish, Alaska SeaLife Center
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 08/31/2010
* USD 103,803.00

The primary objectives of this research are to investigate the proximate effects
of aging on diving capability in the Weddell Seal and to describe mechanisms by
which aging may influence foraging ecology, through physiology and behavior.
This model pinniped species has been the focus of three decades of research in
McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. Compared to the knowledge of pinniped diving
physiology and ecology during early development and young adulthood, little is
known about individuals nearing the upper limit of their normal reproductive age
range. Evolutionary aging theories predict that elderly diving seals should
exhibit senescence. This should be exacerbated by surges in the generation of
oxygen free radicals via hypoxia-reoxygenation during breath-hold diving and
hunting, which are implicated in age-related damage to cellular mitochondria.
Surprisingly, limited observations of non-threatened pinniped populations
indicate that senescence does not occur to a level where reproductive output is
affected. The ability of pinnipeds to avoid apparent senescence raises two major
questions: what specific physiological and morphological changes occur with
advancing age in pinnipeds and what subtle adjustments are made by these animals
to cope with such changes? This investigation will focus on specific, functional
physiological and behavioral changes relating to dive capability with advancing
age. The investigators will quantify age-related changes in general health and
body condition, combined with fine scale assessments of external and internal
ability to do work in the form of diving. Specifically, patterns of oxidative
status and oxygen use with age will be examined. The effects of age on muscular
function, contractile capacity in vascular smooth muscle, and exercise capacity
via exercise performance in skeletal muscle will be examined. Data will be
compared between Weddell seals in the peak, and near the end, of their
reproductive age range. An assessment will be made of the ability to do external
work (i.e. diving) as well as muscle functionality (ability to do internal
work). The investigators hypothesize that senescence does occur in Weddell seals
at the level of small-scale, proximate physiological effects and performance,
but that behavioral plasticity allows for a given degree of compensation.
Broader impacts include the training of students and outreach activities
including interviews and articles written for the popular media. Photographs and
project summaries will be available to the interested public on the project
website. This study should also establish diving seals as a novel model for the
study of cardiovascular and muscular physiology of aging. Research on Weddell
seals could validate this model and thus develop a foundation for similar
research on other species. Advancement of the understanding of aging by medical
science has been impressive in recent years and the development of new models
for the study of aging has tremendous potential benefits to society at
large&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;