* 0440524
* Track 1, GK-12: Engineering Fellows in G6-9 Science Education
* EDU,DGE
* 04/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Rebecca Litherland, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,580,439.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this 3-year project, the Colleges of Engineering and Education at
the University of Missouri-&lt;br/&gt;Columbia will collaborate with three
central Missouri school districts (one small city and two &lt;br/&gt;rural),
engineering businesses, and the Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary
&lt;br/&gt;Education to improve the pedagogy and team-building skills of
engineering graduate students, &lt;br/&gt;increase the engineering content for
G6-9 science and mathematics teachers, and provide &lt;br/&gt;opportunities to
increase interest in science and mathematics among G6-9 students using
hands-&lt;br/&gt;on engineering design projects. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Engineering and education faculty working
together with Fellows and G6-&lt;br/&gt;9 science teachers blends content and
pedagogy skills for better overall impact on the Fellows'
&lt;br/&gt;development. This is further emphasized by requiring the Fellows to
include a chapter about this &lt;br/&gt;outreach activity in their dissertation.
Empowerment of the Fellows and development of &lt;br/&gt;leadership skills is
included by explicitly involving them in decision making; infusion of
&lt;br/&gt;engineering design into K-12 education, a nationally recognized need,
is furthered by the project, &lt;br/&gt;using a unique team approach;
development of Future Scientists and Engineers Clubs in schools links the
proposed activities with curricular ones, enhancing effectiveness and improving
sustainability, and; the proposed global connections via distance links adds an
important educational dimension to all the activities, for all the participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The proposed project will help develop
infrastructure for deeper and sustained &lt;br/&gt;partnerships, centered on
engineering design, among G6-9 science and mathematics educators,
&lt;br/&gt;higher education, industry, and the department of elementary and
secondary education of the &lt;br/&gt;state. The prototype resources (for
graduate students, teachers, and G6-9 students) developed will &lt;br/&gt;be
made available to graduate students, middle and secondary science and
mathematics teachers, &lt;br/&gt;and higher education throughout the region, the
state, and the nation, with the expectation that &lt;br/&gt;they will utilize
them whenever appropriate. Infusion of engineering design projects should also
&lt;br/&gt;facilitate the development of content-rich and inquiry-based
approaches. The graduate students &lt;br/&gt;will also benefit from enhanced
skills transferable to a variety of occupations. The importance of
&lt;br/&gt;actively engaging students in design has the potential not only to
enrich teaching of science and &lt;br/&gt;mathematics, but also to forge
connections to daily life by providing approaches to meet other
&lt;br/&gt;challenges in diverse areas ranging from ecological issues to
personal life. The inclusion of women and minorities in all aspects of this
program will be stressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial funding for this project
is provided by the Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;