* 0440640
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Continuity and Change in Household Life at Classic Period Chunchucmil, Yucatan, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2006
* E. Wyllys Andrews, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2006
* USD 11,570.00

Under the supervision of Wyllys Andrews V, Aline Magnoni will analyze
archaeological data collected at the ancient Maya site of Chunchucmil, Yucatan,
Mexico. Chunchucmil reached its maximum extent from A.D. 400-700, when a dense
settlement of monumental architecture, residential groups enclosed by boundary
walls, and streets facilitating traffic in the crowded urban environment
extended over an area of ca. 25 km2. This urban center became one of the largest
cities in the Maya region and functioned as a commercial and redistribution
center for a few centuries. During the 8th century, probably because of changes
in trade routes, depopulation began at Chunchucmil and in the following two
centuries occupation was extremely limited and resulted in a drastic
modification of the settlement patterns at the site.

This research takes as the unit of analysis the houselot-the space where
household members participated in activities related to reproduction,
production, distribution and transmission. Despite the fact that households vary
in size, form and function in the ethnographic record, their ubiquitousness in
past and present societies across the world renders them a powerful analytical
tool for the cross-cultural elucidation of economic and social processes. Since
households are the result of adaptive domestic strategies to meet the needs of
its members, they are measurable socioeconomic units of the larger community. At
Chunchucmil domestic groups were incorporated in considerably different urban
contexts through time and this diachronic study will characterize the evolution
of Chunchucmil's domestic life during the Classic period (A.D. 300-1000), by
using several complimentary lines of evidence, namely the architectural,
artifactual and soil chemical spatial patterning in houselots as well as the
integration of the houselots in their contemporaneous settlement and built
environment. Since domestic units are the basic units of society, this study
attempts to evaluate changes occurring at the household as well as site level
through time, as major modifications in the architectural arrangement and the
use of space at the domestic level, and transformations of the settlement size,
density, and configuration took place during the Classic period.

Finally, knowledge obtained from these investigations has been and will continue
to be shared with the local Yucatec Maya communities that live around the
archaeological site. Tours of the site and specifically of the excavated
residential groups have been provided to adults and school children over the
years and will continue to be offered. Posters and reports featuring this
research will be made and distributed among the surrounding communities. Some
posters, reports and a video, presenting earlier portions of this research, have
already been given to the villages' authorities and schools. The results of this
investigation will also be shared with the scientific community through
presentations at annual archaeological and anthropological meetings and
publication in academic journals. The creation of a website featuring the
results of this research as well as investigations conducted by other
researchers at Chunchucmil is currently underway. Moreover, undergraduate
students from a variety of universities (US, Europe, and Mexico) have been
trained over several field seasons at Chunchucmil in archaeological field
methods and research.



