* 0440975
* Nitrogen and oxygen gas isotopes in the Siple Dome and Byrd ice cores
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Jeffrey Severinghaus, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 12/31/2008
* USD 425,979.00

The award supports the development of high-resolution nitrogen and oxygen
isotope records on trapped gases in the Byrd and Siple Dome ice cores, and the
Holocene part of the GISP2 ice core. The primary scientific goals of this work
are to understand the enigmatic d15N anomalies seen thus far in the Siple Dome
record at 15.3 ka and 35 ka, and to find other events that may occur in both
cores. At these events, d15N of trapped air approaches zero, implying little or
no gravitational fractionation of gases in the firn layer at the time of
formation of the ice. These events may represent times of low accumulation rate
and arid meteorological conditions, and thus may contain valuable information
about the climatic history of West Antarctica. Alternatively, they may stem from
crevassing and thus may reveal ice-dynamical processes. Finding the events in
the Byrd core, which is located 500 km from Siple Dome, would place powerful
constraints on their origin and significance. A second major goal is to explore
the puzzling absence of the abrupt warming event at 22 ka (seen at Siple Dome)
in the nearby Byrd 18O/16O record in the ice (d18Oice), and search for a
possible correlative signal in Byrd d15N. A third goal takes advantage of the
fact that precise measurements of the oxygen isotopic composition of atmospheric
O2 (d18Oatm) are obtained as a byproduct of the d15N measurement. The proposed
gas-isotopic measurements will underpin an integrated suite of West Antarctic
climate and atmospheric gas records, which will ultimately include the WAIS
Divide core. These records will help separate regional from global climate
signals, and may place constraints on the cause of abrupt climate change.
Education of two graduate students, and training of two staff members in the
laboratory, contribute to the nation's human resource base. Education and
outreach will be an important component of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;