* 0440433
* Capturing Mauna Loa's Current Reawakening - Integrated Geodetic and Numerical Investigations of Magmatic and Volcanotectonic Processes, Mauna Loa, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2008
* Donald Thomas, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2008
* USD 328,774.00

Hawaii's Mauna Loa volcano currently presents a window of scientific opportunity
that is unprecedented. Recent geodetic evidence shows that Earth's largest
volcano has begun to re-inflate and is likely in the first stage of a typical
eruption cycle comprising: 1) summit inflation, 2) summit eruption, and 3) dike
propagation and flank eruptions. Although more than 30 such eruptive cycles have
occurred here since 1833, and one as recently as the 10 years prior to the 1984
eruption, the accompanying surface deformation fields have never been analyzed
with data from the new generation of high-resolution space- based geodetic
platforms that is currently revolutionizing volcano
geodesy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to investigate the kinematics and
mechanics of crustal deformation and its relation to magmatic processes at Mauna
Loa by comparing GPS- and InSAR-derived surface displacement fields and time
series with predictions from numerical simulations designed to simulate
gravitational loading conditions. We will install 12 continuously operating GPS
(CGPS) and 30 survey GPS (SGPS) stations focused on Mauna Loa's rift zones and
flanks. We will combine the GPS data with an InSAR-derived time series from
ENVISAT repeat passes to provide spatial continuity at a pixel spacing of 10s of
meters over areas greater than 10s of kilometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigation of three fundamental volcanotectonic processes and related
questions drive our investigation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Summit Inflation and
Eruption. What is the spatial location and geometry of the summit magma chamber
and how does it change prior, and leading up, to a summit eruption? What are the
mechanical boundary conditions throughout the edifice in which a summit eruption
occurs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Dike Propagation and Flank Eruption. What is the
relationship between summit and rift zone intrusions/flank eruptions? What
controls the dynamics of dike propagation down a flank rift zone? A particularly
exciting prospect is that the CGPS sites will capture major dike-intrusion
events into one of Mauna Loa's flanking rift zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3)
Gravitational Volcanic Deformation. How do topographically-induced stresses
influence near-surface deformation and volcanic processes? How do neighboring
volcanoes, such as Kilauea, impact volcanotectonic
phenomena?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;