* 0440661
* Student Support for the North American Paleontological Convention -- 2005
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* William Ausich, Paleontological Society
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2005
* USD 25,125.00

The North American Paleontological Convention (NAPC) is a quadrennial gathering
of paleontologists from a variety of disciplines. The meeting planned for June
19 through June 26, 2005 at Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia will be
the eighth NAPC. Each previous convention has been judged an excellent
opportunity for the presentation of the results of new research and for
discussions of current areas of paleontological research. One aim of NAPC is to
allow specialists who would not otherwise normally be in contact to meet and
exchange ideas. For example, micropaleontologists and vertebrate paleontologists
have different professional societies that meet at different times, yet some
members of these two groups work on fossils from the same rock units. Based on
past experience, the Organizing Committee for NAPC-2005 expects that more than
500 professionals will attend and interact during three days of meetings and on
several field trips. NAPC provides an outstanding educational opportunity to
obtain focused presentations of paleontological information from talks and
poster presentations without the other distractions presented at a general
geological meeting.

The Organizing Committee believes that the continued interest of students is
critical to the health of the field. Not only will students maintain the study
of past life, they are the ones who will provide fresh approaches and examine
old fossils with new eyes. NAPC allows students the ready opportunity to meet
with leaders in the field and to discuss their research in progress, both
formally and informally, in a venue not provided by a national or regional
geologic meeting.