* 0440018
* Paleosecular Variation in the Southern Hemisphere: A Regional Study in Southern Patagonia
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2009
* Laurie Brown, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 11/30/2009
* USD 262,118.00

The geocentric axial dipole (GAD) model for Earth's magnetic field has been used
for some 50 years as a first approximation, allowing for paleomagnetic studies
of a wide variety of rocks. The position of ancient continents, velocities of
spreading oceans, deformations of plates and correlations of strata are all
possible using the GAD model. But, it is quite obvious from continued
measurements of the magnetic field over historic time that there are higher
order variations in this simple model, such as the flux lobes at high latitude
persistent in the radial component at the core/mantle boundary. Models based on
archeomagnetic data as well as results from young lava flows and lake sediments
extend detailed images of the field back several thousand years. The time-
averaged field (TAF) over the last 5 myr is modeled using data from terrestrial
lava flows and marine sediments, but results are not unambiguous and the data
are not robust enough to fully investigate higher order variations. Indications
of the influence of the lower mantle on outer core behavior and the suggestion
of orbital periodicities in magnetic field variations are only two possibilities
that could be investigated with future modeling. Efforts over the past few years
have increased the number of high precision paleomagnetic field studies with
particular emphasis on high latitudes and Southern Hemisphere locations. Recent
considerations of the number of lava flows needed to assess the TAF implies that
regional studies are of considerable importance. Additionally, the need to
include paleointensity measurements along with the more common directional
measurements is vital for future models. Brown proposes that studying
paleosecular variation using both directional and intensity data over a region
in southern Patagonia (46 degrees S - 52 degrees S) will provide important
additional data for TAF modeling. Several hundred sites will be collected in a
region where young lava flows, < 5 myr, are extensive. Different views of field
dispersion exist in this area; more extensive sampling over a wider area will be
able to further investigate this discrepancy. Broader impacts of this research
will include the education and training of graduate and undergraduate students
as they participate in fieldwork, laboratory work, interpretations and
presentation of results. In addition, this work will be incorporated into a
dynamic digital map (DDM) for use by the wider geoscience community. DDMs are
part of the Digital Library for Earth Sciences Education (DLESE) project, and
are an established way to make geologic information tied to geologic maps
available over the WEB. The results can be accessed by students and researchers
at various levels but the PI will put particular emphasis on undergraduate
geoscience classes wishing to investigate tectonics, volcanism and
paleomagnetism in southern Patagonia.