* 0440679
* A Science Management Office for the United States Component of the International Trans Antarctic Expedition (US ITASE SMO) - A Collaborative Program of Research from Taylor Dome to
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Paul Mayewski, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2009
* USD 497,417.00

This award supports the science management office (SMO) for a series of
collaborative science proposals that are part of the U.S. contribution to the
International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition (US ITASE). It supports the
science administration and the coordination of logistics needed in order to
accomplish the research. The SMO will work with the Antarctic support contractor
to coordinate field operations for the traverse platform so that US ITASE can
undertake a series of scientific traverses in the region from Taylor Dome, in
Northern Victoria Land to South Pole (NVL-SP) inclusive of interior portions of
the East Antarctic plateau such as Dome A. US ITASE is the terrestrial
equivalent of a polar research vessel. It offers the ground-based opportunities
of traditional style over-snow travel coupled with the modern technology of GPS
navigation, crevasse detecting radar, satellite communications, and multi-
disciplinary research. By operating as a ground-based transport system US ITASE
offers scientists the opportunity to experience the dynamic environment they are
studying. US ITASE also provides a stimulating interactive venue for research
similar to that afforded by oceanographic research vessels and large polar field
camps, without the cost of the former or the lack of mobility of the latter.
More importantly the combination of disciplines represented by US ITASE provides
a unique, logistically efficient, multi-dimensional view of the atmosphere, the
ice sheet and their histories. Data collected by US ITASE and its international
partners is available to a broad scientific community and will contribute to
many of the goals of the upcoming International Polar Year (IPY). US ITASE has
an extensive program of public outreach and provides significant opportunities
for many students to experience multidisciplinary Antarctic research.