* 0440940
* Collaborative Research:  Virtual Networking - - Enabling Innovation in Networks and Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2005
* Scott Shenker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 08/31/2005
* USD 79,948.00

Proposal Number: 0439886&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jonathan Turner &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Washington University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0440940&lt;br/&gt;PI: Scott Shenker &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
California, Berkeley &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0439642&lt;br/&gt;PI: Thomas E. Anderson &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Washington, Seattle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0439842&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Larry Peterson &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Princeton University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Virtual
Networking - Enabling Innovation in Networks and Services
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Internet is one of the
great technology success stories of the twentieth century, enabling greater
access to information and providing new modes of communication among people and
organizations. Unfortunately, the Internet's very success is now creating
obstacles to innovation in the networking technology that lies at its core. In
order&lt;br/&gt;to free the global communications infrastructure from
stagnation, the nation must find ways to enable its continuing renewal. This
planning grant is developing a case for network virtualization as a means to
enable innovation in networks and services. Virtualization allows multiple
logically independent virtual networks to share a common physical infrastructure
or substrate. This program is developing a plan for a major new research
initiative in network virtualization that includes both basic research, the
development of key technology components and the creation of an experimental
testbed, to establish feasibility and provide a context in which networking
researchers can develop innovative new network architectures and services. The
program is articulating the case for network virtualization, soliciting input
from the network research community and working with the community to develop
recommendations to NSF for a major initiative in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;