* 0440185
* Bering Sea Volcanic Province: Eruption History, Source Characteristics, Melting Processes and Plate Tectonic Context
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Samuel Mukasa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/29/2008
* USD 253,697.00

This project is to undertake a geochronologic, petrologic and geochemical study
of the Bering Sea Volcanic Province to evaluate the hypothesis that magmatism in
the area was triggered by rift-related decompression, but also that it was
facilitated by presence of volatiles introduced by subduction during the
lithospheric assembly of Alaska, Bering Sea, and the Chukchi Peninsula (Russia)
in the Cretaceous. A comprehensive 40Ar/39Ar isotopic dating program is proposed
to clarify the eruption history of the province, and also to provide a
chronologic framework for follow-up isotopic determinations. Major oxide and
trace element concentrations will be measured to model degree of melting and
geochemical character of the source. Data will be evaluated using the more
commonly utilized standard element partition models, employing modal batch
melting formulations but also equations for the dynamic melting model, which are
likely to be more representative of mantle melting scenarios. Primary melt water
concentrations will be estimated from olivine melt inclusions by FTIR
spectroscopy. The isotopic compositions of Nd, Sr, Pb and Hf will be measured
for a detailed assessment of source characteristics and modeling mixing
relationships. Some U-series isotopes (U, Th, and Ra) will be measured to
further constrain the melting processes and to estimate the depth of melting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will comprise the Ph.D. dissertation research
for Christopher Stefano, a new graduate student in our program. It will also
provide some undergraduate research experience for Tanya Shavalia, a female
minority student with a promising academic career. This is a collaborative study
with Dr. Vyacheslav (Slava) Akinin of the North East Interdisciplinary
Scientific Research Institute (NEISRI), Far East Branch of the Russian Academy
of Sciences in Magadan. This work will contribute to our understanding the plate
tectonic development of the Arctic region, recognized to be an important
boundary condition for other studies including climate change, environmental
change and life/lithosphere interactions. &lt;br/&gt;