* 0440577
* Collaborative Project: Effects of Oxygen and Temperature on Egg Mass Function of Southern Ocean Marine Invertebrates
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2005,11/30/2006
* Harry Woods, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 11/30/2006
* USD 142,669.00

This project seeks to understand the evolutionary physiology of reproductive
strategies in Southern Ocean marine invertebrates. The fauna of the Southern
Ocean has evolved under stable, cold temperatures for approximately 14 million
years. These conditions have led to the evolution of unusual physiological and
biochemical characteristics, many of which may reflect adaptations to relatively
low oxygen availability and high larval oxygen demands. The goal of the proposed
projects is to understand latitudinal variation in the function of invertebrate
egg masses in relation to oxygen availability and temperature. This relationship
is critical to larval survival in the low-temperature, high-oxygen conditions
found at high latitudes. In particular, the investigators will: (1) use first
principles to model the diffusion of oxygen into egg and embryo masses of
Antarctic organisms at environmentally relevant temperatures; (2) test model
assumptions by measuring the temperature-dependence of embryonic metabolism and
oxygen diffusivity through natural and artificial gels; (3) test model
predictions by using oxygen microelectrodes to measure oxygen gradients in both
artificial and natural egg masses, and by measuring developmental rates of
embryos at different positions in masses; and (4) compare the structure and
function of egg masses from the Southern Ocean to those from temperate waters.
These components of the study constitute an integrated examination of the
evolutionary physiology of egg mass structure and function. Studies of masses
endemic to polar conditions will increase the understanding of egg mass
evolution across equator-to-pole gradients in temperature and across gradients
in oxygen partial pressure. The proposal will support graduate students and will
involve several undergraduates in research. The PIs will also design and
implement units on polar biology for undergraduate classes at their respective
institutions. These educational units will focus on the PIs' photographs, video
footage, experiments, and data from this project. The PIs will use web-linked
video and instructional technologies to design and co-teach a new class on polar
ecological physiology, will work with local grade school institutions to involve
high school students in research, and will develop high school course modules
about polar biology.