* 0440769
* Evolution of Morphology and Trophic Strategies in Antarctic Agglutinated Foraminifera
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Samuel Bowser, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 03/31/2010
* USD 487,919.00

Foraminifera ("forams") are structurally complex, abundant, and widely
distributed protists. Allogromiid forams often dominate deep-sea and high-
latitude assemblages, and are believed to aggressively rework sediments in these
habitats. Allogromiids are also common in continental slope systems, which are
important for the recycling of organic matter and hence for global
biogeochemical cycles. Most studies of foram biology have focused on species
from shallow tropical/temperate settings, where they have been shown to employ
diverse trophic strategies ranging from osmotrophy to metazoan carnivory. As a
major meio- and macrofaunal component in deeper settings, a better understanding
of the in situ behavior and feeding biology of basal allogromiids is of major
importance to the ocean sciences. Explorers Cove, Antarctica, is currently the
only place on Earth where biologists can use scuba to directly access a "deep-
sea-like" ecosystem and collect basal allogromiids in bulk; it is therefore a
site of profound scientific interest. Explorers Cove forams, which may normally
have bathymetric ranges to &gt;3,000 m, are ideal for field and laboratory
experimentation, and serve as useful model systems for studying the ecology and
evolution of deep-sea assemblages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just as a firm
understanding of the protists is vital to developing a clear picture of
early&lt;br/&gt;eukaryotic evolution, the key to the origin of Foraminifera lies
in the study of the early branching allogromiids. An improved understanding of
the relationships between early forams through multigene based molecular
phylogenies is a goal of this project. Additionally, a more careful study of the
"crown allogromiids" will illuminate the evolutionary steps that lead to the
rotaliids, which dominate many shallow-water temperate environments and pelagic
foram assemblages. Extant protists represent the modern products of ancient
predatory (phagotrophic) prokaryotes. Protists are well known as consumers of
microbiota, but the consumption of metazoans by protists, one focus of our
studies on allogromiids, is not widely appreciated. As a result, the
consequences of ancient predatory protists are rarely considered a major factor
in the diversification of animals during the late Proterozoic/early Cambrian .
This project will test hypothesis that predation on metazoans is widespread
among basal forams, and if supported by analyses of the new protein-coding
sequence data, then the role of these protists in Neoproterozoic ecosystems will
need to be reevaluated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the research are
to: test the validity of the foram phylogenetic hypotheses currently based
solely on single gene sequence data; examine the ultrastructure of
representative members of allogromiid clades; explore the origin of polar forams
using the new molecular phylogenetic and structural data; further examine the
trophic strategies of allogromiids; and to determine if carnivory is a
fundamental nutritional mode for basal forams, or a special derived character.
Additional broader impacts of this research include training of underrepresented
groups through both grass-roots efforts and formal participation in national
federally funded education programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;