* 0440943
* Paleo Records of Biotic and Abiotic Particles in Polar Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* John Priscu, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 05/31/2008
* USD 254,827.00

The U.S. ice core research community has proposed a deep ice-coring program in
West Antarctica (WAIS Divide) that will develop a unique series of interrelated
climate, ice dynamics, and biologic records focused on understanding
interactions among global earth systems. A significant component of the WAIS
Divide program will be the development of a climate record with an annual layer
chronology for the most recent 40,000 years. The record will also extend, at
lower temporal resolution, to approximately 100,000 years before present. These
records will enable comparison of paleo-environmental conditions between the
northern and southern hemispheres, in conjunction with the study of greenhouse
gas concentrations in the paleo-atmosphere, with greater resolution than
previously possible. This project will develop a flow cytometer-based analytical
system for the continuous detection and characterization of abiotic and biotic
particles in ice cores. The system will be integrated with a unit designed for
continuous flow analysis of trace elements. The research will investigate the
hypothesis that Antarctic glacial ice contains a significant reservoir of
organic carbon that reflects past climatic events. The proposed research will
utilize archived ice cores to both develop methodology and produce new data that
will directly address our hypotheses. The WAIS Divide ice-coring project will be
the first to explicitly integrate biology, glaciochemistry and climate, and thus
will be the bellwether for future interdisciplinary studies on ice cores. This
proposal will train a young scientist and undergraduate students in the
interdisciplinary aspects of ice core research, will introduce a Native American
student to the sciences, and will broaden the field of scientists involved in
ice core research to include biologists.