* 0440391
* Integrating Computational Volcanology With Natural Deposits: An Investigation of Over-Water and Over-Land Volcanic Transport of the Kos Plateau Tuff
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* George Bergantz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2008
* USD 267,085.00

The goal of this project is to develop an integrated field and modeling study as
a basis for a better understanding of how multiphase computational fluid
dynamics modeling can be used to understand features of pyroclastic deposits.
These types of deposits are the dominant expression of eruptive activity in the
geological record, but existing field-based, qualitative techniques cannot
reveal the full time-dependence of pyroclastic activity. This new model will
implement a truly multiphase approach that is applicable over the entire range
of solid volume fraction, from dilute to dense. This allows for one to consider
all stages of the eruption simultaneously, and importantly, to address the
mechanics of the formation of pyroclastic deposits. It is planned to focus on
poorly understood pyroclastic flows that move over water. The field area is the
well-mapped Kos Plateau Tuff (KPT), Greece that offers the opportunity to better
understand both over-land and over-water eruption transport processes by
comparison from a single eruptive episode. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
the project will improve knowledge among volcanologists of the interplay of
dynamic processes in explosive eruptions and will contribute directly to the
ability to understand the reach and magnitude of some volcanic hazards. In terms
of societal benefits, results deriving from this study will be of immediate
interest to volcanic hazards planners. As part of the project, we will train
students with a wide range of backgrounds, and expose them to an international
research experience with collaborators in Pisa, Italy and Geneva,
Switzerland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;