* 0440180
* Children and Science Tests
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/2005,12/31/2010
* Beth Warren, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 1,806,293.00

One of the most vexing problems in education is the persistence of an
achievement gap between middle class students of European American descent and
students from historically underserved communities. This gap is reflected in
performance on a range of achievement tests, from NAEP to state measures being
instituted under NCLB. Despite the increased use of standardized test results to
make consequential decisions in education, little is actually known about the
kinds of knowledge, reasoning, and interpretive practices that students - both
those who do well on such tests and those who do not - use in responding to
them.

The proposed research is a first step in addressing this gap in the field's
knowledge. The main line of inquiry will investigate how children from diverse
ethnic and linguistic communities make sense of science items on the Grade 4
Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS), a high stakes achievement
test viewed as a model in meeting NCLB requirements. The outcome will be a
deeper understanding of a) the conceptual, linguistic, textual and
representational demands of the science items on the MCAS, and b) the forms of
knowledge, reasoning and interpretive practices that children from diverse
backgrounds use in responding to such items. A second, more exploratory line of
inquiry will investigate what, if anything, teachers and administrators may
learn from close examination of children's reasoning about achievement tests. It
will focus on what they learn about a) children's performance and competence, b)
how tests like the MCAS work, and c) possible relationships of curriculum and
instruction to test performance. An important outcome of both lines of inquiry
will be the specification of guidelines for test-makers and practitioners to use
in evaluating the meaning of students' test performance.

Intellectual Merit:

The aim of this project is to contribute to the development of a fuller science
of assessment that serves the goal of equity. In pursuit of this goal, this
project will bring together sociocultural, sociolinguistic, cognitive, and
psychometric perspectives on human performance to develop a theoretically and
empirically grounded understanding of the interpretive work in which children
engage as they respond to items on science achievement tests.

This research will shed light on heretofore unidentified interactions between
children and specific features of science test items (e.g., linguistic and
representational forms) that may affect performance in unintended ways.

Broader Impact:

This project will break new ground by accounting for the complexity of the
sense-making interaction between children and standardized tests, thus deepening
understanding of the achievement gap, our nation's most persistent educational
problem. The results of this research will be translated into guidelines for
test makers and practitioners. Guidelines for testmakers will address the
implications of the findings of this research for the design of test items and
interpretation of children's performance. Guidelines for practitioners will
address how analysis and discussion of student test performance can inform their
practice and support coordination among curriculum, instruction, and assessment
in ways that best serve the education of all students.