* 0440916
* SGER: Assessing MNeSV as a Viral Vector for Gene Silencing in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Kay Scheets, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 01/31/2007
* USD 228,199.00

Genome sequence data is accumulating rapidly for maize and other cereals, and we
need tools that will let us evaluate the functions of maize genes rapidly and
inexpensively. 'Gene silencing' (or RNA interference) uses the cell's machinery
to destroy specific messenger RNAs before their encoded proteins can be made,
effectively turning off a gene's expression without having to make mutations or
generate transgenic plants. Researchers studying broadleaf plants have developed
virus-based vectors that take advantage of virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS),
in which RNA viruses trigger the plant's gene silencing mechanism to study gene
function in Arabidopsis and tobacco. &lt;br/&gt;Our objective is to develop a
virus-based gene silencing vector for maize and other cereals using Maize
necrotic streak virus (MNeSV), a newly described tombusvirus that has a
relatively easy-to-manipulate, small single-part RNA genome. We think MNeSV is a
good candidate, because successful gene silencing vectors were developed for a
related virus (Tomato bushy stunt virus) that infects broadleaf plants. MNeSV-
based vectors will be easy and cost efficient to use, and lack insect
transmissibility. However, the project is risky, because we do not currently
have the information on the function of MNeSV genes that is required to develop
a stable vector for gene silencing, nor do we know the virus' complete host
range. Therefore, our specific objectives for this project include: identifying
MNeSV genes necessary for vector function using mutation analysis; determining
whether we can infect wheat, barley, oats, sorghum, and rice with MNeSV using
vascular puncture inoculation-a method we developed to inoculate germinating
seeds with viruses and viral nucleic acids; and, to design and construct some
preliminary virus vectors. In addition, we will determine whether we can express
MNeSV from plasmid cDNA by cloning the virus behind a plant promoter. Although
this is also high-risk, it would save researchers the time and expense of making
the MNeSV RNA in the lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are highly optimistic that
this project will result in production of a basic VIGS vector, development of an
infectious cDNA version of the MNeSV vector, and identification of additional
cereals hosts of MNeSV. If successful, MNeSV-based vectors could be used by
researchers to investigate maize and cereal gene function using the large pool
of genomic and EST sequences already available. Thus, while high-risk, the
proposed project has far-reaching impacts for the Plant Genome Program if it is
successful. Vector constructs will be available without restriction from OkSU
and USDA to scientists for research purposes. Information on the vectors will be
made available via journal article(s) and through a link from a website
[http://plantpath.osu.edu/faculty/redinbaugh.php]. &lt;br/&gt;We will employ
undergraduates to assist with this research project, giving them hands-on
research experience in molecular biology and plant virology. We will work to
recruit these students from under-represented groups including African
Americans, Native Americans and women.&lt;br/&gt;