* 0440334
* Project SCORE: Development of a Permanent Outreach Partnership Between Teaching Fellows and Science Teachers/Students of the Fort Worth Independent School District
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* Harold Sheedlo, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2011
* USD 1,840,477.00

Teacher/Fellow teams actively engage students with inquiry-based laboratory
exercises in 9th-grade biology classes at six Fort Worth Independent School
District (FWISD) high schools from the Track I program that serve predominantly
underrepresented minorities. Outcomes are assessed through questionnaires,
surveys, and data collection by internal/external evaluators to establish
student interests and attitudes regarding science, overall impact of their
understanding of key scientific concepts, teachers and Fellows outlook of the
program, mentors cooperation and understanding of Fellows involvement, and
institutional commitment to continued support post NSF funding. In addition,
SCORE.s Track II proposal initiates a unique enrichment opportunity for selected
FWISD students who take part in a Summer Science Camp after their 9th grade
year. A Young Scientists Program where students learn laboratory techniques and
develop a research project during their junior or senior year of high school
follows this activity. These programs integrate SCORE activities throughout the
institution by recruiting graduate students outside of the program along with
SCORE Fellows to serve as research mentors to FWISD students and teachers,
embedding this outreach program into the mission and culture of UNTHSC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Implications: Project SCORE aggressively
reinforces science and technology as viable career choices to students. In
addition, it addresses the decline in higher education participation rates and
educational attainment of minorities in the state of Texas. SCORE Fellows
receive training on how to initiate discussions with students about their future
education goals, emphasizing science and technology. These discussions address
student's lifelong learning goals, regardless of their personal interests or
educational choices. At all times, Fellows serve as role models and mentors to
their students, providing encouragement for success along with valuable
scientific stimulation in the laboratory and classroom.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: During Track I, the project expanded
the originally proposed activities with the addition of the Teachers as Scholars
and the After-school/TAKS Tutorial programs. Track II builds on these existing
activities with a Summer Science Camp, Young Scientists Program, Fort Worth Zoo
Outreach Program, and a Research Field Trip Experience. Anticipated outcomes of
these new activities will, we feel, have a profound effect on the overall
acceptance and level of commitment to the program by the institutions, and will
be a strong foundation for the expansion of this and future outreach programs at
UNTHSC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;