* 0440113
* Toward a new Conceptualization of  What Constitutes Progress in Learning Physics, K-16:  Resources, Frames, and Networks
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Edward Redish, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2009
* USD 799,800.00

The purpose of this project is to come to a more explicit understanding of what
good scientific reasoning looks like, what sorts of knowledge and abilities
contribute to it, how teachers can help students develop that knowledge, and
what aspects of early scientific reasoning we can identify as the seeds of later
sophistication. Prior research suggests that young children have a variety of
intellectual resources for understanding science: they have extensive knowledge
about physical causes and effects, at least concerning objects and phenomena
they encounter every day; they have a variety of abilities for working with and
adding to that knowledge; and most have skills for defending a position with
reasons and evidence. Prior research also suggests that science teaching does
not generally help children refine their everyday thinking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include four types of studies: 1)
Detailed case studies of K-16 students' reasoning in physical science and
physics, recorded on videotape and transcribed for line-by-line analysis; 2) the
construction of computational models that try to reproduce aspects of students'
reasoning; 3) the development of a theoretical framework for understanding the
progression from childhood abilities to the expertise of a college major; and 4)
applying that framework to generate and explore hypotheses for what
instructional actions might promote good scientific reasoning and understanding.
&lt;br/&gt;