* 0440222
* Collaborative Research: Africa Array - Imaging the Africa Super Plume
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Stephen Grand, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2009
* USD 53,743.00

Collaborative Research:AfricaArray - Imaging the African
Superplume&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The African Superplume is a large region of low
seismic wave speeds in &lt;br/&gt;the lower mantle under southern Africa that
has long been recognized as &lt;br/&gt;one of the most prominent features of the
mantle. Above the African &lt;br/&gt;Superplume lies the African Superswell,
suggesting a geodynamic link &lt;br/&gt;between lower mantle dynamics and
geologic processes shaping the &lt;br/&gt;African plate. The origin and nature
of the African Superplume is &lt;br/&gt;controversial. The initial
interpretation of the low wave speed region &lt;br/&gt;under southern Africa
attributed it to a long-lived, hot mantle &lt;br/&gt;upwelling. A number of
seismic studies since then have suggested the &lt;br/&gt;presence of chemical
heterogeneity within the superplume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What parts of the
superplume anomaly are thermal vs. chemical (or both) &lt;br/&gt;remains
uncertain, as does its origin. In this project, the structure,
&lt;br/&gt;composition and origin of the African Superplume will be investigated
&lt;br/&gt;using the first 3 years of broadband seismic data from AfricaArray,
&lt;br/&gt;together with existing data, and concentrating on four types of
&lt;br/&gt;analyses; 1) tomographic imaging of the upper and lower mantle using
&lt;br/&gt;body wave travel times, 2) modeling waveforms of teleseismic body
wave &lt;br/&gt;phases that sample the Superplume, 3) jointly inverting receiver
&lt;br/&gt;functions and surface wave dispersion measurements for crust and
&lt;br/&gt;uppermost mantle structure, and 4) stacking and migrating receiver
&lt;br/&gt;functions to image topography on the 410 and 660 km
discontinuities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AfricaArrayis a new 10-year-long Pan-
African training and research &lt;br/&gt;initiative in geophysics, with an
emphasis on seismology, set up by the &lt;br/&gt;University of the
Witwatersrand, the Council for Geoscience (South &lt;br/&gt;African geological
survey), and Penn State. AfricaArraywill provide the &lt;br/&gt;U.S. geophysics
community with important seismic data on earth &lt;br/&gt;structure and
processes for many years. AfricaArraywill greatly &lt;br/&gt;strengthen
scientific ties between the U.S. geophysics community and &lt;br/&gt;earth
scientists throughout Africa. Once established, AfricaArraywill
&lt;br/&gt;provide opportunities for promoting geophysics to U.S. minority
groups, &lt;br/&gt;as well as other students, through summer internships and a
summer &lt;br/&gt;geophysics field course (both in
Africa).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF's Office
of International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;