* 0440594
* Track 1, GK-12, Science and Society Fellows: Partnering with Rural Schools in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem
* EHR,DGE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Lisa Graumlich, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2010
* USD 1,850,091.00

0440594&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this GK-12 project are to 1)
strengthen MSU.s institutional support for training experiences in a K-12
context in order to enhance the communication and leadership skills of graduate
and undergraduate scientists; and 2) enhance science education in rural K-12
settings by infusing locally relevant, current environmental science research
about the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem into K-12 classrooms. The Fellow-Teacher
partnerships enhanced by a number of focused team activities, joint professional
development activities and Teacher collaboration in the Fellow's summer field
work. GK-12 Teachers and Fellows collaborate during the school year to develop a
lasting product that links the GK-12 Fellow's research and expertise with a
science issue of local or regional concern (e.g., water quality,
wildlife,climate change).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
proposal rests on the potential to develop a model of GK-12 engagement with
rural school districts in a state where 42% of the 159,998 K-12 students attend
schools in communities where the population is more than 2500. There are two
broad impacts of project. First, by bringing to the K-12 classroom scientific
research on topics that ultimately relate to the management of a large, diverse
and complex ecosystem, the project works towards creating an environmentally
literate citizenry who have the capacity to make science-based decisions about
contentious resource management issues. Second, by establishing an MSU standard
of exposing the best and brightest graduate researchers to the K-12 community,
increasing the capacity for future partnerships between academic scientists and
K-12 educators while increasing the communication skills of the next generation
of scientific researchers. The evaluation will provide strong formative feedback
and also determine the extent to which the work succeeds in achieving its
desired goals. A key step for the evaluation is the development of a theory of
change based on the assumptions underlying the programs activities through
dialogs with major stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;