* 0440284
* Collaborative Research: SEA-CALIPSO: An Offshore/Onshore Tomography and Magma-Chamber Seismic Imaging Experiment on Montserrat
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Charles Ammon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2008
* USD 96,620.00

The CALIPSO Project (Caribbean Andesitic Lava Island Precision Seismo-geodetic
Observatory) on Montserrat, WI has aimed to investigate the dynamics of the
entire magmatic system of Soufriere Hills Volcano, and to improve our
understanding of magma dynamics for andesite volcanoes that make up most of the
Earth's Ring of Fire. An exciting new component of this is the SEA-CALIPSO
experiment, involving a Seismic Experiment with Airgun-source. This is an
'onshore/offshore' seismic experiment to image the magma chamber and deep crust
of Soufriere Hills Volcano. This data acquisition phase of this project will be
carried out in Spring 2005, with combined support of NSF (Geophysics and the
Americas Program in OISE) and the National Environmental Research Council (NERC)
of the UK. This collaborative project involves scientists and students from five
US institutions (U Arkansas, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cornell, Duke,
Penn State), Bristol and Leeds universities in the UK, and the Montserrat
Volcano Observatory (MVO). Prof. B. Voight is Project Director. The US group is
being supported by NSF, whereas the other groups have gained support from UK
agencies. The MVO will provide data and key logistical support to the project.
The project entails circling Montserrat with a UK research vessel setting off
airgun shocks, and recording the seismic wave arrivals, and natural earthquakes,
by ~100 IRIS/PASSCAL seismic recorders. The deployment will last for a 3-4 month
period centered approximately on the May 2005 airgun survey. These will be
critical data, because modeling and interpretation of these datasets can be used
to generate tomographic and reflection imaging of the magmatic system. The
research will reveal important internal features of a currently erupting
andesitic volcano, which is of significant value to the studies of volcanology,
petrology and geochemistry, and geophysics. The investigators expect major
advances in understanding magma genesis and transport, and 'how volcanoes work'.
Five US institutions are involved, and at least six graduate students will be
trained in deformation and seismic modeling, onshore/offshore seismic imaging,
and many undergraduates will receive research experience. The importance of
understanding such magma systems is clear, as this type of volcanism presents
serious hazards and causes significant societal and economic damage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;