* 0440063
* Coupled Deformation and Metamorphism, Fabric Development, Rheological Evolution and Strain Localization
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Scott Johnson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2009
* USD 239,279.00

When Earth's tectonic plates interact with one another the rocks that comprise
them are deformed, commonly forming great mountain chains. During this
deformation, the minerals that make up the rocks can become spatially or
crystallographically aligned to form a fabric. The development of rock fabric is
a primary factor affecting the strength, or rheological evolution of deforming
rocks. Fabric development commonly involves coupling of both physical and
chemical processes. For example, crenulation cleavage is the most common type of
fabric in multiply deformed rocks, and its formation leads to extreme mineral
segregation and rheological anisotropy. It is also commonly associated with the
growth of large metamorphic minerals (porphyroblasts), which are used by
structural geologists to infer deformation histories and mechanical quantities
such as shear strain, shear strain rate and vorticity. Although crenulation
cleavage is common throughout the world's mountain chains, and may play an
important role in the localization of deformation across a range of scales, the
details of its formation, and its possible mechanical significance, remain
poorly understood. The investigators and their students are combining field- and
laboratory-based studies with computer modeling to address the effects of rock
fabric, particularly crenulation cleavage, on the rheological evolution of
rocks. The chosen field area is located in the Appalachian mountains of western
Maine. The results of this project will be incorporated into web-based
educational modules that are intended as resources for earth-science teachers
and students at all levels.