* 0440817
* Investigation of Climate, Ice Dynamics and Biology using a Deep Ice Core from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Ice Divide
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2011
* Kendrick Taylor, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 07/31/2011
* USD 1,934,475.00

This award supports the coordination of an interdisciplinary and multi
institutional deep ice coring program in West Antarctica. The program will
develop interrelated climate, ice dynamics, and biologic records focused on
understanding interactions of global earth systems. The records will have a
year-by-year chronology for the most recent 40,000 years. Lower temporal
resolution records will extend to 100,000 years before present. The intellectual
activity of this project includes enhancing our understanding of the natural
mechanisms that cause climate change. The study site was selected to obtain the
best possible material, available from anywhere, to determine the role of
greenhouse gas in the last series of major climate changes. The project will
study the how natural changes in greenhouse gas concentrations influence
climate. The influence of sea ice and atmospheric circulation on climate changes
will also be investigated. Other topics that will be investigated include the
influence of the West Antarctic ice sheet on changes in sea level and the
biology deep in the ice sheet. The broader impacts of this project include
developing information required by other science communities to improve
predictions of future climate change. The project will use mass media to explain
climate, glaciology, and biology issues to a broad audience. The next generation
of ice core investigators will be trained and there will be an emphasis on
exposing a diverse group of students to climate, glaciology and biology
research.

