* 0440177
* Collaborative Research:  Integrated Study of East Antarctic Ice Sheet Tills (ISET):  Tracers of Ice Flow and Proxies of the Ice-covered Continental Shield
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2008
* G. Lang Farmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2008
* USD 48,695.00

This project studies till from the glaciers that drain the East Antarctic ice
sheet through the Transantarctic Mountains into the Ross Embayment. Glaciers
from both East and West Antarctica converge in this area, creating the Ross Ice
Shelf, whose size is a sensitive indicator of global climate change. This work
will determine till provenance through petrologic, geochemical, and isotopic
studies. Its goal is to understand the flow paths of ice sheets into this area
during the late Quaternary period, especially focused on the last glacial
maximum approximately 18,000 yrs ago. This knowledge is critical to modeling ice
sheet formation and behavior. While the East Antarctic ice sheet is considered
stable, West Antarctica hosts rapidly flowing ice streams that may be affected
by global climate change. The work will also improve our knowledge of the
crustal rocks of East Antarctica. Covered by kilometer-thick ice sheets, its
basic geology is largely unknown. The provenance studies will also be used in
field-based curriculum workshops for Indiana Earth Science educators. Other
broader impacts include graduate and undergraduate education, and improving
society's understanding of global climate change. Antarctica's ice sheets play a
pivotal role in atmospheric and oceanic circulation, and are key factors in sea-
level rise. Models of ice sheet behavior rely on accurate reconstructions of
past ice sheet configurations that this study will provide.