* 0440819
* Investigation of the Stratigraphy and Time Scale of the WAIS Divide Ice Core Using Electrical Methods
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2012
* Kendrick Taylor, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 06/30/2012
* USD 987,186.00

This award supports a project that is part of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
Divide (WAIS Divide) program; which is a multi-disciplinary multi-institutional
program to investigate the causes of natural changes in climate, the influence
of the West Antarctic ice sheet on sea level, and the biology of deep ice. The
WAIS Divide core will be unique among Antarctic ice cores in that it will have
discernable annual layers for the last 40,000 years. A critical element of the
program is to determine the age of the ice so that the climate proxies measured
on the core can be interpreted in terms of age, not just depth. This project
will make electrical measurements that can identify the annual layers. This
information will be combined with information from other investigators to
develop an annually resolved timescale over the last 40,000 years. This
timescale will be the foundation on which the recent climate records are
interpreted. Electrical measurements will also be used to produce two-
dimensional images of the ice core stratigraphy; allowing sections of the core
with abnormal stratigraphy to be identified. The broader impacts of this project
include exposing a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students to ice
core research and assisting the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History
in Washington, D.C to develop a paleoclimate/ice core display.



