* 0440761
* Collaborative Research: Deducing Late Neogene Antarctic Climate from  Fossil-rich Sediments in the Dry Valleys
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Allan Ashworth, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 08/31/2009
* USD 46,373.00

This project studies ancient lake deposits from the western Dry Valleys of
Antarctica. These deposits are particularly exciting because they preserve flora
and fauna over seven million years in age that represent the last vestiges of
ecosystems that dominated this area before formation of the modern East
Antarctic ice sheet. Their unique nature offers a chance to bridge modern and
ancient ecology. Formed along the margin of ancient alpine glaciers, these
deposits contain layers of silt, clay, and volcanic ash; as well as freeze-dried
remnants of mosses, insects, and diatoms. Geological and biological analyses
provide a view of the ecological and environmental conditions during mid-to-late
Miocene--seven to seventeen million years ago--which spans the critical period
when the East Antarctic ice sheet transitioned to its present stable form. The
results place the modern lakes of the Dry Valleys into a long-term evolutionary
framework, and allow for correlation and dating comparisons with other fossil-
rich deposits from the Transantarctic Mountains. Chemical fingerprinting and
dating of volcanic glass shards will also help date fossil- and ash-bearing
horizons in nearby marine cores, such as those to be collected under the ANDRILL
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are education at the
postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate levels: and collaboration between a
research institution and primarily undergraduate institution. The work also
improves our understanding of global climate change during a critical period in
the Earth's history.&lt;br/&gt;