* 0440772
* Operation, Enhancement and Distribution of the Antarctic Bibliography and the Bibliography on Cold Regions Science and Technology
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2005,11/30/2011
* Sharon Tahirkheli, American Geological Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Winifred Reuning
* 11/30/2011
* USD 1,006,879.00

The American Geological Institute will compile, edit, produce, and distribute
the Antarctic Bibliography and the Bibliography on Cold Regions Science and
Technology on behalf of the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Army Cold
Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory. It began performing this project in
2000 under NSF award OPP-9909727. These bibliographies are the world's premier
databases for information about virtually all scientific publications relevant
to the world's cold regions. &lt;br/&gt;The Library of Congress performed the
project from its inception in 1951 until 2000.&lt;br/&gt;AGI will continue to
extend its national and international data exchange network to improve
comprehensiveness. Also, individual scientists and others can recommend
additional titles as described on the web site.&lt;br/&gt;The bibliographies are
distributed via web and CD-ROM. The web site links to the full texts of cited
publications where appropriate. GIS options for retrieval will be
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;AGI produces GeoRef, the primary bibliographic service for
the geosciences, and thus compiles the cold-regions bibliographies with a
reasonable effort while enhancing them with recent innovations. &lt;br/&gt;The
bibliographies can be searched to at http://www.coldregions.org.&lt;br/&gt;What
is the intellectual merit of the project?&lt;br/&gt;The project preserves the
scientific research record across all disciplines by enhancing access to and
dissemination of research information about cold regions. New dissemination
techniques combining web technology with repurposed information obtained from
publishers and researchers provides the opportunity to continue improving and
extending the bibliographies.&lt;br/&gt;What are the broader impacts of the
project?&lt;br/&gt;The project supports the research and education
infrastructure across the scientific disciplines by providing access to cold
regions literature. These regions are critical for understanding the global
system and for other research that is best performed in Polar regions and other
cold regions. &lt;br/&gt;