* 0440211
* Collaborative Research:   Upscaled Mass Transfer Coefficients for Modeling Dissolution of Nonaqueous Phase Liquids in Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Porous Media in the Field
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Cass Miller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2008
* USD 196,494.00

0440211&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subsurface contamination by
nonaqueous phase liquids (NAPLs) is a frequent occurrence. One of the most
important process influencing risk assessment and environmental management
decisions at NAPLcontaminated sites is the rate at which NAPLs dissolve into
groundwater. NAPL dissolution controls fluxes of contaminants to down-gradient
receptors, and is a significant process affecting the design of monitoring
systems, the assessment of human and ecological risk, and the selection of
remediation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Numerous models
for NAPL dissolution have been developed based upon and intended to describe
centimeter-scale laboratory columns. While our understanding of NAPL dissolution
at this scale is relatively mature, this understanding does not translate to
reliable field-scale models for two reasons: (1) the computational problem is
intractable with current technology if one endeavors to resolve centimeter-scale
features known to be important for field-scale simulations; and (2) upscaled
models of NAPL dissolution, which are computationally tractable, are in their
developmental infancy. We have shown in previous work that the dissolution
process leads to the formation of dissolution fingers, which have
a&lt;br/&gt;profound effect on the rate of dissolution. Because these fingers
can affect the rate of mass transfer by two or more orders of magnitude in some
cases, it is essential that the effect of this mechanism be represented in
field-scale simulators, and we know of no case in which this has been
done.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposed work is to extend a novel fractal-
based upscaling approach to produce a nonlinear, multiscale mass transfer model
suitable for more realistic field-scale simulation. Multiscale models are the
holy grail of subsurface science, indeed much of science in general. Our efforts
to date in this regard have met with considerable success, but several key
unresolved issues that influence NAPL dissolution fingering remain: NAPL
wettability, porous medium heterogeneity, the initial spatial distribution of
NAPL contamination at the onset of dissolution, and the effect of realistic
patterns of field-scale heterogeneity on the development and evolution of
fingers and NAPL dissolution in general. A combination of creative theoretical,
novel experimental, and advanced computational approaches will be used to
address these issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In this work, a
numerical model will be developed and used to investigate a nonlinear process
and to extend the range of conditions beyond what can be easily studied in the
laboratory to those typical of complex natural systems. The synergy between the
experimental and computational approaches provides a unique opportunity to draw
high school and undergraduate engineering and science students into the exciting
world of subsurface hydrology and computational science. To that end, we will
create two Problem-Based Learning (PBL) modules based on our work that will be
tested with undergraduate students at the University of Delaware (UD) and the
University of North Carolina (UNC) and used in a program&lt;br/&gt;intended to
attract gifted high school students into engineering and science. PBL is a
successful example of student-centered or active learning, the strengths of
which have been firmly established by research in educational psychology. UD has
developed an institutional focus on PBL and has become a national and
international PBL leader, and they will disseminate these PBL educational
modules to instructors throughout the US. In addition, this research will
involve directly both undergraduate and graduate students from active research
groups that have both a strong commitment to and representation of under-
represented groups in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;