* 0440229
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Finite Element Modeling of a Subducted Topographic High: Determining Regional Stress Changes Due to Subducting Features
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Carolina Lithgow-Bertelloni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2007
* USD 35,553.00

Proposal "Collaborative Research: Finite Element Modeling Of A Subducted
Topographic High: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining Regional Stress Changes Due
To Subducing Features" EAR 0440243 and 0440229 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
majority of global seismicity occurring in subduction zones, it is very
important to understand the stress conditions in the subduction environment.
Variations in the details of earthquakes in these regions are likely due to
variations in stress conditions between subduction zones. Key factors that can
impact the stress conditions in subduction zones include mantle flow and the
interaction between the overriding and subducting plates at the plate interface.
The plate interface may vary in roughness depending on a variety of features on
the incoming plate, such as presence of thick sediment packets, horst and graben
structures, seamounts, ridges, and fracture zones. These subducting plate
structures not only influence the stress state within the subduction zone, but
may also control the size and rupture behavior of large subduction zone
earthquakes, as suggested for large earthquakes in Costa Rica and Nankai
subduction zones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on examining the
stress state in these two subduction zones, with goals to examine the
relationship between stresses, subducted features, and seismicity patterns seen
in Costa Rica and Nankai, stress triggering of large earthquakes in these
regions, and determining conditions for which topographic features may act as
zones of high earthquake slip or a barrier to earthquake rupture. Two and 3D
modeling of the subduction zone environment will provide opportunities to
explore the effects of viscoelastic relaxation and triggering, frictional
properties at the trench interface, and the bathymetric variability of the
subducted oceanic lithosphere on earthquake patterns. Results from this effort
will be applied to knowledge of earthquake hazards in Costa Rica and Nankai, and
may be extended to other subduction zones as well. &lt;br/&gt;