* 0440338
* ROLE: Understanding the Connection between Science Achievement and Reading Achievement
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Louis Gomez, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 01/31/2009
* USD 1,279,143.00

The researcher observes that a correlation between reading and science
achievement suggests that poor student performance in science may be a result of
prior poor reading ability. This study intends to learn whether high school
students fail to be effective inquirers in science because of inadequacies in
their reading abilities or not. Moreover, the proposal seeks to determine
whether curricular and technological supportive innovations can improve inquiry-
based science learning in classrooms. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is a study of
the application of a number of technology tools to assist classroom management
of students with low reading skills to learn more science. The researchers will
use existing systems to give students a chance to easily document words and
phrases they don't understand which can be easily assessed by the teacher for an
entire class (double-entry log). Also, they will apply a tool to help teachers
make sense of assessment results for individual students and classes so they can
identify reading patterns that exist in a classroom. The classroom patters are
presented to teachers in a visual format. CARAT is an integrating software that
uses logs to create concept maps of text to scaffold students to learn science
by reading different types of science text. Some reviewers were concerned about
the choice of text. Gomez would use science magazine articles as the science
text. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will examine student performance
in schools in which students and teacher have access to the tools and schools
where they don't. They will be studying ninth and tenth grade science teachers
in 24 classes. They will collect data on reading and science achievement at two
points in time. And they will have data on teaches background, beliefs, and uses
of the proposals. They will do qualitative and quantitative indicators of
science achievement (not sure what that means) an they will develop rubrics to
rate written student "artifacts". The study uses treatment and control groups
and a doubly-entry log for students to note their work, they also annotate
science texts. The experiment will involve 3 conditions: (1) students have
inquiry science with annotated text and access to one tool; (2) students have
inquiry science units with same text and a graphic organizer; and, (3) students
have only inquiry science units with annotated texts. Students will be followed
from 9th to 10 grade. Computer software is used to facilitate instruction,
document student science learning, and monitor student progress in science
topics. Sophisticated computer modeling of word meaning with Latent Semantic
Technology will be used to track student understanding and writing. Then the
analysis would be conducted with sophisticated statistical procedures including
structural models with HLM for data collected between 2004 and 2007. &lt;br/&gt;