* 0440517
* Track 1 GK-12: Graduate Fellows and Environmental Biology
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2005,09/30/2009
* Scott Lanyon, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,861,077.00

Intellectual Merit: Environmental biology graduate students will learn to use
inquiry-based pedagogy to become effective in teacher training, in K-12 schools
and in university teaching, and will gain direct experience with translating
their research expertise into a K-12 learning environment. Participating
graduate fellows will be more likely to connect with the broader community
throughout their careers, thus strengthening US STEM education. Through a
competitive process, 12 fellows will be selected annually from six U of MN
graduate programs: Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior; Entomology; Natural
Resources Science and Management; Plant Biology; Fisheries, Wildlife and
Conservation Biology; and Water Resources Science. Each fellow will be paired
with an experienced teacher from one of four Minneapolis and St. Paul schools
(three fellow-teacher pairs per school). Teachers will gain increased STEM
content and process knowledge, and their students will engage in real science
and scientific research. Consequently, the urban students involved in the
project will gain confidence in their science skills and thus be more likely to
see themselves as potential scientists. Three categories of project activities
are planned: summer workshops for fellows and teachers, science activities in
K-8 classrooms during the academic year, and activities to supplement and
support interactions between fellows and the K-12 school community. Summer
provide science content training for the teachers and initial pedagogy training
for fellows. Classroom and after-school science activities are designed to
support and to extend national, state and district science content standards.
Fellow/ student classroom and science club projects will culminate with in-
school Science Fairs at each school and a project-wide Natural story Student
Research Fair that promote connections between fellows and the broader school
community, including parents and families. During the academic year, fellows
will enroll in a seminar course led by the PIs, and receive additional training
in teaching practices, grant writing and providing resources for K-12 education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The primary goal of this
project is to train 36 graduate fellows who will then work with K-12 schools
throughout their careers and eventually train the next generation of graduate
students to do likewise. These fellows will serve as role models in four urban
schools in which students from under-represented groups predominate and share
their K-12 experience with colleagues within the university and the broader
scientific community. An important outcome of this project will be the
development of closer ties between public schools and the STEM programs of the
University of Minnesota, and an improved understanding at the university of how
to create effective K-12 collaborations. After the grant period, elements of the
program will be incorporated into graduate student curriculum offerings and Bell
Museum programmatic efforts. &lt;br/&gt;