* 0440722
* Dissertation Research:  Social Norms, Markets, and Conservation in Bhutan
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2007
* Monique Borgerhoff Mulder, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2007
* USD 11,998.00

Development has become a key component of many conservation programs because
planners assume that local residents require benefits in order to support
environmental conservation. This dissertation project by a cultural
anthropologist will study the interaction of social norms and integration into
markets on conservation behavior in Bhutan. The proposal will test the
hypothesis that strong social norms, measured as religiosity, traditional
ecological knowledge, and social capital, will result in decreased resource
extraction independent of household integration into a market economy and that
market integration in the absence of strong social norms will lead to increased
resource use. The Kingdom of Bhutan is taking a unique approach to development
with an emphasis on protecting environmental and cultural heritage in the course
of deliberate and conscientious economic development. The recent influx of
markets has, however, begun degrading traditional values. Thirty individuals in
each of eight villages will be sampled. Using surveys, behavioral scans, and
participant observation, the degree of market integration and markers for social
norms for conservation, will be measured. This study will contribute to the
education of a doctoral student in addition to undergraduates at the Royal
University of Bhutan as well as adding to the very limited anthropological and
biological knowledge of one of the most isolated nations. Broader Impacts: The
advance in our knowledge will be useful to conservation and development planners
who must design policies that spur economic growth while limiting negative
impacts on local environments. With many of the world's biodiversity hotspots in
developing countries, understanding the dynamics between economic growth, social
norms, and conservation is crucial to improving conservation outcomes.