* 0440131
* Thermal Structure of the Central New England Acadian-to-Alleghenian Metamorphic High, Through Regional Correlation of Accessory-Phase Paragenesis
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2008
* Joseph Pyle, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2008
* USD 156,793.00

One of the puzzling questions in studying the evolution of Earth's crust, and
the metamorphism of rocks produced during mountain-building episodes, is "what
is the heat source for very high temperature metamorphism?", especially for
metamorphic rocks that locally show evidence for melting, and attainment of
significantly higher temperatures than the surrounding metamorphic rocks. In
such high-temperature metamorphic rocks, The PI and his co-workers have
discovered that the radioactive phosphate mineral monazite undergoes 3 or 4
growth reactions in a single metamorphic event. Using thermodynamic, textural,
and compositional studies, the PI and co-workers link each generation of
monazite with a reaction, a temperature, and a date of formation. For multiple
episodes of monazite growth, the PI and co-workers extract pressure
(P)-Temperature (T)-time (t)-paths. And these P-T-t paths are compared to P-T-t
paths generated from numerical models for a variety of heat sources, such as
pluton intrusion, asthenospheric underplating, or exothermic reactions.

The work of the PI, to date, shows that high-grade metamorphism in central New
England is not linked, in many cases, to adjacent granitic plutons, as the
metamorphism post-dates the pluton emplacement by 40-50 million years. P-T-t
paths derived from study of monazite closely match numeric P-T-t paths modeled
assuming lithospheric delamination, and asthenospheric underplating, beneath New
England at about 400 million years before the present. This interpretation
agrees with independent geophysical evidence for lithospheric delamination
beneath present-day central New England.

The PI and co-workers are extending this methodology to high-grade, partially
melted metamorphic rocks along the length of New England Appalachians, and are
currently examining samples from SW Maine, Central New Hampshire, S New
Hampshire, and Central Massachusetts to provided a more complete picture of
high-grade Paleozoic (400-300 million years before present) metamorphism, and
the heat sources responsible, in the Northern U.S. Appalachians. This project
represents one of the first attempts to correlate accessory phase growth on an
orogen-wide scale. Correlation of monazite growth events from location to
location are used in a manner analogous to stratigraphic correlation. Under the
assumption that monazite rims are grown at the peak of metamorphism (during
melting or melt crystallization), precise monazite rim ages provide a means to
track the peak of metamorphism down the length of the orogen. Lateral (E-W)
variation in monazite rim ages may record collisional or extensional vergence
along the orogen. A positive correlation between pressure and peak monazite age
(e.g., deeper, older peak monazite) may indicate a strong mantle heating
component. Integration of growth histories, thermometry, and dating of monazite
on a regional scale provides a remarkably robust tool to aid in reconstructing
the thermal evolution of large-scale orogens.