* 0440238
* Collaborative Research: Geochemical Processes in Forearc Peridotites: Depletion, Enrichment, and Melt Reactions in the Mantle Wedge
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2007
* Samuel Mukasa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2007
* USD 81,335.00

The question of geochemical flux in the mantle wedge during subduction is
critical to our understanding of arc volcanism, and forms an important aspect of
the global geochemical flux. This is one of the first order problems identified
by the "Geochemical Earth Reference Model" (GERM) initiative, and by the
"subduction factory" focus of the NSF "MARGINS" initiative. One way to study
this problem is to examine outcrops of lithospheric mantle that underlie crust
known to have formed by magmatism above a subduction zone. This mantle
represents, in part, the source from which the overlying crust was extracted,
and its mineralogy and composition reflect the processes that have affected it
through time, including melt extraction, fluid phase enrichment, and subsequent
interactions with melt derived from lower in the mantle. The primary advantage
of this approach is that large tracts of supra-subduction lithosphere are
commonly exposed at the base of many ophiolites, allowing us to examine their
composition directly and on larger length scales than is currently possible in
any active system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the geochemical
flux preserved in lithospheric mantle above the proto-Franciscan subduction
zone, as represented by harzburgite and dunite tectonites that underlie the
Coast Range ophiolite of California. The goal is constrain the nature and extent
of these fluxes, as documented by whole rock major element and trace element
analyses, by mineral analyses using electron and ion beam techniques, and by
isotopic analyses of ultra-pure, hand-picked mineral separates. Major questions
we will pose include the cumulative extent of melt extraction and the nature of
the melt extracted, the nature, source, and extent of fluid flux to the mantle
in the SSZ wedge, and the nature and extent of mantle-melt interactions
subsequent to melt extraction (e.g., addition of melt from sub-lithospheric
sources, or reaction of this melt with the previously depleted peridotites).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geochemical evolution of the source region for island
arc volcanics is an important problem with implications not only for the
chemical budget of the Earth, but also for the origin of ore deposits that are
commonly associated with island arc volcanism, the transfer of volatile elements
from inside the Earth into the atmosphere, and the time scales over which these
processes occur. While volcanoes are found on many terrestrial planets, plate
tectonics and arc volcanism are unique to Earth and represent an important
component of planetary evolution. &lt;br/&gt;