* 0440529
* Track 1 GK-12: Integrated Science Teaching Enhancement Partnership (InSTEP)
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* John Windsor, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 01/31/2010
* USD 1,698,852.00

&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Integrated Science Teaching Enhancement Partnership
(InSTEP) is to organize and expand an existing relationship between the Florida
Institute of Technology and Brevard Public Schools designed to enhance and
improve science instruction and increase student enthusiasm for scientific
inquiry and discovery. Graduate students (GK-12 Fellows) are matched with high
school (Grades 9-11) Integrated Science (IS) teachers and participate in
workshops, seminars, and mini-symposia focusing on student learning styles,
inquiry-based teaching methods, pedagogy, and national and state curriculum
standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: Fellows work with IS
teachers to design and pilot a series of learning modules linking core IS
content areas, Earth science, biology, chemistry, and physics. Using ocean
exploration as a common theme, the program takes advantage of Florida's
extensive coastal resources and student awareness of local ocean-related issues
to stimulate interest in science. This thematic approach is used to demonstrate
the interrelatedness of science disciplines and the role the ocean plays in
environmental and chemical cycles and physical and biological processes. Modules
are based on state and national curriculum standards and include demonstrations
and inquiry-based activities that emphasize the scientific process and rely
heavily on instructional strategies that encourage experimentation and problem
solving. A mobile laboratory [SEAS (Science Exploration At Sea) Lab] will be
purchased and renovated to support hands-on activities at local field-sites.
InSTEP teams work with participating resource faculty from Florida Tech programs
in marine biology, oceanography, chemistry, physics, and environmental science
to develop and revise the modules before they are disseminated through regional
workshops and district-wide in-service training programs. Curriculum information
is distributed electronically through an interactive web portal developed and
maintained by Florida's NSF-sponsored Center for Ocean Sciences Education
Excellence (Florida COSEE; http://floridacosee.net). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the project are reflected in the benefits to the Fellows,
teachers, and students. InSTEP Fellows learn valuable teaching, communication,
and classroom management skills, gain a heightened awareness of their ability to
enhance K-12 education, and experience the rewards and challenges of K-12
teaching. Teachers improve their understanding and mastery of science concepts
and content, increase their comfort with inquiry based techniques, and gain a
greater appreciation for the interdisciplinary nature of the IS curriculum.
Students have an opportunity to interact with scientists and career role models
and, through active participation in data collection and analysis, develop a
deeper understanding and appreciation for the scientific process and the
relevance of science to local community issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is receiving partial support from the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;