* 0440097
* Frequency Sweep Acoustic Interferometry: Measurement of Silicate Melt Compressibility and Density at High Temperature and Pressure
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Rebecca Lange, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2007
* USD 400,002.00

An equation of state (P-V-T relation) for magmatic liquids is critical for
quantitative models of partial melting and melt transport beneath spreading
ridges and subduction zones, where oceanic and continental crust are formed. A
major challenge to thermodynamic models of partial melting in the deep mantle is
the lack of information on the density of magmatic liquids at high pressure. The
largest uncertainties are with the pressure dependence to melt compressibility
and with how volatile components affect melt density at high pressure. The
primary objective of this proposal is to measure the compressibility and density
of numerous geologically relevant liquids as a systematic function of pressure
and temperature, using a frequency-sweep acoustic interferometer in an
internally heated pressure. These data will provide a quantitative link between
the microscopic structure of liquids, obtained from spectroscopic studies, and
their macroscopic properties. Thus these data will greatly enhance the utility
and insights provided by different spectroscopic tools and molecular modeling
within the earth and material sciences. The sound velocity data on melts at high
pressure will also be helpful for improved interpretation of seismic velocity
variations in the crust and mantle, where partial melt may be present. Graduate
students will be partially supported by this grant. The interdisciplinary nature
of the training that they will receive is excellent preparation for either an
academic career in the earth sciences or an industry career involving high-tech
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;