* 0440511
* Advancing Geospatial Skills in Science and Social Science (AGSSS) - Track 1, GK-12
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Sarah Bednarz, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2010
* USD 1,104,501.00

Advancing Geospatial Skills in Science and Social Studies (AGSSS), Track 1, is a
project to enhance spatial thinking skills of Fellows, Teachers, and Students
through instruction in geospatial technologies and related educational
experiences. It is a collaboration among geoscientists and other spatial science
faculty at Texas A&amp;M University, College Station (Texas) Independent School
District, and Texas Education Agency's Educational Service Center
VI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Spatial thinking is defined as a
constructive amalgam of concepts of space, tools of representation, and
processes of reasoning that uses space to structure problems, find answers, and
express solutions. Spatial thinking is not an explicit part of K-16 science or
social science curricula. This is in spite of evidence that spatial thinking is
essential to success in mathematics, science, and some social science
disciplines. AGSSS develops a program to prepare and connect geospatially
skilled Fellows with science and social studies Teachers to collaborate on
developing Students' spatial thinking and problem solving through geospatial
technologies such as GIS, GPS, and RS. AGSSS provides Teachers and Fellows with
the knowledge and skills to conduct teacher-research to assess and measure the
success of their efforts to promote Students' spatial thinking and mastery of
geospatial technologies. AGSSS builds on proven educational programs (Community
Atlas, Mission Geography, ISS EarthKAM, Pathfinder Science) to expand the cadre
of Teachers who develop students' spatial thinking and who use geospatial
technologies and observational science with their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project creates, uses, and
evaluates materials and strategies that enhance spatial thinking. This is
important because it is clear that society cannot afford to relegate some
students to a lesser position simply because they do not innately know how to
think spatially. Spatial thinking is an emerging field of interest with broad
implications for a number of domains, including school-to-workforce issues. It
is critically important to develop spatially literate Fellows, Teachers, and
Students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is receiving partial support from
the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;