* 0440228
* Accessory Minerals and Crustal Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2010
* E. Bruce Watson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* William P. Leeman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 577,236.00

Most of the processes that influence the composition and properties of the
continental crust are not accessible to direct observation because they occur
too deep in the Earth or too slowly. Alternative strategies are thus needed to
investigate the deep crust; one of these is high temperature-pressure
experimentation. Laboratory re-creation of deep-crustal conditions allows direct
investigation of phenomena such as impurity uptake during mineral growth and the
rates at which atoms move around in crystals. Insight gained from these
laboratory experiments can, in turn, be used to make deductions about processes
occurring in the natural environment over geologic time. This project involves
implementation of experimental strategies in combination with theoretical models
to provide tools for "reading the record" of crustal evolution over geologic
time. The project focuses specifically upon "accessory" minerals -- minerals of
only modest abundance in the crust, but which are of widespread occurrence and
which tend to concentrate key trace elements and radioactive isotopes. Rare
crystals of one of these accessory minerals (zircons from Australia) are the
oldest known terrestrial materials, dating back 97% of the age of the Earth.

Ongoing research involves three principal sub-projects, the first of which is
calibration and development of "geothermometers" for estimating the
crystallization temperatures of accessory minerals recovered from crustal rocks.
Temperature history is a vital component of the overall geologic history of a
crustal sample; experimental studies at RPI are providing detailed knowledge of
the systematic variation with temperature of impurity incorporation into zircon,
rutile and other titanium-bearing minerals (in zircon, the impurity of interest
is Titanium; in rutile, it is Zicronium). The results allow researchers to
determine the crystallization temperature of zircon and rutile crystals of
unknown origin ("provenance") simply by analyzing them for their titanium and
zirconium contents, respectively. This study has already revealed that the
world's oldest zircons (formed 4.4 billion years ago) crystallized at
temperatures typical of granite-forming processes under present-day geologic
conditions. This finding suggests that crustal processes of the very early Earth
were not very different from what they are today.

The second sub-project addresses the migration (diffusion) rates of atoms in
accessory mineral crystals, focusing upon the possible consequences of rapid
atomic movements via extended crystal defects such as sub-grain boundaries and
dislocations. Experiments at high pressures and temperatures are used in
combination with theoretical models to determine the circumstances under which
isotopic age information might be perturbed by unexpected loss of daughter
(radiogenic) isotopes unusually fast atomic migrations. The motivation of this
work is to identify circumstances under which the significance and usefulness of
isotopic measurements on natural samples might be compromised by diffusion-
enhancing defects in crystal structures.

The third sub-project focuses on the behavior of atoms of the noble gas helium
in accessory minerals. Helium is produced mainly by radioactive decay of uranium
and thorium, which are concentrated in most accessory minerals relative to the
major rock-forming minerals. Laboratory heating of accessory minerals causes
degassing of helium, and the pattern of degassing can be used to constrain the
geologically recent temperature histories of rock bodies. This thermal history
provides, in turn, information on local erosion rates. Underpinning this "helium
thermochronometry" approach is knowledge of the migration rates of helium atoms
in accessory minerals, most importantly apatite, zircon and titanite. Much has
been learned about He diffusion properties over the past decade by thermal
degassing of natural samples, but a few key questions can be more definitively
answered through direct laboratory studies of helium atomic migration rates. The
experimental program at RPI includes investigations of the effects of crystal
orientation and isotope mass (helium-3 vs. helium-4) on helium migration.