* 0440145
* Rupture Propagation and Arrest in Geometrically Complex Fault Systems: Bends, Stepovers, and Damaged Border Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Renata Dmowska, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

A major problem in earthquake science is to understand rupture through
geometrically complex fault systems with bends, branches and stepovers. Such
complexities exert major control over the propagation and arrest of rupture. The
understanding when and how ruptures stop, which is often associated with such
features, is central to understanding seismic risk. This study continues recent
developments of the theory and modeling of fault fracture at encounters with
kinks, bends and offsets between fault segments. That is done with close
reference to explaining rupture patterns as observed in field examples. Those
include branches and stepovers in major strike-slip earthquakes (e.g., 2001
Kunlun, Tibet, 2002 Denali, Alaska, and 1992 Landers, California), and splay
thrust faulting like that documented for the 1944 Nankai, Japan, and 1964 Alaska
subduction zones, with implications for tsunami generation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The studies open new frontiers in rupture dynamics and
the physics of earthquakes. Those include a basic understanding of how rupture
paths are chosen through complex fault systems, and of the formulation of
appropriate computational models (based on dynamic finite element and boundary
integral equation methodology) to analyze slip propagation through kinks and
branches. In such cases there are significant, coupled, dynamic changes in both
the normal and shear stress components supported by the fault, which pose new
challenges to representing fracture propagation. Progress in correlating theory
with field (and sometimes lab) examples is providing new ways of looking at
fault geometry and evidence about prestress states, and translating that into
predictions about rupture paths. An important issue under study is whether relic
fault geometries with branches and other complexities can be used to infer the
direction of rupture in past events, which is important for identifying regions
of most severe ground motion. Also, the work addresses how damage zones along
faults evolve by successive ruptures, and how inelastic processes within such
zones may interact back with stress transmission to the rupture front and with
the dynamics of propagation to generate high frequency seismic wave
emission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project during the previous funding cycle
was also effective in aiding the participation of women in research. That
includes the co-PI, a graduate student research assistant, and three visiting
student interns who completed research on fault rupture as capstone projects in
completion of their degree programs elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;