* 0440112
* High P-T Elasticity of Deep Earth Materials With New Gigahertz-Ultrasonic Techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Russell Hemley, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2007
* USD 298,671.00

This study is aimed towards understanding the constitution of Earth's interior
through experiment. The high-pressure and high-temperature elasticity of deep-
Earth materials has been identified as a major Grand Challenge by the NSF
COMPRES consortium. The presence of seismic anisotropy within all of Earth's
major boundary layers and inner core highlights the importance of anisotropic
elasticity data from mineral physics. Through this award, a state-of-the-art
gigahertz-ultrasonic interferometer will be interfaced with the next generation
of large-volume, gem and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) diamond-anvil pressure
cells in an effort to obtain accurate thermodynamic equations of state for some
geophysically relevant Earth-forming minerals. The high P-T experiments will
feature a recent breakthrough in ultrasonic methods developed by the PI, wherein
purely-polarized ultrasonic shear waves are transmitted into the diamond-anvil
cell using a P-to-S conversion. The employment of gas-loading techniques with
large gem anvils will greatly extend the working P-T range over which ultrasonic
measurements can be made. The ultrasonic experiments in this study will focus on
the darker, Fe-bearing silicates, oxides and metals such as ringwoodite,
magnesiowustite, and metallic iron because the study of these materials is
problematic for existing optical methods. Acoustic-wave travel times in single-
crystal samples will be used to determine P-wave velocity, S-wave velocity,
elastic-wave anisotropy and the complete elastic tensor, from which the
adiabatic bulk and shear moduli are readily determined for direct comparison
with seismological observation. Finally, the elastic tensor of annealed CVD
diamond will be accurately determined using the GHz-technique because knowledge
of the individual elastic constants will help to characterize the new anvil
material and may provide insight into the origin of the extraordinary mechanical
properties of CVD diamond crystals. This work will nurture collaborations
between the Geophysical Laboratory and the Bayerisches Geoinstitut in Bayreuth,
Germany, involving at least one graduate student and possibly several
undergraduate interns attending the Carnegie Institution Summer Internship
Program, which is managed in part by the PI.