* 0440381
* Collaborative Research: Using Melt Inclusions to Unravel Lithospheric Mantle and Crustal Contributions to Gondwana Flood Basalts and to Determine Pre-Eruptive Volatile Contents
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Adam Kent, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2008
* USD 122,819.00

This project will use melt inclusions as a window into the earlier stages of the
melt aggregation and crustal assimilation processes in magmatic plumbing systems
beneath the main Gondwana flood basalt provinces (Parana, Etendeka, Karoo,
Ferrar). Homogenized melt inclusions will be analysed by electron-microprobe
(major elements; volatiles - Cl, F, S), laser ablation ICP-MS and MC-ICP-MS
(trace elements; Pb isotopes), and ion-probe (H2O, CO2). The principal
objectives are two-fold: (1) to use the diversity of compositions recorded in
melt inclusions from the least crustally-contaminated samples to see whether
they preserve evidence of earlier, less-contaminated magmas that might better
constrain source compositions and whether these sources are in the lithospheric
or sub-lithospheric mantle. (2) to obtain data on the pre-eruption volatile
contents of flood basalt melts as an indicator of source characteristics, and
volatile saturation pressures will also provide a unique means to determine the
pressures at which melts are contaminated and aggregate and thus provide new
insight into the architecture of flood basalt magma plumbing systems. The melt
inclusion data will provide a means by which to estimate volatile emissions
during lava eruptions and should aid the understanding of the processes
responsible for the local and global environmental consequences of the eruption
of such huge quantities of magma in a relatively short time interval.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results will be of interest to a broad range of
scientists, including those involved in palaeoclimate studies and the modelling
of the possible causes of global climate change. The project will support and
enhance the geochemical laboratories at Oregon State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;