* 0440614
* Track 1, GK-12 Teaching Assistants Sharing Knowledge (TASK) in Alaska
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2009
* Douglas Schamel, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,883,820.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Track 1, GK-12 Teaching Assistants Sharing Knowledge
(TASK) in Alaska is a multidisciplinary program developed by the STEM
departments within the University of Alaska Fairbanks with the enthusiastic
support of the Fairbanks North Star Borough School District, Denali Borough
School District, and the Lower Kuskowkim School District. The project builds on
the solid foundation of the Partners in Science, GLOBE, and OLCG programs to
meet the needs of Alaskan K-12 students in science and mathematics and targets
schools with high Alaskan Native populations. The project uses the best
practices models to prepare Fellows for the classroom and place them with Master
K-12 teachers. The goals of the project are to bring current technology, tools,
and knowledge to students in K-12 classrooms to meet the Alaska State Standards;
contribute to the knowledge base of K-12 teachers; and to enhance the teaching
and communication skills of graduate our Fellows so that their academic careers
are measurably enhanced by this experience. Fellows are assigned to one school
for one or two semesters to develop rapport with students and staff. The project
uses an experienced program coordinator to help manage this program, and an
enthusiastic team of UAF faculty mentors and K-12 teachers to enrich the
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The project applies the
best practices in teacher preparation and mentoring to those schools in the
Fairbanks area that are most likely to be in trouble with NCLB standards. The
Fellows will deepen their content knowledge through being forced to explain
concepts in simple ways, and by using analogies that are developmentally
appropriate. Mentoring of teachers has been shown to be very effective in
retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts . The best practices used will
insure that K-12 students will receive the very best of hands-on science,
mathematics and technology education. The project employs numerous minority
(especially Alaska Native) and women scientists and mathematicians, who will
serve as excellent role models for K-12 students. By establishing a university
course to prepare the students to interact in meaningful ways with K-12
students, the project will develop the needed infrastructure to continue this
program. The project will disseminate the results through presentations at the
AAAS Arctic Division meetings, local and national conferences, journals, and
through the website. As a benefit to the general public, a collaborative
learning community will continue to grow; one that spans K through gray, with
K-12 schools, institutions of higher learning, Alaska Native elders, practicing
professionals, and community members all involved&lt;br/&gt;in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;