* 0440382
* Collaborative Research: Volatile Recycling and Magma Genesis in a Hot, Dry Subduction Zone: A Case Study of the Cascade Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Adam Kent, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2008
* USD 260,892.00

Subduction zones play a major role in governing chemical cycling between the
Earth's crust, hydrosphere and atmosphere and the deeper mantle. In these
environments volatile elements (H, C, F, Cl, S and others) mediate mass transfer
and elemental cycling, and also strongly influence the processes that lead to
the generation, transport and eruption of magmas within subduction zone
environments. To investigate the distribution and role of volatile elements and
their effect on mass transfer and melting in single subduction system, this
study will involve a systematic study of major, trace and volatile elements
trapped in melt inclusions from primitive magmas in the Cascade arc in
California, Oregon and Washington. The aims are to determine pre-eruptive
volatile concentrations and oxygen fugacity conditions for the different
primitive magma types found in the Cascade arc, and to use this data to examine
the composition of slab- and mantle-wedge derived components along and across
the arc, and to test current models for melting and magma genesis in subduction
zones. Although the Cascade subduction zone is recognized as an endmember "hot
and dry" subduction zone, the role of volatiles in element cycling and magma
genesis remains unclear. Existing studies and our preliminary data show that
water contents vary and that some primitive Cascade magmas are quite "wet" -
with H2O up to 4 to 7 wt.%. Two sampling strategies will be pursued, firstly
involving study of lavas from along an east-west cross-arc traverse in the
Central Oregon Cascades (Lat. ~43-45 degrees). The Oregon High Cascades region
is characterized by the highest recent erupted volumes of mafic magma and
contains all major primary magma types found in the arc (HAOT, OIB-like, CAB,
and shoshonite). This work will be combined with work on other lavas from
selected well-studied locations along the arc. Overall this approach will allow
use to identify the volatile composition of the range of different magma types
produced within the Cascade arc, and provide insight on the variations in
volatile abundances across and along the arc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;