* 0440532
* Track 1, GK-12: Inquiry-based Approaches to Earth System Science
* EHR,DGE
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Scott Sheridan, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,914,276.00

This Track 1 project enhances middle and high school Earth Science education,
specifically, the understanding of terrestrial, aquatic, and atmospheric
interactions, by introducing educators and students to geospatial
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits- The partnership between
Earth Science faculty, K-12 teachers and a county level educational services
center enhances the science education of Fellows and K-12 students. The Fellows
enhance K-12 student learning by using the local environment as a natural
laboratory to explore relationships between geology and climate in Northeast
Ohio. Fellows train using inquiry-based methods, and they develop the
communication and leadership skills needed to excel in a variety of academic or
business settings. The synergistic activities of the project include: (i) STEM
education of graduate and undergraduate Fellows using inquiry approaches, (ii)
placement in K-12 classrooms as content providers, (iii) professional
development opportunities for K-12 teachers, and (iv) research opportunities for
K-12 teachers and their students. These activities foster understanding of Earth
Science concepts and to promote the use of geospatial technology in the
classroom as a tool for inquiry-based K-12 learning. The educational materials
employed in the program are aligned with Ohio Academic Content Standards for
Earth and Space Science, Science and Technology, Scientific Inquiry, and
Scientific Ways of Knowing. Fellows develop curriculum modules based on analysis
of the local environment using field methods and on-line geospatial
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts- Through the enhancement of
existing educational partnerships between Kent State University and the Stark
County Educational Services Center, the project seeks to improve the quality of
middle and high school Earth Science education in high-risk schools from the
seventeen school districts of Stark County, OH. The 270 middle and high school
teachers in Stark County educate more than 35,000 student in a mix of urban,
rural, and suburban districts. This method partners overlapping pairs of nine
graduate (GK-12) and five undergraduate (UK-12) Fellows with teams of teachers
comprising entire science departments of targeted Stark County schools. In this
way, the project directly impacts 36 middle and high school science teachers per
year and their almost 5,000 students. Partnering pairs of Fellows with teams of
teachers is a powerful approach that allows rapid institutionalization through
dissemination of learned techniques, peer support, and administrative "buy-in".
Teacher participants are empowered to disseminate their knowledge to peers at
other departments in their districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
receiving partial support from the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;