* 0440033
* Resolving the Paradox of fO2 in Arcs Using V/Sc Systematics of Primitive Lavas as a Proxy for Mantle fO2: Towards an Internally Consistent Dataset
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Cin-Ty Lee, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 12/31/2007
* USD 179,999.00

The goal of this proposal is to investigate the oxidizing potential (oxygen
fugacity) of the upper mantle, with special emphasis in subduction zones. Oxygen
fugacity is important because it dictates an element's oxidation state, and
hence chemical behavior. Of particular interest is how oxygen fugacity varies in
subduction environments, beginning with melting within the mantle wedge and
ending with emplacement and eruption of the magma at crustal levels. A specific
hypothesis to be tested is the widespread notion that the mantle source regions
of arc lavas are characterized by oxygen fugacities much higher than that
beneath mid-ocean ridges. This view derives largely from the observation that
arc lavas themselves appear to be highly oxidized and that slab-derived fluids
metasomatizing the mantle wedge are likely to be oxidizing. While estimating the
oxygen fugacity of magmas is fairly straightforward, estimating that of the melt
source region in the mantle is not so straightforward because a method is
required that can "see through" magmatic differentiation processes. This
proposal seeks to use V/Sc ratios of primitive arc basalts to see into the
mantle. The partitioning behavior of V is redox-sensitive, whereas that of Sc is
not. For primitive magmas, this ratio is unlikely to be modified significantly
by early crystallization of olivine. Accordingly, the V/Sc ratio may be able to
"see through" early magmatic differentiation processes and into the mantle.
Preliminary data suggest that V/Sc ratios are slightly correlated with indices
of fluid contributions (e.g., Ba/Yb), but that overall, the V/Sc ratios of arc
magmas do not significantly differ from that of mid-ocean ridges. Efforts will
be made to build on these investigations in more detail on several selected arc
series. The proposed study will support 1 PhD thesis and one or two
undergraduates over the course of two years.

