* 0440103
* Design Principles for Effective Molecular Animations
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Barbara Tversky, University of Northern Colorado
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,089,484.00

Conveying molecular-level chemistry processes to students is notoriously
difficult. Dynamic, molecular-level animations are used increasingly in
chemistry and biology to help students visualize chemical structures and
processes. However, animations are often too complex to be accurately perceived,
especially by novices, who may not even know where to look or how to interpret
what they are seeing. Animated graphics may even convey or sustain
misconceptions about chemical processes. The goals of this project are to reveal
how students perceive and interpret various kinds of molecular animations and to
develop design principles for creating and presenting effective static graphics
and dynamic visualizations in chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
posits that effective animated and static visualizations can be designed. To
this end, the proposal applies techniques from cognitive psychology to reveal:
a) mental models novices and experts have about key chemical processes, and b)
graphic tools that will convey those concepts adequately. The research has 5
steps, which will be carried out sequentially during the three-year period: 1.
In-depth talk-aloud sessions with experts and novices to reveal the mental
models; 2. Analysis of attempts by novices and experts to convey key concepts
graphically and in language; 3. Extraction of design principles from 1 &amp; 2;
4. Development of animated and static visualization prototypes in which those
design principles have been applied; 5. Testing the new visualizations on new
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out such a wide-ranging project
requires expertise in cognitive psychology, in chemistry education, in
chemistry, and in the development of animations and visualizations. This project
involves collaboration among the disciplines of chemistry, molecular biology,
education, and cognitive science to develop research-based design principles for
effective molecular animations. The project will provide useful guidelines for
the effective design of dynamic molecular visualizations and illustrate them
with concrete examples. It will also generate research tools that can be used to
study the characteristics of animations and simulations in other scientific
fields. Results of the study will allow the developers of all types of molecular
visualizations to make informed design decisions and will give instructors a
sound pedagogical basis for effective use of molecular animations and
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;