* 0440217
* Track 1, GK-12:  Broader Impact from Graduate Students Transferring Engineering Principles (BIGSTEP) to K-12 Education
* EHR,DGE
* 05/15/2005,10/31/2009
* Leigh Abts, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 10/31/2009
* USD 1,944,590.00

Fellows will rotate through an internship with several distinct K-12 schools
that serve disadvantaged children. Master Teachers who have been involved in
research at JHU or who are currently participants in a Native American Math
Science Partnership will work with the Fellows: to develop pedagogical skills to
teach children with different learning styles; to enhance the content knowledge
of district teachers; and to facilitate the creation of standards aligned
content based on cutting-edge research. Each project will focus on topics from
Environmental Engineering and Geography (EEG), including geology, hydrology,
ecology, geomorphology, environmental chemistry, human factors (relations
between human activities and environmental change). The Fellows will relate each
project: (1) to standards, such as the American Association for the Advancement
of Science.s Project 2061, Flow of Matter in Ecosystems;. (2) to compelling
social issues as global climate change, and preservation of ecosystems; and (3)
to the utilization of materials by students with physical limitations.

The intellectual merit lies in the potential to advance our understanding of how
formal university-K-12 partnerships can improve teaching and learning by
delivering challenging and relevant science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) content to traditionally disadvantaged K- 12 students with a
wide range of learning styles. A team of eminent scientists, future STEM
faculty, leading K-12 teachers, and education experts will work as teams to use
engaging EEG content and pedagogy to overcome barriers such as: students.
unstable learning environments, curriculums that are in transition due to
educational policy shifts, the lack of accommodations for students with physical
disabilities, and the scarcity of resources.

Broader impact will be achieved through the development of sustainable K-12
curriculum and laboratory modules deployed by teachers prepared to deliver
advanced, multi-disciplinary, and multi-contextual material spanning the STEM
disciplines. An independent evaluator will gather information and report the
findings on the feasibility of using EEG activities and instructional materials
to improve the academic achievement of disadvantaged students with diverse
needs.