* 0440609
* Climatology, Volcanism, and Microbial Life in Ice with Downhole Loggers
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* P. Buford Price, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2008
* USD 360,748.00

This award supports a project to use three downhole instruments - an optical
logger; a miniaturized biospectral logger at 420 nm (miniBSL-420); and an
Acoustic TeleViewer (ATV) - to log a 350-m borehole at the WAIS Divide drill
site. In addition, miniBSL-224 (at 224 nm) and miniBSL-420 will scan ice core
sections at NICL to look for abrupt climate changes, volcanic ash, microbial
concentrations, and correlations among them. Using the optical logger and ATV to
log bubble number densities vs depth in a WAIS Divide borehole, we will detect
annual layers, from which we can establish the age vs depth relation to the
bottom of the borehole that will be available during the three-year grant
period. With the same instruments we will search for long-period modulation of
bubble and dust concentrations in order to provide definitive evidence for or
against an effect of long-period variability of the sun or solar wind on
climate. We will detect and accurately date ash layers in a WAIS Divide
borehole. We will match them with ash layers that we previously detected in the
Siple Dome borehole, and also match them with sulfate and ash layers found by
others at Vostok, Dome Fuji, Dome C, and GISP2. The expected new data will allow
us to extend our recent study which showed that the Antarctic record of
volcanism correlates with abrupt climate change at a 95% to >99.8% significance
level and that the volcanic signatures at bipolar locations match at better than
3 sigma during the interval 2 to 45 kiloyears. The results to be obtained during
this grant period will position us to extend an accurate age vs depth relation
and volcano-climate correlations to earlier than 150 kiloyears ago in the future
WAIS Divide borehole to be drilled to bedrock. Using the miniBSLs to identify
biomolecules via their fluorescence, we will log a 350-m borehole at WAIS
Divide, and we will scan selected lengths of ice core at NICL. Among the
biomolecules the miniBSLs can identify will be chlorophyll, which will provide
the first map of aerobic microbes in ice, and F420, which will provide the first
map of methanogens in ice. We will collaborate with others in relating results
from WAIS Divide and NICL ice cores to broader topics in climatology,
volcanology, and microbial ecology. We will continue to give broad training to
undergraduate and graduate students, to attract underrepresented minorities to
science, engineering, and math, and to educate the press and college teachers. A
deeper understanding of the causes of abrupt climate change, including a causal
relationship with strong volcanic eruptions, can enable us to understand and
mitigate adverse effects on climate.