* 0440636
* Collaborative Research:     Using Fracture Patterns and Ice Thickness to Study the History and Dynamics of Grounding Line Migration and Shutdown of Kamb and Whillans Ice Streams
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Mark Fahnestock, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2008
* USD 189,384.00

This award supports a three year project to develop the tools required to
interpret complex patterns of flow features on the Ross Ice Shelf, which record
the discharge history the ice streams flowing east off of the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet. This work builds on previous research that used flow features visible in
satellite image mosaics and numerical models of ice shelf flow to detect changes
in grounding zone dynamics and redirection of ice stream outlets over hundreds
of years. Recently observed changes on Whillans Ice Stream fit within this
framework. The pattern of redirection is driven by the influence of rapid
downstream thinning on the basal thermal gradient in the ice and associated
"sticky spot" (ice rise) formation. In pursuing this work, the investigators
recognized other records of discharge variation on the shelf that can be used to
build a more complete history and understanding of ice-stream discharge
variability. The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in the fact that
these records, including fracture patterns and spatial variation in ice
thickness, when understood in the proper context, will yield quantitative
information about the timing and dynamics of ice stream slowdowns, grounding
line retreat, and the relative history of discharge between the ice streams. New
tools will help further constrain this history. The laser altimeter on NASA's
IceSAT has improved our knowledge of the surface elevation of Antarctic ice.
IceSAT surface elevations provide a high-resolution map of ice-shelf thickness
that, along with provenance maps from ice-shelf image mosaics, will be used to
estimate the volumes of ice involved in past ice-stream discharge events
(slowdowns, redirections, and so on). This project will develop new numerical
models for fracture propagation; these will allow past variations in ice-shelf
stress state to be investigated. Together, the dynamic and volume-flux histories
will provide a powerful set of observations for understanding past variations in
ice stream discharge and the underlying physical processes. The broader impacts
of this project center on how it contributes to the ability to estimate West
Antarctic contributions to global sea level rise and to answer outstanding
questions about the causes of millennial and longer-scale evolution of ice
streams. This work will provide a history of the most complex record of ice
discharge known. In addition to the incorporation of this research into graduate
student advising and normal teaching duties, the investigators are involved in
other avenues of civic engagement and education. Outreach to high school
students and the community at large is promoted on an annual basis by the
investigators at both institutions. New outreach projects at Portland State
University are developed with the assistance of researchers with expertise in
student learning and achievement in science and mathematics. The collaborative
research team includes two glaciologists with experience in the pairing of high
resolution satellite imagery and a variety of ice-flow models and a geologist
whose focus is the mechanics of rock deformation.