* 0440666
* Histories of accumulation, thickness and WAIS Divide location from radar layers using a new inverse approach
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2009
* Howard Conway, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 11/30/2009
* USD 240,014.00

This award supports development of a new modeling approach that will extract
information about past snow accumulation rate in both space and time in the
vicinity of the future ice core near the Ross-Amundsen divide of the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS). Internal layers, detected by ice-penetrating radar,
are isochrones, or former ice-sheet surfaces that have been buried by subsequent
snowfall, and distorted by ice flow. Extensive ice-penetrating radar data are
available over the inland portion of the WAIS. Layers have been dated back to
17,000 years before present. The radar data add the spatial dimension to the
temporally resolved accumulation record from ice cores. Accumulation rates are
traditionally derived from the depths of young, shallow layers, corrected for
strain using a local 1-D ice-flow model. Older, deeper layers have been more
affected by flow over large horizontal distances. However, it is these deeper
layers that contain information on longer-term climate patterns. This project
will use geophysical inverse theory and a 2.5D flow-band ice-flow forward model
comprising ice-surface and layer-evolution modules, to extract robust transient
accumulation patterns by assimilating multiple deeper, more-deformed layers that
have previously been intractable. Histories of divide migration, geothermal
flux, and surface evolution will also be produced. The grant will support the
PhD research of a female graduate student who is a mentor to female socio-
economically disadvantaged high-school students interested in science, through
the University of Washington Women's Center. It will also provide a
research&lt;br/&gt;experience for an undergraduate student, and contribute to a
freshman seminar on Scientific Research.&lt;br/&gt;