* 0440295
* Developing and Cultivating Meta-Cognitive Strategies to Invoke Conceptual Knowledge Relevant to Engineering Problem Solving
* EHR,DRL
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Anne Fay, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2009
* USD 261,435.00

The proposed research focuses on developing metacognitive strategies in the
foundational engineering subject of Statics. The literature on problem-solving
indicates that even if students understand the concepts necessary to solving
particular problems, that knowledge, in isolation, is not sufficient to
guarantee success. Strategies for organizing the problem-solving task, and for
retrieving the appropriate conceptual knowledge, are also necessary. The PI's
previous investigations of conceptual understanding in Statics, based on
observations of students' problem solving efforts, led to the development of a
preliminary method for assessing that understanding. The PIs propose to develop
and test the effectiveness of candidate metacognitive strategies in helping
students learn to integrate conceptual elements while constructing solutions.
The PIs will also monitor whether students possess the relevant underlying
conceptual knowledge. In addition, the proposed research seeks to develop
methods for cultivating student ability to use such strategies, both in the
classroom and in informal groups of students outside of class. The proposal
includes the development of a new computer-based methodology for recording
problem solving of students. The proposed project will also make use of
technology to enhance learning through their extension of the Classroom
Communication Systems to the in-class assessment of metacognitive strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;