* 0440388
* Solid State Geochemistry: High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy of Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2009
* Peter Buseck, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2009
* USD 480,000.00

Material properties and structural perturbations at the near-atomic scale will
be determined with unprecedented detail for rock-forming minerals having
geophysical significance. Quantitative measurements will be made of: the
waviness of low-angle grain boundaries as a function of dislocation densities;
fine-scale displacements and strain produced by dislocations and grain
boundaries; the spatially resolved strain-energy density near dislocation cores
- regions that were previously inaccessible; and the strain fields and energies
of dissociated dislocations. Geometric phase analysis, which combines high-
resolution transmission electron microscopy and intensive image analysis, will
be used. The measurements will be compared to calculations utilizing elastic
theory. In the process, estimates of elastic constants for regions as close as
one or two atomic spacings from crystallographic disruptions will be determined.
The results will have implications for material properties that include
deformation, recrystallization, diffusion, electrical properties and other
parameters of geophysical interest. From an applied perspective, certain
macroscopic boundary geometries will give curvatures that could be exploited to
engineer desired properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students and postdoctoral
researchers with diverse backgrounds and ethnicities will be provided an
interdisciplinary research environment and will be trained in advanced methods
of studying materials at the nanoscale. New methodologies for studying geologic
materials will be developed; the procedures and data will also be useful for
scientists working in solid-state physics, chemistry, and materials science. The
products of the research will be disseminated via prompt publication in leading
journals with broad readership. An international component is provided through
visitors who routinely utilize our facilities and techniques and export them to
their home institutions and countries.&lt;br/&gt;