* 0440057
* Collaborative Research: Internally-Consistent Model for Trace and Major Element Evolution in Open System Magma Bodies: Merging EC-RAFC and MELTS
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Frank Spera, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2008
* USD 197,133.00

Geological and geochemical data provide definitive evidence that magma chambers
are inherently open systems subject to interaction with adjacent wallrock
(crustal assimilation), magma recharge, and crystal formation (fractional
crystallization). The objective of this research is to develop a broadly
applicable computational geochemical tool, the Magma Chamber Simulator (MCS), to
describe the compositional, mass, and thermal evolution of open system magma
bodies undergoing simultaneous recharge, crustal assimilation, and fractional
crystallization. The basis of the MCS is a thermodynamic description of a
magmatic system that is subject to energy, mass and species conservation, and
construction of the MCS will proceed via reformulation and integration of two
extant modeling tools, MELTS and Energy-Constrained Recharge, Assimilation
Fraction Crystallization (EC-RAFC). Application of the MCS will allow field,
geochemical, petrological, and geochronological studies of magmatic systems to
be placed in a quantitative framework that will enable predictions about the
behaviors of magmatic systems. Through application of the MCS to the diverse
array of magmatic systems represented on Earth, progress will be made on the
fundamental question of how magma diversity is achieved. For example, questions
related to how magmas diversify in classical settings such as ocean islands
(Hawaii), subduction zones (Arenal), continental flood basalts (Parana), and
layered mafic intrusions (Bushveld Complex) will be explored.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MCS will be available on a number of web sites for use
by professional researchers as well as graduate and undergraduate students,
thereby providing the geochemical and petrological community with a user-
friendly desktop computational tool for quantitatively investigating the
evolution of dynamic, open-system magma bodies. As part of the outreach
activities, exercises for undergraduate/graduate petrology classes will be
developed in collaboration with students. These exercises will assist students
in developing skills in computational modeling as well as use of quantitative
analysis of geologic data to answer relevant questions in igneous petrology.
Thus, this work will not only impact the research of a large number of
professional petrologists/geochemists, but it will also contribute to the
training of students in research, curriculum development, and collaborative
endeavors. &lt;br/&gt;