* 0440713
* The Molecular Signals that Regulate the Ontogeny of Aerobic Capacity, Lipid Metabolism and Elevated Myoglobin Concentrations in the Skeletal Muscles of Weddell Seals
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2005,07/31/2006
* Shane Kanatous, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 07/31/2006
* USD 192,435.00

During the past three decades, intensive field studies have revealed much about
the&lt;br/&gt;behavior, physiology, life history, and population dynamics of the
Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) population of McMurdo Sound, Antarctica.
These animals are marine predators that are highly adapted for an aquatic life
in shore-fast and pack ice habitats. They must locate and capture sparsely
distributed under the ice. Most of what is known about their diving behavior is
based on studies of adult animals with little known about the development or the
genetic controls of diving behavior of young animals. The goal of this project
is to examine the temporal development of aerobic capacity, lipid metabolism and
oxygen stores in the skeletal muscles of young Weddell seals and to determine
which aspects of the cellular environment are important in the regulation of
these adaptations during maturation. This project builds on past results to
investigate the molecular controls that underlie the development of these
adaptations. The first objective is to further characterize the ontogenetic
changes in muscle aerobic capacity, lipid metabolism and myoglobin concentration
and distribution using enzymatic, immuno-histochemical and myoglobin assays in
newly weaned, subadult, and adult seals. The second objective is to determine
the molecular controls that regulate these changes in aerobic capacity, fiber
type distribution and myoglobin in skeletal muscles during maturation. Through
subtractive hybridization and subsequent analysis, differences in mRNA
populations in the swimming muscles of the different age classes of Weddell
seals will be determined. These techniques will allow for the identification of
the proteins and transcription factors that influence the ontogenetic changes in
myoglobin concentration, fiber type distribution and aerobic capacity. These
results will increase our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of both the ontogeny and
molecular mechanisms by which young seals acquire the physiological capabilities
to make deep (up to 700 m) and long aerobic dives (ca 20 min). This study will
advance knowledge of the molecular regulation for the&lt;br/&gt;adaptations that
enable active skeletal muscle to function under hypoxic conditions; this has a
broader application for human medicine especially in regards to cardiac and
pulmonary disease. Additional broader impacts include the participation of
underrepresented scientists and a continuation of a website in
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;with the Science Teachers Access to Resources at
Southwestern University (STARS Program) which involves weekly updates about
research efforts during the field season, weekly questions/answer session
involving students and teachers, and updates on research results throughout the
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;