* 0440568
* Graduate Teaching Fellows Enhancing STEM Education in South Carolina Schools
* EHR,DGE
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2012
* Christine Ebert, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 02/29/2012
* USD 1,999,990.00

This project expands a successful GK-12 program that was originally focused on
engineering problem solving to a cross-campus program with the broader theme of
authentic inquiry in all STEM disciplines. The institutionalized program is
called the Project Partners in Inquiry (Project Pi) because it promotes inquiry
as an instructional approach through partnerships between STEM graduate students
and grade 3-8 teachers. GK-12 Fellows and their institutional counterparts (Pi
Fellows) partner with science and mathematics teachers to develop the teaching
skills of the Fellows, foster STEM content gain among teachers, and enrich K-12
students. learning of STEM concepts and applications. The Track 2 project
reflects a unique partnership between Richland County School Districts I and II,
three USC Colleges (Engineering and Information Technology, Science and
Mathematics, and Education), the Graduate School, Office of Research, Office of
Information Technology, and the SC Commission on Higher Education. The partners
are contributing over $900,000 in cost share to this project, and plan to
provide $100,000 per year beyond the Track 2 grant to support STEM students to
work in K-12 schools and further the goals of GK-12. Institutionalization of
GK-12 at USC will occur though the administration of Pi Fellowships by the
Graduate School, the management of the Pi Project by the newly established
Center for Teaching and Learning, and the adoption of a degree-credit graduate
course (GRAD 800) that prepares STEM students for GK-12
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this project includes
an innovative inquiry-based learning cycle approach that enables Fellows and
teachers to use inquiry in instruction. Fellows and Teacher Partners also learn
cooperatively from one another. Other major program elements include the GK-12
Retreat, GRAD 800, the GK-12 Spring Seminar, and the GK-12 Institute for
Teachers. The project is designed so that Fellows can help implement and develop
lessons based on their disciplinary knowledge. Research will be conducted to
determine what factors contribute to successful partnerships and on the extent
to which the graduate student.s discipline and the teacher.s grade level
assignment affect the partnership.s effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts are reflected in the nature of the targeted schools, which include large
numbers ofstudents in groups currently underrepresented in STEM. GK-12
activities will be integrated intograduate programs by institutionalizing
coursework that includes K-12 teaching and by institutional support for Pi
Fellows. Outcomes assessment from Track 1 tells us that graduate students that
participate in GK-12 better understand the issues facing K-12 education and will
continue to be involved in K-12 after leaving the University. The addition of
science and mathematics students to the engineering student base broadens our
programs interdisciplinary focus, allows for more coverage of the grades 3-8
curricula, and enriches the graduate student experience. Qualitative and
quantitative evaluation and research will be conducted through the USC Office of
Program Evaluation to assess program outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;