* 0440784
* A Research and Training Center for Astronomical Spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Nancy Morrison, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey R. Pier
* 09/30/2010
* USD 411,905.00

Proposal: 0440784 Institution: University of Toledo Principal Investigator:
Nancy Morrison Title: A Research and Training Center for Astronomical
Spectroscopy

ABSTRACT:

The University of Toledo's Ritter Observatory is an urban, on-campus facility
for research and education. Its 1.06-m reflecting telescope is instrumented with
two fiber-fed spectrographs, one low-resolution (R = 6,000) and one high-
resolution (R = 26,000), and is dedicated to long-term spectroscopic monitoring
of variable objects, mainly stars. This type of research, being tolerant of
partially cloudy weather and light pollution, is well suited to maximizing the
scientific return from the site. In-house research concentrates on classical Be
stars, Herbig Ae/Be stars, and hot supergiant stars. In addition, Ritter
performs service observing for community astronomers and is active in academic
instruction and community outreach.

Ritter's community service and education functions will be expanded. These
include hands-on training in observing techniques, telescope operation,
spectroscopy, and data reduction for visiting undergraduate and graduate
students; and a Web-based public archive of reduced spectra, including spectra
of typical bright stars for comparison purposes. In addition, Ritter's service
observing effort will become more vigorous and will benefit far more
astronomers. These activities will be supported by improvements to the
observatory's infrastructure. For example, enhancement of the telescope control
system, which has already begun and will continue with support from this
project, will increase its user friendliness, make it more similar to control
systems at major observatories, provide for more effective training of students,
and increase the efficiency of data collection. For this reason, the additional
service observing will not have excessive impact on the in-house research
programs. Another key improvement will be the acquisition of a large-format CCD
camera. Not only will the limited spectral coverage of the present CCD be
increased threefold, but also the scientific value of the data product will be
enhanced disproportionately because it will be possible to observe a greater
number of critical spectral lines, such as H-alpha and He I 6678,
simultaneously.

Intellectual merit: Ritter Observatory is positioned to become a robust service
facility. It disposes of 70% of the time of a highly qualified technician, and
it is operated by a team of energetic student and faculty observers, who obtain
observations on virtually all of the roughly 110 usable nights per year. The
constant availability of two spectrographs supports a wide range of projects on
any type of star down to about tenth magnitude, depending on the required
spectral resolution and signal-to-noise ratio. Being a flexible, accessible,
dedicated facility, the observatory responds rapidly to targets of opportunity
such as bright comets and novae. Thus, the result of this activity will be
improved access to spectroscopic data, in the form of both snapshots and long-
term monitoring, for the astronomical community.

Broader impacts: By making spectroscopic data available to the community, the
project will assist astronomers at institutions without their own observatories
and will help fill the void left by closure of the smaller telescopes at the
national facilities. Long-term spectroscopic monitoring capabilities are
particularly important for stellar astronomy in view of the declining
availability of small telescopes for this purpose. By training up to about three
dozen visiting undergraduate and graduate students per year, as well as the
department's own students, the activity will enlarge the national pool of
students who have hands-on observing experience prior to their first run at a
large facility. About five senior undergraduate University of Toledo students
majoring in physics or engineering will participate in improving the telescope
control system each year; they will be a small but significant addition to the
pool of graduates with basic training in telescope control systems. Finally, by
exposing high-school students to a research observatory and providing them with
experience in astronomical spectroscopy, the program will enlarge the pool of
students who may choose advanced study in astronomy or a related science.

This award is being funded jointly by the Division of Astronomical Sciences and
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.