* 0440007
* Climate Variability and Its Impacts on Hydrology of Small Mid-Continent Lakes and Wetlands
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Frank Schwartz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2009
* USD 374,993.00

0440007 Schwartz This explores new applications of satellite radar altimetry in
the analysis and observation of lake/wetland systems over large areas. Data from
various satellite (TOPEX/Poseidon (TP), Jason, IceSat, Jason-1, GFO and Envisat)
and shuttle missions provide new information for hydrologic investigations of
lakes and wetlands of the Prairie Pothole region (PPR) and portions of the
Boreal Forest region (BFR) of North America The combined regions contain
millions of lakes and wetlands of all sizes. Significant variability in
precipitation both seasonally and interannually causes tremendous variation in
the occurrence of surface waters, cycling between drought and deluge. The study
will rely on methods we have developed using IceSat and SRTM data in measuring
stages on small lakes and new approaches involving TP/Jason-1 and similar
altimetry data. Once these approaches are fully developed they will be used to
examine how lakes and wetlands respond to climatic variability on a regional
basis. The study emphasizes the transition from drought to deluge over the last
16 years. The droughts of 1988-92 were second in severity only to the dust bowl
years of the 1930s. The most significant wet period of the century occurred in
the middle to late 1990s. This variability in climate caused tremendous changes
in the number, and size of lakes and wetlands. Fortunately, the historical
record of data from TP and earlier altimeters spans much of this time period.
Both the PPR and southern BF regions experience extreme variability in climate,
with droughts reoccurring on a regular basis. Indications are that both of these
regions will be sensitive to global climate changes, over the next century. The
magnitude of climate changes might be such that the distribution and function of
hydrologic and ecologic processes (especially fire, insect infestations, and
duck production) will be pushed outside their normal ranges. Such changes in
hydrologic and ecosystem function have the potential to release carbon, further
increasing CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere. The educational component will
focus on science literacy at the 5th grade level. We plan to develop wetlands as
a vehicle to increase skills in science reading literacy, and science content
and processes at the 5th grade. A major emphasis will be on reading, designed to
develop appropriate vocabulary, and understanding the structure and format of
nonfiction writing. Our approach will be to develop an interactive website with
wetland ecology, as a major focus. Students will be presented with interesting
examples of different nonfiction writing styles used in science writing (report,
comparison/ contrast, summary), which are appropriate for 5th grade students.
This website will also emphasize cross-curricular initiatives with fiction
stories that build on a wetland theme.

