* 0440198
* Collaborative Research: Pressure Decrease as a Cause of Quartz and Molybdenite Vein Mineral Precipitation in Magmatic-Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Mark Reed, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2009
* USD 209,789.00

In high temperature geothermal systems, and magmatic hydrothermal systems such
as the porphyry copper deposit at Butte, Montana, sharp decreases in pressure
from lithostatic toward hydrostatic are a likely process for producing quartz
veins. The nearly universal occurrence of molybdenite (MoS2) in such quartz
veins that likely form by pressure drop and the scarcity of molybdenite in other
vein types suggest that molybdenite, like quartz, precipitates by pressure
reduction, as opposed to a decrease in temperature. Previous molybdenite
solubility experiments have not addressed the role of pressure, thus we do not
know a chemical mechanism that would cause molybdenite to precipitate upon a
drop in pressure. For quartz, we know its solubility as a function of pressure,
but we do not know the origin of quartz mineral and trace element compositions
that distinguish pressure-drop vein quartz from other types of quartz. This
research addresses pressure decrease as a key process in magmatic hydrothermal
systems in three coordinated sub-projects: (1) experiments in the Wood
laboratory (U. Idaho) to explore molybdenite solubility as a function of
pressure and temperature, (2) in the Reed laboratory (U. Oregon), determine the
SEM-cathodoluminescence textures and related trace element compositions, 18O/16O
ratios and fluid inclusion properties in natural vein quartz formed by pressure
drop and other processes; and (3) apply numerical modeling methods (program
CHILLER) to explore the role of pressure-decrease in magmatic hydrothermal
systems. Benefits beyond the research itself include the following: a) graduate
students and two undergraduates would be trained in the analytical,
experimental, and computational methods involved in modern geochemical research,
b) the Reed-Wood research collaboration joins complementary strengths in
experimental, analytical and numerical modeling geochemistry that would aid
future developments in geochemistry, c) a deeper understanding of magmatic
hydrothermal processes is important for mineral exploration and for future
energy extraction from high-temperature (&gt;400 degrees C), high-yield
geothermal systems, such as that now being drilled in Iceland.