* 0440478
* Environmental and Ecological Regulation of Differences and Interactions between Solitary and Colonial forms of Phaeocystis antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Kam Tang, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 04/30/2009
* USD 586,348.00

Phaeocystis Antarctica is a widely distributed phytoplankton that forms dense
blooms and aggregates in the Southern Ocean. This phytoplankton and plays
important roles in polar ecology and biogeochemistry, in part because it is a
dominant primary producer, a main component of organic matter vertical fluxes,
and the principal producer of volatile organic sulfur in the region. Yet P.
Antarctica is also one of the lesser known species in terms of its physiology,
life history and trophic relationships with other organisms; furthermore,
information collected on other Phaeocystis species and from different locations
may not be applicable to P. Antarctica in the Ross Sea. P. Antarctica occurs
mainly as two morphotypes: solitary cells and mucilaginous colonies, which
differ significantly in size, architecture and chemical composition. Relative
dominance between solitary cells and colonies determines not only the size
spectrum of the population, but also its carbon dynamics, nutrient uptake and
utilization. Conventional thinking of the planktonic trophic processes is also
challenged by the fact that colony formation could effectively alter the
predator-prey interactions and interspecific competition. However, the factors
that regulate the differences between solitary and colonial forms of P.
Antarctica are not well-understood. The research objective of this proposal is
therefore to address these over-arching questions:&lt;br/&gt;o Do P. Antarctica
solitary cells and colonies differ in growth, composition
and&lt;br/&gt;photosynthetic rates?&lt;br/&gt;o How do nutrients and grazers
affect colony development and size distribution of P.
&lt;br/&gt;Antarctica?&lt;br/&gt;o How do nutrients and grazers act
synergistically to affect the long-term population&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of P.
Antarctica? Experiments will be conducted in the McMurdo station with natural P.
Antarctica assemblages and co-occurring grazers. Laboratory experiments will be
conducted to study size-specific growth and photosynthetic rates of P.
Antarctica, size-specific grazing mortality due to microzooplankton and
mesozooplankton, the effects of macronutrients on the (nitrogen compounds)
relative dominance of solitary cells and colonies, and the effects of
micronutrient (Fe) and grazing related chemical signals on P. Antarctica colony
development. Because this species is of critical importance in the Southern
Ocean, and because this research will provide critical information on factors
that regulate the role of P.Antarctica in food webs and biogeochemical cycles, a
major gap in knowledge will be addressed. This project will train two marine
science PhD students. The investigators will also collaborate with the School of
Education and a marine science museum to communicate polar science to a broader
audience.&lt;br/&gt;