* 0440302
* A Natural Experiment to Examine Hafnium Mobility in Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Kirsten Nicolaysen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2006
* USD 114,334.00

This project is designed to use the central Aleutian arc as a natural experiment
to examine the influence that melts of terrigenous turbidites has upon the
abundances of high field strength elements (HFSE) and Hf isotopic compositions
in arc lavas. The Amlia Fracture Zone (AFZ) contains sediment in greater volume
than elsewhere in the Aleutian trench and delivers anomalous quantities of
sediment and water directly to the mantle. Oblique subduction of the Pacific
plate has moved the AFZ westward along the arc front, sequentially subducting a
pulse of sediment and fluid beneath the islands of Chuginadak, Yunaska and
Seguam circa 5, 2.5 and 1 million years ago, respectively. Lavas from Atka
Island, which has not yet received the sediment and fluid spike from the AFZ
provides control compositions. This section of the Aleutians was selected
because Sr and Pb isotopic compositions are markedly more radiogenic at Seguam
and Yunaska volcanoes than at Atka. This study proposes to examine the variation
of HFSE and Hf isotopic compositions in fifteen lavas from these islands to test
whether a pulse of sediment in the magma source, delivered by a subducted
fracture zone, affected these lavas. Because this sediment addition occurred as
a spatially and temporally discrete spike, temporal variation in the hafnium
characteristics of the lavas constrains the duration of HFSE transfer to arc
magmas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the ages and petrogenesis of several of
the volcanic complexes in the Aleutians has never been investigated, this
project will contribute significantly to the understanding of this active arc.
This project will establish the research program of the PI at KSU, where the PI
provides a role model for women students. The project will support the graduate
training of Ms. Katrina Pekar and partially support that of Mr. David Bridges.
The project will foster national and international collaborations between the
KSU geology department and other institutions. An important aspect of these
collaborations includes training graduate students in the use of analytical
techniques not currently available at KSU (ICP-MS) or in the state of Kansas
(40Ar/39Ar geochronology, isotope analysis by MC-ICPMS and TIMS). The results of
the study will be shared with the geologic community through national meetings,
manuscript publication and archive on the Aleutian Arc Data System. &lt;br/&gt;