* 0440490
* Track 1, GK-12: National Science Foundation GK-12 Fellows Program at Louisiana State University
* EHR,DGE
* 05/15/2005,05/31/2010
* Su-Seng Pang, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2010
* USD 1,558,502.00

0440490&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims are (1) to better prepare students
from the large and mostly underserved EBRPSS school system to meet high academic
standards in collegiate STEM disciplines, (2) to foster the appreciation and
capability of college students for high quality STEM teaching methods, and (3)
to graduate high-caliber U.S. research doctorates who are well-prepared for
content-oriented training of prospective secondary math and science teachers at
colleges and universities in the U.S. Supported by NSF's STEM Teacher
Preparation and R. Noyce Scholarship Programs, LSU's newly redesigned secondary
STEM certification program features extensive field based preparation and broad-
based collaboration among university faculty and a cadre of highly qualified
STEM mentor teachers from EBRPSS. In this project, the mentor teachers help to
identify each year eight pairs of math and science teachers who welcome the
support of GK-12 Fellows and the professional development opportunities
provided. Each teacher pair works with a Graduate Fellow and two Undergraduate
Fellows throughout the academic year. Graduate Fellows spend ten hours a week
providing direct assistance to the two teachers, with time given off for
assignments for other GK-12 Tasks, such as presentations of .Discovery Kits
within the LSU Science on Wheels Program. Undergraduate Fellows provide a wide
range of instructional support in Math Labs they organize.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal is based upon the
extensive experience of the participating STEM investigators in the project, the
breadth and depth of leadership and infrastructure provided by LSU, and the
strong partnership among the university faculty and a corps of dedicated middle
and high school mentor teachers. The project allows the testing of a model to
enhance the scope and quality of undergraduate and graduate education at a large
state university by helping to improve mathematics and science education in a
school district that embodies all of the challenges that are faced by many
districts nationwide, including low performing schools, a large minority
population, and schools with a high proportion of economically disadvantaged
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include an increased interest
of faculty in academic STEM departments in K-12 math and science education, an
increase in recruitment rates of high school students into STEM disciplines,
especially among minorities and/or women, and an increase in the number of
strong research-doctorates in STEM disciplines that are better prepared to
provide content-based instruction to prospective secondary teachers as well as
to in-service secondary teachers. Through careful documentation and
dissemination of the project results, this project will have applications across
the country, particularly in research universities that are in close proximity
to school systems plagued by low student performance and a dearth of students
being offered challenging STEM curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;