* 0440792
* Ice Dynamics and Surface Glaciology along US ITASE Traverse Routes in East Antarctica
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2011
* Gordon Hamilton, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2011
* USD 365,435.00

This award supports a series of field measurements that will improve our
understanding of the East Antarctic ice sheet. The objectives of this project
are to take advantage of the overland traverse logistics framework provided by
US ITASE and to collaborate with other US ITASE investigators to calculate rates
of ice sheet thickness change (mass balance) on domes, along elevation contours
and along flow lines in East Antarctica using precise global positioning system
methods. In addition, the variability (both spatial and temporal) in snow
accumulation rates will be assessed using shallow ice cores and ground-
penetrating radar profiling, and will provide the capability to deduce true past
climate variation in accumulation rates in ~200-year long ice core records by
measuring ice motion and upglacier gradients in accumulation rate. Study
patterns and causes of the onset of streaming flow in the catchments of selected
large outlet glaciers draining through the Transantarctic Mountains will also be
determined. The work will be conducted along the proposed US ITASE traverse
route from Taylor Dome to South Pole. This route travels across the East
Antarctic plateau, roughly parallel to the Transantarctic Mountains. Orthogonal
satellite traverses are planned, each of which will follow a flow line of
selected major outlet glaciers. The expected results include mass balance
determinations for the Ross Ice Shelf sector of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet, an
improved snow accumulation map for portions of East Antarctica, the
deconvolution of ice dynamics effects from climate effects in ice core records,
and an analysis of glaciological conditions near the onset of streaming flow
leading to large outlet glaciers. The broader impacts of the proposed work
include the collaboration with a multidisciplinary group of polar scientists,
support of a graduate student and the production of results that will lead to an
improved understanding of the Earth system from which sound planning and policy
decisions can be based.