* 0440061
* Modernizing the Michigan State University Observatory for Research, Education, and Outreach
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* G. Mark Voit, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey R. Pier
* 08/31/2008
* USD 144,971.00

Proposal: AST-0440061&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Horace
Smith&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Michigan State University&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Modernizing the Michigan State University Observatory for Research, Education,
and Outreach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Michigan
State University campus observatory and its 60-cm Boller &amp; Chivens telescope
will be refurbished and modernized. This will enable an expansion of programs in
research, education, and outreach. The research will involve undergraduate,
graduate, and summer Research Experiences for Undergraduate students at every
stage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will emphasize long-term photometric
studies of pulsating variable stars. The revitalized campus observatory will
allow the undertaking of studies of these stars that require months or even
years of observing time, filling a niche not easily matched at many other
facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The refurbished telescope will also be used
for observing as part of college courses. Classes of astrophysics majors and
classes of non-science majors will use the telescope in different ways. The
program of public outreach that has attracted more than 30,000 visitors to the
observatory since 1986 will be continued. The collaboration with Abrams
Planetarium, one of the major astronomy outreach facilities in Michigan, will be
expanded. In cooperation with the staff of Abrams Planetarium, the PI and
collaborators will produce a planetarium program designed to show schoolchildren
what goes on at an observatory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 20% of the
research time will be made available to qualified members of the astronomical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being funded jointly by the
Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;