* 0440547
* FERMAT - Fellows Engaged as Resources in Mathematics to Assist Teachers
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Helena Noronha, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,665,600.00

This Track 1 FERMAT GK-12 project unites the efforts of mathematics faculty from
a federally designated Hispanic-serving institution with educators from a school
district with a large Hispanic/Latino student population to place 12 graduate
mathematics students as Fellows in three pairs of high schools and feeder middle
schools in the district. FERMAT's focus is the quality of the education provided
to mathematics graduate students so they become competent professionals who are
skilled in communicating mathematical knowledge. It is also aimed at improving
teacher quality in the participating schools. Its design fosters the creation of
a learning community in which Fellows, partnered with teachers, secondary
mathematics coordinator, exemplary teachers, and CSUN mathematics and secondary
education faculty, all collaborate as professional colleagues in the four
fundamental features of our project: recruitment, training, interaction, and
mentoring. As a result, honors-quality Algebra I and Geometry instruction will
be offered to pupils with different learning styles from diverse populations.
Other special features of our project are a program for qualifiable minority
undergraduates, portfolios of Fellows activities, a graduate seminar, a graduate
newsletter to inform and track Fellows, and a website for dissemination.
Finally, the outcomes of the project will be continuously and carefully
evaluated by an external evaluator to improve the FERMAT model during and
following the grant period, fostering
institutionalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The FERMAT
project is partnership-driven, builds on previous CSUNLAUSD collaborations and
CSUN efforts involving graduate students in educational projects, and uses
methods of demonstrated efficacy. Fellows and GK-12 Teachers search for
pedagogical methods that address age-related abilities to deal with
abstractions, while engaging pupils in challenging problems that connect them to
their larger world. Our Fellows assist teachers to build capacity for teaching
challenging courses and through applications of mathematics and creative use of
computers, Fellows and teachers improve learning in their classrooms. Using a
balanced approach between discovery and direct instruction, their pupils
progressively advance their logical and abstract thinking to succeed in
mathematics. Finally, the FERMAT projectl comprehensively develops Fellows
communication and teamwork skills, in addition to sharpening and broadening each
Fellow's vision of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition
to enriching the quality of mathematics taught in the participating schools,
FERMAT experiences enhances the teaching competency of both Fellows and GK- 12
Teachers, extending the project's benefits to future students. Via the graduate
seminar, graduate newsletter, and a website, this project has an impact on
faculty and students in mathematics who are not directly involved in FERMAT. By
recruiting qualifiable minority students, in particular Hispanic students, and
turning them into highly qualified Fellows, the project develops and trains
graduate students who share the cultural and ethnic backgrounds of the pupils in
the project's schools. These role-model Fellows organize and lead academic
enrichment activities for secondary pupils, inspiring them to seek careers in
mathematics or related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is receiving
partial support from the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;