* 0440235
* Growth of Early Continental Crust and Chemical Evolution of Cratonic Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Robert Rapp, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2008
* USD 267,259.00

The oldest rocks on Earth occur within the continents are of Archean age
(~3.0-4.0 Ga), and are comprised of granitoid ("TTG") rocks that form the
physical nucleus, or craton, of these continents. The cratons are underlain by
mantle peridotites of the continental lithosphere, which possess unique chemical
and physical properties that are responsible for their long-term stability since
the Archean. Amongst the terrestrial planets of our solar system, the Earth
appears to be unique in possessing extensive, highly-differentiated continental
crust (or cratons). This study considers the origins of the oldest continental
crust, and addresses how crustal growth in the Archean was related to the
chemical evolution of the cratonic lithosphere. Laboratory experiments, to be
performed at pressures and temperatures relevant to those of the subcratonic
lithosphere, will consider to what extent and by what chemical mechanisms
Archean granitoid (TTG) magmas interacted with peridotite rocks in evolving
cratonic roots. These experiments will produce variable proportions of melt
("magma") and crystalline (mineral) phases as a function of pressure,
temperature and other variables, and the detailed chemical features of the
experimental melts and minerals will be compared with appropriate natural
samples (respectively, Archean granitoids, and samples of the subcratonic
lithosphere brought to the surface in kimberlite eruptions, in the form of
peridotite "xenoliths, or as minute mineral "inclusions" in diamonds).
Geometrically, modern subduction zones consist of a "wedge" of mantle
lithosphere (peridotite) overlying a "slab" of subducting oceanic lithosphere.
Questions for Archean crustal evolution, which this project will address,
include whether or not a conventional mantle wedge-subducting slab geometry is
appropriate for the early Earth, or if some unique style of tectonism was
operative, and at what point in time did modern-style, plate tectonic processes
take over? A better understanding of the genetic relationship between granitoid
magmatism on the early Earth and the development of deep roots or "keels" for
the cratons in the underlying mantle is an important prerequisite for on-site
studies of crusts on the other terrestrial planets (e.g., Mars and Venus), and
for the search for Earth-like planets beyond our solar system.