* 0440332
* Harnessing Sample Geometry to Measure Equation of State of Deep Earth Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Abby Kavner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 20,000.00

The behavior of minerals at ultrahigh pressures and temperatures controls the
inner workings of the Earth. The goals of this proposed work are to measure
phase stability, density, compressibility, and thermoelastic properties of what
is likely the predominant deep-mantle suite of minerals-MgSiO3-at the relevant
pressure and temperature conditions of the deep Earth. The ability of in-situ
high pressure measurements in the laser heated diamond cell to constrain these
properties has been severly limited by the behavior of the sample inside the
diamond cell sample chamber. The sample geometry-which often consists of a
marker material embedded in the study material matrix-will generate errors and
uncertainties in measurement. However, the accuracy and precision of
measurements can be significantly improved when the sample geometry is
controlled. These improvements are a feature of our proposed work. The specific
tasks include: 1) Sol-gel processing of samples consisting of alternating layers
of MgSiO3 and metal marker starting materials; 2) Studies of the stress
environment of the sample chamber, especially during laser heating.; 3) X-ray
diffraction measurements at high pressures for density and compressibility
measurements; 4) X-ray diffraction coupled with laser heating to determine phase
stability and constrain thermoelastic properties of MgSiO3; and 5) Finite
element modeling of the stress state inside the sample chamber. The results have
important implications on both technical and scientific fronts. Technically,
this research will advance our ability to intelligently design samples for
geophysical measurements. Scientifically, the results will contribute to our
understanding of how the deepest mantle helps govern the current state and
evolution of the whole Earth.