* 0440710
* STTR Phase I:   Modular Feedforward Adaptive Noise Control
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Robert Collier, SOUND INNOVATIONS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2005
* USD 99,823.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to
demonstrate the concept of a multipurpose active noise control module with broad
application to a variety of environments and markets requiring acoustic noise
control. Digital Signal Processors (DSP) have matured to the point where active
noise reduction (ANR) based on least mean square (LMS) filters is viable.
However, traditional LMS filters do not respond effectively to non-stationary
signals, thus outside of telephony, commercial DSP-based noise control products
employing adaptive feedforward control are unavailable. This project seeks to
develop an ANR module that implements an innovative adaptive filter based on a
patented Lyapunov tuning method. This method improves low frequency noise
reduction performance significantly over traditional feedforward LMS filters or
feedback ANR, and it enhances the LMS filter.s ability to track and effectively
cancel non-stationary noise. This Phase I STTR seeks to evaluate the concept of
a general purpose DSP module for ANR using Lyapunov-tuned filters that can be
applied to a variety of open space or source noise cancellation problems. Open
space ANR provides noise attenuation within a specified volume, while source
cancellation reduces source noise created by heavy or light machinery. Phase I
tasks focus on evaluating the potential for a plug-and-play module that, due to
innovative LMS filters, can accommodate a variety of noise source
characteristics and a range of dynamics of the acoustic environment in which the
module is used. The research and eventual product meets a significant societal
need for noise abatement technology to protect against noise and vibration,
reduce occupational hearing loss, and increase human effectiveness in noisy
environments. The applications for this general-purpose ANR module range from
providing a quiet zone in the space around a passenger's head in the cabin of an
aircraft or construction vehicle to acoustic and vibration protection of
sensitive instrumentation that is subject to noise and vibration. The module
serves the noise control consulting industry by providing a means of rapid
deployment of effective retrofit ANR solutions for reducing noise due to
mechanical equipment and ducting, in high noise cabins (aircraft, vehicle, and
construction equipment), and by creating quiet spaces in
manufacturing/industrial settings, airports, and office buildings.