* 0440499
* Track 2, GK-12, Optimization and Institutionalization of the Science Fellows Supporting Teachers  (SFST) Program
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2012
* Garry McKenzie, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 01/31/2012
* USD 1,928,000.00

Intellectual Merits: The Ohio State University (OSU) GK-12 projects builds on a
Track 1 project which successfully paired science fellows with elementary school
teachers to improve science education since 1999. Academically talented graduate
students in the sciences collaborate with 3rd through 5th grade teachers at
Columbus Public Schools to develop hands-on, inquiry based science lessons to
cover all areas of the elementary science curriculum. Reported Ohio Proficiency
Test scores show dramatic improvements in the passing rates in science among the
elementary school children involved and teachers participating in the program
are showing great progress in their science content knowledge and their ability
to teach inquiry-based science lessons. With strong support from the University
and Columbus Public Schools (CPS), this proposal outlines the plans for
continuation of the project, cooperation with the successfully operating Wonders
of Our World, W.O.W. science outreach program, and institutionalization of these
efforts at OSU. New fellows and teachers are chosen through competitive
application processes to ensure that the best graduate students are paired with
teachers who are committed to improving their ability to teach science. The
fellow- teacher teams are paired based on optimal match between the fellow's
available time and the teacher's time frame allocated for science. OSU GK-12
efforts are interwoven with the CPS Urban Systemic Program, while, trained USP
science specialists (4th grade teachers) help to coordinate the GK-12 efforts
and share professional development workshop efforts. Fellows continue to
collaborate with elementary school teachers and the PI and Co-PIs begin to
develop plans for a graduate level course that will be a part of the OSU
curriculum starting the sixth year (one year after NSF support). A GK-12 class
will be developed that will contain the optimized structure of the fellow-
teacher teams working in the classrooms with professional development workshops
for the teacher interwoven in the program throughout the year.

Broader Impacts of the Project: This OSU program is substantially enhancing the
graduate education at OSU, having a large impact on elementary school teachers
in inner-city schools and advancing science skills of the elementary school
children.

This project is receiving partial support from the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences.