* 0440555
* BE/CNH: Emerging Issues Along Urban-Rural Interfaces: Linking Science and Society
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* David Laband, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 36,932.00

The pace of urbanization is accelerating in many parts of the world, leading to
rapidly changing environmental conditions along urban-rural interfaces. In turn,
these changing conditions are creating new ecological and societal challenges
and opportunities. In March 2005, a major conference on "Emerging Issues at the
Urban-Rural Interface: Linking Science and Society" will be held in Atlanta,
Georgia. The conference will bring together researchers, practitioners, and
policy makers from around the globe to share current research results and to
identify knowledge gaps regarding the interaction between urbanization and
natural resources. Special attention will be focused on approaches that
integrate socioeconomic and ecological research. Topics to be explored at the
conference include human dimension issues along urban-rural interfaces,
urbanization and the sustainability of ecological functions, effects of
urbanization on rural areas, the impact of urbanization on the supply of and
demand for environmental services, the eco-politics of urbanization,
urbanization impacts on species fragility, species protection, and biodiversity,
how communities successfully deal with urban/rural issues, and restoring
ecosystem integrity in response to urban impacts. This award will provide
funding to enable about three dozen graduate and undergraduate students to
attend and participate in this conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected
contributions of the conference include enhancement of communications among
researchers, practitioners, and policy makers. This award will provide about 35
graduate and undergraduate students with the opportunity to explore this topic
and to interact with leading researchers in a scholarly setting. This project is
supported by an award resulting from the FY 2004 special competition in
Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;