* 0440253
* Lattice Boltzmann Methods for Concentration- and Temperature-Induced Density Driven Flows
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Michael Sukop, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 219,468.00

&lt;br/&gt;0440253&lt;br/&gt;Sukop&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in lattice
Boltzmann methods (LBMs) offer a radical new way of computing solutions to the
challenging non-linear problems of concentration- and temperature-induced
density driven flows. Interactions between low density fresh water and high
density seawater in ground water flows in coastal regions illustrate the nature
of the general problem. Ground water models for coastal areas must be able to
simulate density driven flow and the coupled advection, diffusion, and
dispersion of solutes and heat in porous media. Although LBMs are simpler than
conventional (e.g., finite element) methods for these problems, they have not
previously been applied to seawater intrusion problems. Because of the numerical
difficulties inherent in conventional simulations involving non-linear, coupled
solute/energy transport and density-driven flow, inconsistent numerical results
have often been reported in the literature. Analytical solutions for the
problems addressed by these models are rarely available, and 'validation' of
various codes has generally relied on comparison with previous numerical
results. As a completely different, more fundamental approach, LBMs may
contribute significantly to clarifying these issues and offer a more robust and
efficient means of solving these problems. We will compare LBM with conventional
approaches for benchmark problems and develop code for larger, realistic
problems.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed activity&lt;br/&gt;This
research is critical to advancement of knowledge and understanding of the
hydrology of coastal aquifers, other salt-affected aquifers, and high-level
(hot) waste disposal. Other disciplines where fluids and porous media are
important could benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and research team are
uniquely qualified to conduct this project. The PI has conducted research on
solute transport, pore- and macro-scale dispersion, and LBMs. The research team
includes a computer scientist with expertise in LBMs, numerical methods, and
parallel algorithms. Ample resources are available to conduct the project (see
letters of support).&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
provide the beginning PI, the post-doctoral researcher, and graduate and
undergraduate students with extensive experience in LBMs and existing models.
The post-doc and students will receive intensive training. The project will lead
directly to enhanced classroom and research experiences for students at FIU,
which holds the Carnegie Foundation's highest rating (Doctoral/Research
University-Extensive) and is a recognized Minority Serving Institution that
awards more Bachelor's degrees to Hispanic students than any other U.S.
university. Future students of the post-doc and graduate student will benefit.
Career-long scientific partnerships will be established between the project
participants. A new course in advanced solute transport modeling will be
developed. Undergraduates will be recruited from the NSF GeoSCOPE project at FIU
(see letter of support). The high-performance computing and algorithm
development work will result in permanent infrastructure enhancement and
modeling tools for the broad scientific community. Results will be broadly
disseminated as refereed journal articles, presentations at scientific meetings,
a dissertation, and via the Internet. Software will be available to interested
researchers and ultimately as a modular option accessible from widely used model
interfaces. Society will benefit from the enhanced ability of scientists and
engineers to more accurately and rapidly predict density-driven flows arising
from solute concentration and temperature variations such as those that affect
millions of people who depend on ground water in coastal areas.&lt;br/&gt;