* 0440669
* Collaborative Research: The Boston University/Lowell Observatory Partnership - Bringing the Perkins Telescope into the 21st Century
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Robert Millis, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey R. Pier
* 12/31/2009
* USD 281,086.00

Proposal: AST-0440669 Principal Investigator: Marc Buie Institution: Lowell
Observatory Title: Collaborative Research: The Boston University/Lowell
Observatory Partnership - Bringing the Perkins Telescope into the 21st Century

ABSTRACT:

Five years ago, Boston University and Lowell Observatory joined in a partnership
to operate the1.83-meter Perkins telescope on Anderson Mesa outside Flagstaff,
Arizona. Much of the efforts over the ensuing period were directed toward the
development of a new generation of instrumentation for the telescope: PRISM, a
wide-field optical imager, polarimeter and spectrometer went into operation in
November 2003. Mimir, a wide-field 1 - 5 micron imager, polarimeter and
spectrometer and the White Spectrograph, a moderate-resolution optical
spectrograph, will achieve first light by early fall of 2004.

The goal of the current program is to continue the modernization of the Perkins
Telescope, with a few key improvements, thus creating effective resources in
support of the scientific and educational missions of the two partnering
institutions and to the astronomical community via a program of competitive
community access to the telescope. These efforts will improve the image quality
of the Perkins telescope, make some key productivity enhancements and for
educational innovations. Specifically, the new development program includes
ventilation of the control room, telescope and dome, telescope and dome
insulation, telescope safeguards, student travel, a graduate-student-in-
residence program, a real-time cloud monitor and instrument upgrades.

Intellectual Merit: The new instrumentation now going into operation at the
Perkins will provide the Lowell/Boston University partnership with an important
niche in "observation space," not readily available elsewhere, including wide-
field polarimetry, imaging and multi-object low-resolution spectroscopic
capability across the spectrum from the near UV to the near IR. This will
position the telescope well for surveys and synoptic studies, ranging from
tracking Kuiper-belt objects, to following stellar activity in old open cluster
stars, to mapping the galactic magnetic field, to monitoring polarization
variations in blazars.

Broader Impact: Boston University has a rigorous graduate program and one of the
largest undergraduate programs in the country and Lowell Observatory has an
extensive outreach program. The next generation of students that pass through
the Boston University and Lowell Observatory programs will be enriched in their
understanding and appreciation of the way astronomical observations are done.
Astronomically, ongoing surveys and synoptic programs will provide scientific
support for projects on larger telescopes and spacecraft.

This award is being funded jointly by the Division of Astronomical Sciences and
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.