* 0440432
* Constraining Asthenospheric and Lithospheric Seismic Structure along the Yellowstone Hotspot
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2006
* Kenneth Dueker, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2006
* USD 50,679.00

Constraining Asthenospheric and Lithospheric Seismic Structure along the
Yellowstone Hotspot Synopsis for NSF website

One of the most profound continental upper mantle convective phenomena is the
Yellowstone Hotspot. While substantial geophysical work has been done on
Yellowstone over the last 30 years, several important questions remain with
respect to the upper mantle and crustal modifications produced by this Hotpot.

We propose a focused project that capitalizes on the excellent broadband seismic
coverage of the Hotspot from a recent PASSCAL broadband experiment to examine:
1) how the Hotspot has affected bulk crustal velocities and thickness; 2) how
the Hotspot has modified the lithosphere and lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary.
The analysis will consist of two sub-projects. First, joint Pds, Sdp, and
surface wave phase velocity inversion for velocity and discontinuity structure
of the upper 200 km will be performed using a nearest neighbor directed Monte-
Carlo algorithm. Second, depth dependent anisotropy analysis will be
accomplished using the nearest neighbor algorithm to invert cross-convolved
source normalized direct-S and SKS seismograms and Pds time-series. The proposed
research advances discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training
and learning. It promotes education by funding a Ph.D. level graduate student
and a new Master's student for one year. Our research infrastructure will be
enhanced as we gain experience with the analysis techniques proposed. Providing
new and better constraints on the Yellowstone hotspot is a global issue of
concern to the Earth science community. To disseminate our results we intend to
publish our results in a timely manner and post our results on the web.

