* 0440172
* Experimental Investigations on the Role of H20 in Magmatic Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2007
* Timothy Grove, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 12/31/2007
* USD 119,091.00

The proposed experiments will provide constraints on the influence of water on
mantle melting and on crustal differentiation processes. The studies will
provide information on the temperature, volatile content and pressure of melting
and fractional crystallization. The cycling of water through the Earth's
interior is of fundamental importance for understanding the chemical evolution
of the Earth over geologic time. Processes of solid - liquid differentiation
(crust formation, mantle differentiation and core segregation), of the origin of
the oceans and of life on Earth are tied to the cycling of H2O through our
planet's deep interior. Three projects are proposed. 1) A systematic
investigation of the influence of H2O on the liquidus of natural basaltic melts.
These experiments will provide quantitative information that can be used to
model the H2O-undersaturated melting of silicates in the presence of variable
amounts of H2O, and should help resolve the considerable uncertainty on the
influence of small amounts of H2O on melting. 2) Investigation of the role of
H2O, pressure and mantle composition on peridotite melting. These experiments
will provide quantitative estimates of the role played by H2O and bulk
composition (primarily the alkali elements Na2O and K2O) on the generation of
magmas in subduction zone and sub continental mantle environments. 3)
Experimental studies of the role of H2O and pressure on fractional
crystallization of basaltic melts in the crust. In arc magmatic systems the
compositional characteristics of differentiated arc magmas and their mineral
assemblages can provide evidence of the pre-eruptive H2O content, temperature
and depth history of differentiation. For all of the preceding studies we will
develop thermodynamically based analytic models that allow prediction of
conditions of melting/crystallization and compositions of melts generated when
H2O is involved. These studies will place quantitative constraints on the
influence of H2O on the chemical evolution of the Earth's crust and mantle. This
information on H2O will be of broad interest in the geodynamics and mineral
physics community and ultimately has relevance for the origin of the Earth's
oceans and life on Earth. This project will train graduate and undergraduate
students in research methods of experimental petrology/geochemistry. The
experimental data that results from this study will be shared with the community
and models for predicting temperature, H2O content and pressure of
melting/crystallization will be developed and distributed.