* 0440143
* Distinguishing Tectonic Mechanisms of Extension and Forearc Translation near the Central American Volcanic Arc by High-Resolution Seismic Profiling in Lakes Nicaragua and Managua
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2009
* Kirk McIntosh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2009
* USD 311,059.00

Deformation at convergent tectonic plate margins frequently involves some form
of boundary-parallel shearing attributed to oblique convergence. This boundary-
parallel component of convergence may be absorbed by deformation in the forearc,
backarc, or concentrated along the volcanic arc. Two of the major deformation
modes associated with oblique convergence are 1) crustal block rotation and 2)
forearc detachment by strike-slip faulting along the volcanic arc - the forearc
sliver model. The roles of forearc slivering and block rotation are not clear in
the case of the Central American convergent margin. A linear zone of strike-slip
earthquakes indicates right-lateral shearing along the Nicaragua depression, a
prominent Quaternary morphologic and structural depression, which extends
approximately 600 km from the northern Gulf of Fonseca in El Salvador and
northern Nicaragua to the Caribbean coast of Costa Rica. The depression is
aligned with the belt of active Central American volcanoes, which are generally
within the depression or near its southwest margin. To test the two deformation
hypotheses, this project exploits the existence of two very large, shallow lakes
(Nicaragua and Managua), to acquire images of the lake sediments and the recent
faults that deform these sediments. Using a portable seismic reflection system
mounted on passenger ferries in the lakes, roughly 1000 km of high-resolution
seismic data is being recorded. By mapping the active fault patterns in the
lakes this project provides a way to distinguish between the proposed
deformation models. The block rotation model requires a series of northeast-
oriented, left-lateral faults crossing the lakes. The forearc sliver model
suggests that a major northwest-oriented fault system is aligned with the active
volcanic chain and that extensional basins will develop between right-stepping
offsets in the chain. Thus there should be a significant difference in fault
system orientation and distribution depending on the mode of
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to testing deformation models
related to oblique subduction, the longer term geologic history of the Nicaragua
depression is also being investigated. Some models suggest that the depression
formed largely in Plio-Pleistocene times (approximately 0 to 6 million years
ago) by arc-normal extension associated with slab rollback. However, if the
forearc sliver model applies here, then basin development at right-step-overs
along the strike slip system may also be an important and ongoing factor in
forming the Nicaragua depression. Data is being acquired near both the northeast
and southwest margins of the lakes to investigate the presence and orientation
of basin-forming normal faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is helping
with seismic hazard mitigation. Faults in and around the lakes pose a major
seismic hazard for the populated areas of the Nicaragua depression; the capital
city and economic hub of Managua has been completely destroyed twice in the last
70 years by earthquakes and has a rapidly growing, present-day population of
over one million inhabitants. This project better defines locations of active
faulting and thus helps guide seismic hazard mitigation efforts.