* 0440665
* IN COLD PURSUIT (working title)--A Science-based Mystery Novel Set in the Antarctic
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Sarah Andrews, Andrews Sarah
* Standard Grant
* Winifred Reuning
* 03/31/2006
* USD 1.00

The author, Sarah Andrews, will interact with NSF-funded earth science
investigators in Antarctica to collect material for a mystery novel, In Cold
Pursuit, that will incorporate Antarctica and Antarctic research into a novel in
her Em Hansen forensic geology mystery series. The purpose of In Cold Pursuit is
to bring the value of Antarctic research to the public in an easily understood,
appealing, and compelling form appropriate for adult and young adult (ages 12
and up) readers. In Cold Pursuit will highlight current U.S. antarctic
geological research. Because geographic and scientific exploration is
Antarctica's cultural heritage, the plot will have a fictional forensic
geologist come to Antarctica as part of a forensic team that is investigating
the fate of a fictional explorer. Once there, her inquiring mind and scientific
bent will carry the reader into a scientist's-eye-view of life and research on
the ice continent. Sarah Andrews has published nine novels in the Em Hansen
forensic geology series with a major New York publisher and has three decades of
achievement as a geologist, teacher, and writer. In researching the Em Hansen
novels, she works collaboratively with her geological colleagues, thereby
presenting not only current scientific knowledge but also comprehension of the
benefits provided by earth science professionals to our culture. She increases
the impact, outreach, and integration of her work with a website
(www.sarahandrews.net) and talks to the lay public and her scientific
colleagues, thus building a bridge between science and its beneficiaries. The
broader impacts of the proposed work will be a better-educated, wiser public
with a growing interest in U.S. polar research, role-model support for women in
the geosciences, and a work of literature that will provide Geoscience education
for readers.