* 0440525
* Track 2, GK-12 at Baylor College of Medicine
* EHR,DGE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2011
* Nancy Moreno, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 03/31/2011
* USD 911,170.00

Baylor College of Medicine, in partnership with the Houston Independent School
District (HSID), builds on a three-year GK-12 project aimed at improving high
school life science education. Program accomplishments to date include student
and teacher content knowledge gains, and improved student attitudes toward
science. In addition, the partnership has led to greater awareness by Baylor
research faculty and students of the importance of K-12 science education, the
permanent establishment of a Biosciences Resource Lab at Baylor for K-12
educational activities, and successful funding of four new initiatives that link
scientists-in-training at Baylor directly to Houston schools, teachers and
students.

The Track Two project will: continue to select four Fellow-Teacher Teams per
year; develop GK-12 Fellows' communications and teaching skills; provide teacher
professional development through partnerships with GK-12 Fellows (four teachers
per year) and an annual professional development series (24 teachers per year);
sustain the Baylor-HISD GK-12 partnership beyond the period of NSF-support
through refinement of the partnership model, and phased-in institutional
commitments; and disseminate resources developed by GK-12 Fellows and Partner
Teachers on an existing biology teaching website.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT. By focusing on a single content area (biology) and grade-
level range (9-12) within a large urban school district, Baylor's GK-12 program
has been able to make progress in improving teacher knowledge and instructional
experiences for students. The program also has contributed to the development of
graduate student scientists as educators without affecting the quality of their
research or their times to graduation. Track Two support will allow further
refinement and evaluation of this model. Both Baylor and HISD have made formal
commitments to sustain the project to continue to support and improve biology
education for the more than 40,000 students enrolled in HISD high schools.

BROADER IMPLICATIONS. The GK-12 activities focus on schools with high
enrollments of students underrepresented in STEM careers. In addition, schools
in Texas are updating their curricula to align with new state assessments and to
meet requirements that all high school students pass biology for graduation.
GK-12 Fellows are assisting by contributing up-to-date and in-depth science
knowledge, in addition to serving as professional role models for students. The
dissemination of project-generated resources, including streaming video
presentations, downloadable PDF files and annotated slide sets, on a state-of-
the-art biology teaching website, BioEd Online (www.bioedonline.org), will
expand the scope of the project nationally.