* 0440396
* Imaging the Northern Costa Rica Subducted Slab With Broadband Receiver Functions
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2007
* Susan Schwartz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2007
* USD 63,145.00

This award supports investigation of the hydration state of subducted
lithosphere at the Costa Rica convergent margin. Previous studies have suggested
above average slab hydration in this region, which implies anomalous dehydration
at depth. This is important because slab dehydration plays a critical role in
producing arc lavas and in generating intermediate depth earthquakes within the
downgoing slab. Slab dehydration at shallower depth may also be important in
influencing seismogenic behavior along the plate interface. Metamorphic
dehydration reactions in oceanic crust have been implicated in the
serpentinization of the forearc mantle wedge and the termination of interplate
earthquakes in some subduction zones. The Costa Rica Seismogenic Zone Experiment
imaged a distinct pattern of geodetic locking and microseismicity along the
plate boundary in northern Costa Rica. The onset of interplate microseismicity
occurs down-dip of the region of geodetic locking, coincident with thermal
models of the 200-250 degrees Centigrade isotherms. This has been interpreted as
a down-dip weakening of the plate interface due to fluid production from low-
grade metamorphic reactions in basaltic crust coupled with a decrease in
permeability around 250 degrees Centigrade producing elevated pore pressure and
sufficient weakening of the thrust interface to permit earthquake failure. The
implication of slab dehydration in the initiation of interplate earthquakes has
thus increased the importance of determining the state of hydration of
subducting lithosphere. P-to-S converted seismic phases, generated at the crust-
mantle (Moho) interface of the subducting Cocos slab, recorded by the Costa Rica
Seismogenic Zone Experiment broadband seismometers positioned directly above the
slab are being analyzed. Teleseismic converted phases provide a direct method to
image the structure of the subducted slab, and are being used to determine
velocity structure across the oceanic Moho and relating it to the extent of
oceanic crustal hydration. In addition, the velocity structure in the vicinity
of the plate boundary is being investigated and related to the onset of
seismicity and the inferred weakening of the plate interface. The possible role
of a large normal fault outer rise earthquake in hydrating the oceanic crust
near the Nicoya Peninsula is being assessed. This work is enhancing the
understanding of the velocity structure of the subducting lithosphere and plate
interface and its material properties.