* 0440051
* US-Germany Workshop Towards an International Research Partnership Program on Human-Automation Interaction in the Life Sciences
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Mo-Yuen Chow, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2005
* USD 58,699.00

0440051 Kaber

This award is for a planning grant to support the development of a large
"international research partnership program" between the University of Rostock
and North Carolina State University (NCSU). The grant is intended to fund the
efforts of NCSU faculty, collaborating with Rostock researchers, in: (1)
identifying unique research directions in bioengineering and bioinformatics
through a focused workshop on human-interaction with life sciences automation;
(2) developing white papers on specific research directions, including the
application of advanced robotics to microarray research processes, development
of decision-support tools for biochemist planning and execution of complex
biocatalysis and microarray experiments, and the development of data-mining and
scientific data visualization tools for extraction of results from large
biological databases; and (3) writing a successful "partnership program" grant
by integrating the content of the white papers and describing unique
international undergraduate and graduate training and exchange programs.

NCSU faculty (form the Departments of Computer Science, Chemical Engineering,
Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Industrial Engineering), collaborating
in the development of a new lab for studies of Human- Interaction in the Life
Sciences Automation (HILSA), will work with researchers at the University of
Rostock's Center for Life Sciences Automation (CELISCA) in planning and
preparing the workshop. The activities are to include: (1) keynote presentations
by Rostock researchers; (2) research seminars by NCSU faculty; (3) workshop
breakout sessions for focused discussions on topics to be addressed as part of
the large "partnership program" proposal; (4) tours of institutes and labs at
the University of Rostock supporting bioengineering research efforts; (5) a
visit to a German biotechnology company focused on microarray research; and (6)
a graduate student research poster session.

The workshop activities are expected to result in: (1) a mutual understanding of
the research interests and capabilities of the two universities; (2) a
collection of white papers resulting from the Workshop breakout sessions; and
(3) a CD-ROM of student research poster presentations. This material is to be
used to develop the "partnership program" proposal. The results of the HILSA
Workshop will also be presented to the NSF as part of a progress briefing during
late Fall 2005.

The partnership proposal that this workshop will lead to will structure a set of
integrated research projects at NCSU, which will be complementary to a
collection of life sciences automation projects at Rostock. In general, the
projects will focus on: high-throughput biochemical screening processes;
advanced robotics for screening processes; remote control of screening processes
for promoting distributed access; middleware and sensor technologies for
monitoring screening processes; and human-machine interface design for
biochemist control of advanced automation. A supporting student program will
include international undergraduate research training and exchange programs and
an international graduate school involving NCSU and Rostock faculty in joint
direction of doctoral student research across institutions.