* 0440427
* Holocene Seismicity of the Northern San Andreas Fault Based on Precise Dating of the Turbidite Event Record
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2008
* Chris Goldfinger, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2008
* USD 168,787.00

The Northern San Andreas Fault last ruptured in the great 1906 earthquake that
destroyed San Francisco. Efforts on land to determine the frequency of such
earthquake and their magnitudes and rupture lengths have been hampered by few
suitable localities where a geologic record has been created. Offshore, new core
data show that continental margin channels in Northern California have recorded
a Holocene history of regional submarine landslides possibly triggered by San
Andreas great earthquakes. This project is applying marine paleoseismologic
techniques to the turbidite history along the Northern San Andreas transform
margin using cores collected in 2002 during a cruise of the Scripps vessel R/V
Roger Revelle.

The goals of this project are to test models of full margin and segmented
rupture along the North Coast segment of the San Andreas Fault. A Holocene event
chronology along the margin from San Francisco to Cape Mendocino is being
established using offshore turbidites and turbidite events are being tested for
synchronous (and therefore earthquake) triggering. The methods include direct
dating of each turbidite, biostratigraphy, and direct physical property
correlation using density, magnetics, mineralogy and visible and X-ray imagery
to construct a stratigraphic framework along the margin.

Correlation of events between separate sites along the fault using radiocarbon,
and fingerprints of each event are being used to test the linkages between
deposits along the fault. Direct linkages point to an earthquake origin, since
other triggers of submarine landslides happen in only one canyon at a time.
Using this information, it may be possible to establish both rupture length and
timing of past earthquakes along the Northern San Andreas. This information will
be valuable for analysis of seismic hazards in San Francisco, as well as shed
light on the long-term behavior of large fault systems that does not presently
exist.