* 0440604
* Fourth Bianual Workshop on Opportunities in Materials Theory, October 25-27. 2004,  Arlington, VA.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Amy Liu, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/2005
* USD 32,000.00

This grant supports the fourth biannual Workshop on Opportunities in Materials
Theory to be held on October 25-27, 2004, at the National Science Foundation in
Arlington, VA, and at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. The workshop
will focus on scientific areas that present an opportunity for new and continued
theoretical and computational research using a wide range of tools and
approaches. The workshop will highlight areas identified by the materials theory
community as having high potential for significant progress and impact. The
topical areas will cover the breadth of materials theory including condensed
matter theory, theoretical materials science and theoretical solid-state
chemistry. A session on NSF funding opportunities and proposal writing and
evaluation will also be held.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the workshop is
on young investigators and travel stipends will be provided to assist pre-tenure
faculty and postdoctoral associates in attending. As part of the workshop, there
will be a public lecture at Georgetown University to convey to the general
public the excitement in this field.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports
the fourth biannual Workshop on Opportunities in Materials Theory to be held on
October 25-27, 2004, at the National Science Foundation in Arlington, VA, and at
Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. The workshop will focus on scientific
areas that present an opportunity for new and continued theoretical and
computational research using a wide range of tools and approaches. The workshop
will highlight areas identified by the materials theory community as having high
potential for significant progress and impact. The topical areas will cover the
breadth of materials theory including condensed matter theory, theoretical
materials science and theoretical solid-state chemistry. A session on NSF
funding opportunities and proposal writing and evaluation will also be
held.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the workshop is on young investigators
and travel stipends will be provided to assist pre-tenure faculty and
postdoctoral associates in attending. As part of the workshop, there will be a
public lecture at Georgetown University to convey to the general public the
excitement in this field.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;