* 0440936
* Collaborative Research: The Boston University/Lowell Observatory Partnership - Bringing the Perkins Telescope into the 21st Century
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Dan Clemens, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey R. Pier
* 12/31/2008
* USD 194,051.00

Proposal: AST-0440936&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Kenneth
Janes&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Boston University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative
Research: The Boston University/Lowell Observatory Partnership - Bringing the
Perkins Telescope into the 21st
Century&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five years ago,
Boston University and Lowell Observatory joined in a partnership to operate
the1.83-meter Perkins telescope on Anderson Mesa outside Flagstaff, Arizona.
Much of the efforts over the ensuing period were directed toward the development
of a new generation of instrumentation for the telescope: PRISM, a wide-field
optical imager, polarimeter and spectrometer went into operation in November
2003. Mimir, a wide-field 1 - 5 micron imager, polarimeter and spectrometer and
the White Spectrograph, a moderate-resolution optical spectrograph, will achieve
first light by early fall of 2004. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the current
program is to continue the modernization of the Perkins Telescope, with a few
key improvements, thus creating effective resources in support of the scientific
and educational missions of the two partnering institutions and to the
astronomical community via a program of competitive community access to the
telescope. These efforts will improve the image quality of the Perkins
telescope, make some key productivity enhancements and for educational
innovations. Specifically, the new development program includes ventilation of
the control room, telescope and dome, telescope and dome insulation, telescope
safeguards, student travel, a graduate-student-in-residence program, a real-time
cloud monitor and instrument upgrades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The new instrumentation now going into operation at the Perkins will provide the
Lowell/Boston University partnership with an important niche in "observation
space," not readily available elsewhere, including wide-field polarimetry,
imaging and multi-object low-resolution spectroscopic capability across the
spectrum from the near UV to the near IR. This will position the telescope well
for surveys and synoptic studies, ranging from tracking Kuiper-belt objects, to
following stellar activity in old open cluster stars, to mapping the galactic
magnetic field, to monitoring polarization variations in
blazars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Boston University has a rigorous
graduate program and one of the largest undergraduate programs in the country
and Lowell Observatory has an extensive outreach program. The next generation of
students that pass through the Boston University and Lowell Observatory programs
will be enriched in their understanding and appreciation of the way astronomical
observations are done. Astronomically, ongoing surveys and synoptic programs
will provide scientific support for projects on larger telescopes and
spacecraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being funded jointly by the
Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;