* 0440208
* Three-Dimensional Modeling of Continental Subduction and the Evolution of Ultra High Pressure Metamorphism
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Peter Koons, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2007
* USD 159,503.00

This project investigates driving forces and material behavior associated with
continental subduction and ultra high-pressure metamorphism through an
integration of numerical modeling of continental subduction and
structural/petrological evolution of the material caught in the collision. The
natural ultra high-pressure and high-pressure assemblages of the Western Gneiss
of Norway provide rheological, geometric and geochronological information for
the modeling, while the active obliquely convergent plate boundary of central
New Zealand serves as a modern analog of a collision-subduction transition.
Continental subduction zones represent regions where the crust-mantle
interaction changes from nearly horizontal to dominantly vertical, accentuating
the competing influences of body and viscous forces in the evolution of
continents. Consequently, these zones contain a wealth of information on the
basic driving forces and material behavior that control continental tectonics.
The ultra high-pressure nappes of western Norway represent one of the few
terrains that have traversed the viscera of continental subduction and escaped
complete mineralogical overprinting and structural dismemberment of later
events. Consequently, they can provide fundamental information on depth and
temperature attained during collision, transient rheological behavior of crustal
material where the motion in the mantle is transmitted to the crust, and on the
spatial trajectories of material through a collisional orogen. These features
identify the basic constraints required for coherent mechanical modeling of the
collisional process.

The geodynamic models of oblique convergence, conditioned by these observations,
provide orogen-wide velocity and strain rates and identify the characteristic
length scales of strain partitioning within oblique subduction. Kinematic
descriptions at a scale that overlap with field structural observations are
being developed that relate the large scale dynamic model to observations made
at the level of an outcrop. The research group is integrating these data sets
into a three-dimensional dynamic and kinematic model of continental subduction
capable of describing particle histories as a function of mechanical,
metamorphic and thermal evolution. Because the researchers solve simultaneously
for thermal as well as material flow patterns, pressure- temperature and time
history of material throughout the subduction process can be tracked. This will
provide model particle histories for comparison with the natural petrology.