* 0440304
* Radar Studies of  Internal Stratigraphy and Bed Topography along the US ITASE-II Traverse
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Robert Jacobel, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 09/30/2010
* USD 408,278.00

This award supports a project to perform ice radar studies of bedrock topography
and internal layers along the second US ITASE traverse corridor extending from
Taylor Dome to South Pole on the inland side of the Transantarctic Mountains.
The radar will provide information immediately available in the field on ice
thickness and internal layer structure to help in the selection of core sites as
the traverse proceeds. These data will also be useful in locating additional
radar and surface studies to characterize the drainage divides between major
outlet glaciers flowing through the mountains and possible changes in them
through time. Information from the radar on bed roughness and basal
reflectivity, together with images of internal layer deformation will enable us
to study changes in the character of ice flow as tributaries merge to trunk flow
and velocities increase. Areas where wind scour and sublimation have brought old
ice close to the surface will be investigated. Based on our results from the
first ITASE traverse, it is also likely that there will be findings of
opportunity, phenomena we have not anticipated that are revealed by the radar as
the result of a discovery-based traverse. The interdisciplinary science goals of
US ITASE are designed to accommodate a variety of interactive research programs
and data collected are available to a broad scientific community. US ITASE also
supports an extensive program of public outreach and the education and training
of future scientists will be central to all activities of this proposal. St.
Olaf College is an undergraduate liberal arts institution that emphasizes
student participation in scientific research. This award supports two
undergraduate students as well as a research associate and a graduate student
who will be part of the US ITASE field team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;