* 0440050
* Deformation, Fluid Generation, and Seismogenesis in a Transitional Subduction Environment, the Marlborough Region, New Zealand, Revealed with a Magnetotelluric Resistivity Transect
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Philip Wannamaker, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2010
* USD 394,164.00

Intellectual Merit of Research. - The Marlborough strike slip fault system of
New Zealand clearly exemplifies the transition in plate convergence from near
decoupling between upper and lower plates in true subduction (northern North
Island), to essentially complete coupling between the plates with near-
continuous thickening of the crust and upper mantle and no subduction (central
South Island). In Marlborough, four major dextral fault zones at a low angle to
the present Australian-Pacific plate convergence direction accommodate most of
the component of motion parallel to the plate boundary. A magnetotelluric (MT)
geophysical transect of the region is to be carried out to clarify controls on
internal physical state of strike slip fault zones, and fill a gap in
understanding of transpressional orogens between uncoupled and fully coupled
situations. Basic questions to be addressed include: 1) How much are seismogenic
faults fluidized, which may influence stress buildup?, 2) Is the fluid state of
fault zones a function of cumulative displacement or degree of activity?, 3) Do
major fault zones acquire their fluids locally, or from the lower crust?, 4)
What are the physical conditions in the crust as major strike slip faults
initiate?, 5) What enables coupling between subducting and overriding plates to
develop?, 6) Is the subduction interface sharp, or is there a broad zone of
diffuse deformation?, 7) If fluids help control rheology near the subduction
interface, what is their origin?, and 8) Do slab dehydration reactions
contribute to seismicity of the downgoing slab?&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the
Research. - The proposal is a fully cooperative effort between the University of
Utah of the United States and the Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences
(IGNS) of New Zealand in research into an important solid earth problem. Support
for a female graduate student is made available for education into state of the
art geophysical instrumentation, parameters of field survey design, practical
logistical matters in overseas settings, modern methods of inversion, and the
relationship between electrical resistivity and physico-chemical state in the
Earth. The utility of off-the-shelf commercial geophysical instrumentation for
specialized solid earth studies is tested and the project raises the profile of
electrical methods, an underutilized field, in solid earth science. Additional
societal benefits include broader understanding of the controls on fault
strength and ability to build up damaging stresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;