* 0440954
* Collaborative Research:  Reconstructing the High Latitude Permian-Triassic: Life, Landscapes, and Climate Recorded in the Allan Hills, South Victoria Land, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Molly Miller, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 06/30/2010
* USD 112,254.00

This project studies fossils from two to three hundred million year old rocks in
the Allan Hills area of Antarctica. Similar deposits from lower latitudes have
been used to develop a model of Permo-Triassic climate, wherein melting of
continental glaciers in the early Permian leads to the establishment of forests
in a cold, wet climate. Conditions became warmer and dryer by the early
Triassic, inhibiting plant growth until a moistening climate in the late
Triassic allowed plant to flourish once again. This project will test and refine
this model and investigate the general effects of climate change on landscapes
and ecosystems using the unique exposures and well-preserved fossil and sediment
records in the Allan Hills area. The area will be searched for fossil forests,
vertebrate tracks and burrows, arthropod trackways, and subaqueously produced
biogenic structures, which have been found in other areas of Antarctica. Finds
will be integrated with previous paleobiologic studies to reconstruct and
interpret ecosystems and their changes. Structures and rock types documenting
the end phases of continental glaciation and other major episodic sedimentations
will also be described and interpreted. This project contributes to
understanding the: (1) evolution of terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems and
how they were affected by the end-Permian extinction, (2) abundance and
diversity of terrestrial and aquatic arthropods at high latitudes, (3)
paleogeographic distribution and evolution of vertebrates and invertebrates as
recorded by trace and body fossils; and (3) response of landscapes to changes in
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this project will
provide an outstanding introduction to field research for graduate and
undergraduate students, and generate related opportunities for several
undergraduates. It will also stimulate exchange of ideas among research and
primarily undergraduate institutions. Novel outreach activities are also planned
to convey Earth history to the general public, including a short film on the
research process and products, and paintings by a professional scientific
illustrator of Permo-Traissic landscapes and ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;