* 0440687
* Habitat Utilization of Southern Ocean Seals: Foraging Behavior of Crabeater and Elephant Seals Using Novel Methods of Oceanographic Data Collection
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2010
* Daniel Crocker, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 08/31/2010
* USD 900,549.00

As long-lived animals, marine mammals must be capable of accommodating broad
variations in food resources over large spatial and temporal scales. While this
is true of all marine mammals, variation in the physical and biological
environmental is particularly profound in the Southern Ocean. A basic
understanding of the foraging behavior and habitat utilization of pelagic
predators requires knowledge of this spatial and temporal variation, coupled
with information of how they respond to these changes. Current understanding of
these associations is primarily limited to population level studies where animal
abundance has been correlated with oceanography. Although these studies are
informative, they cannot provide insights into the strategies employed by
individual animals nor can they provide insights into the spatial or temporal
course of these interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent technological
advances in instrumentation make it possible to extend an understanding beyond
the simple linkage of prey and predator distributions with environmental
features. The key to understanding the processes that lead to high predator
abundance is the identification of the specific foraging behaviors associated
with different features of the water column. This study will accomplish these
objectives by combining accurate positional data, measures of diving and
foraging behavior, animal-derived water-column temperature and salinity data,
and available oceanographic data. This project will examine the foraging
behavior and habitat utilization of two species of contrasting foraging ecology,
the southern elephant seal, Mirounga leonina, and the crabeater seal, Lobodon
carcinophagus in the Western Antarctic Peninsula, a region of strong
environmental gradients. Although these two species are phylogenetically
related, they utilize substantially different but adjacent habitat types.
Southern elephant seals are predominantly pelagic, moving throughout the
southern ocean, venturing occasionally into the seasonal pack ice whereas
crabeater seals range throughout the seasonal pack ice, venturing occasionally
into open water. The relationship of specific foraging behaviors and animal
movement patterns to oceanographic and bathymetric features develop and test
models of the importance of these features in defining habitat use will be
determined along with a comparison of how individuals of each species respond to
annual variability in the marine environment. The physical oceanography of the
Southern Ocean is inherently complex as are the biological processes that are
intrinsically linked to oceanographic processes. Significant resources are
currently being directed toward developing mathematical models of physical
oceanographic processes with the goals of better understanding the role that the
Southern Ocean plays in global climate processes, predicting the responses of
ocean and global scale processes to climate change, and understanding the
linkages between physical and biological oceanographic processes. These efforts
have been limited by the scarcity of oceanographic data in the region,
especially at high latitudes in the winter months. This study will provide new
and significant oceanographic data on temperature and salinity profiles in to
further the understanding of the dynamics of the upper water column of west
Antarctic Peninsula continental shelf waters. Outreach activities include
website development and an association with a marine education program at the
Monterrey Bay Aquarium Research Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;