* 0440557
* Track 1, GK-12: Greater Orlando GK-12 Partnership
* EDU,DGE
* 03/15/2005,06/30/2009
* David Hagan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,510,000.00

The Greater Orlando GK-12 program is a partnership between the University of
Central Florida (UCF), the Orlando Science Center (OSC) and Orange County Public
Schools (OCPS) aimed at strengthening curriculum content and teacher knowledge
in 9th grade science education. The program teams 9 graduate fellows and 3
undergraduate fellows from STEM programs at the University of Central Florida
with 12 teachers from Orange County Public Schools. The GO-GK-12 Partnership
builds upon many independently existing relationships between the various
partners, and addresses the strategic needs for science education in the school
system. The program focuses on assisting Orange County teachers with their 9th
grade integrated science curriculum. OCPS is the 14th largest school district in
the country serving 154,485 students in 151 schools. 52% of these students are
members of underrepresented minority groups in science. An ultimate goal is to
develop financial models for sustaining the GO-GK-12 Partnership so that GK-12
fellowships become an integral part of STEM graduate programs at UCF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this program are: Strong
emphasis on pedagogical training of the GK-12 fellows prior to entering the
classroom; Planned matching of fellows and teachers and comprehensive
interactive training and planning workshops; Use of the GK-12 fellows to
introduce teachers to the Orlando Science Center's Science Suitcase equipment
loaner program; A thorough and independent evaluation and assessment component;
A focus on the science education needs of the school
district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this program are: Creation
of cohorts of outstanding STEM Doctoral and Bachelors graduates with strong
communication skills and an intimate knowledge of issues facing K-12 science
education; Strengthened and lasting partnerships between UCF's STEM faculty and
local K-12 teachers and schools; Sustained improvement in the teaching of 9th
grade science in the region; Improved student experiences of learning science;
Each year, this program will impact twelve 9th grade science teachers and 2,000
9th grade students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;