* 0440847
* Detection of Crystal Orientation Fabrics near the Ross/Amundsen Sea Ice-flow Divide and at the Siple Dome Ice Core Site using Polarimetric Radar Methods
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2011
* Kenichi Matsuoka, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2011
* USD 442,908.00

This award supports a project to investigate fabrics with ground-based radar
measurements near the Ross/Amundsen Sea ice-flow divide where a deep ice core
will be drilled. The alignment of crystals in ice (crystal-orientation fabric)
has an important effect on ice deformation. As ice deforms, anisotropic fabrics
are produced, which, in turn, influence further deformation. Measurement of ice
fabric variations can help reveal the deformation history of the ice and
indicate how the ice will deform in the future. Ice cores provide opportunities
to determine a vertical fabric profile, but horizontal variations of fabrics
remain unknown. Remote sensing with ice-penetrating radar is the only way to do
that over large areas. Preliminary results show that well-established
polarimetric methods can detect the degree of horizontal anisotropy of fabrics
and their orientation, even when they are nearly vertical-symmetric fabrics. In
conjunction with ice deformation history, our first mapping of ice fabrics will
contribute to modeling ice flow near the future ice core site. The project will
train a graduate student and provide research experiences for two under graduate
students both in field and laboratory. The project will contribute to ongoing
West Antarctic ice sheet program efforts to better understand the impact of the
ice sheet on global sea level rise. This project also supports an international
collaboration between US and Japanese scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;