* 0440021
* Workshop on Cognitive Work Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Jens-Erik Mai, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2005
* USD 24,007.00

Cognitive Work Analysis (CWA) approaches computer-based work in socio-technical
systems by focusing on the analysis of cognitive work within a holistic
framework in order to develop system requirements. Its unique contribution to
human-centered design is its ability to address the complexity and the dynamic
nature of the workplace. As a result, CWA facilitates flexibility in problem
solving in this ever-changing environment. CWA is one of the few conceptual
frameworks that provide researchers with a way to study both task and context
simultaneously, and affords a mechanism for transfering results from an in-depth
analysis of human-information interaction directly to design requirements. This
workshop, to be organized by the Center for Human-Information Interaction at the
Information School of the University of Washington in November of 2004, with
participants from both industry and academe, will focus on issues relating to
research work using CWA and to training and education in this area. Ten
participants from various disciplines, including psychology, information
retrieval, knowledge representation, human-computer interaction, control and
simulation, industrial design, mechanical engineering, and human factors
engineering, will be invited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: For the
first time, researchers and practitioners from around the globe will be able to
come together and discuss CWA and computer-based technology design, not as a
subsystem of Cognitive Systems Engineering, but as a research focus well able to
stand on its own and offering its own unique insights and benefits. The workshop
will be advertised among other CWA experts, who will be welcome to register at
no charge; the organizers thus expect a total of approximately 40 participants
in all. Summaries of the results of working groups, as well as other materials,
will be made available on the workshop's website. In addition, the workshop will
begin to establish an international network of researchers and practitioners who
employ CWA in their daily work.