* 0440360
* Collaborative Research: Flood Basalt Magma Genesis and Dynamics: Application of Crystal Isotope Stratigraphy and Igneous Componentry to the Columbia River Basalt Group
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,04/30/2005
* Frank Ramos, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2005
* USD 36,241.00

Continental flood basalts are the products of events in which very large volumes
of magma (105 - 107 km3) are erupted in geologically short periods of time (=106
years). Although there is widespread agreement that rising deep-rooted mantle
plumes provide the heat source for such intense volcanism, other mantle and
crustal rocks may melt under the thermal impact of the plume to contribute some,
perhaps most, of the total erupted mass of flood basalt. Assessing the relative
contributions of magma from these different sources to continental flood basalt
lavas is a long-standing problem. This project will apply modern approaches of
small-scale sampling, targeting key geochemical tracers (chiefly isotope ratios)
within and between single crystals and basalt matrix, to the Columbia River
flood basalts. Because this approach is based on rock textures that grow
sequentially, this research will enable reconstruction of how and in what order
the magmas were assembled from different sources. In addition, residence times
of crystals in their host magmas can be obtained by diffusion modeling of
spatial variations in isotope abundance ratios in crystals, allowing constraints
to be placed on the durations of individual eruptions, which is an important
parameter in assessing the potential these events have for global climate and
ecological disruption. Over the next few years, the techniques to be employed
will enter the mainstream of geochemical investigations into volcanism, and
training research students to meet this need is a further benefit of the
project.