* 0440576
* Track 2, GK-12: Let's Explore Applied Physical Science (LEAPS)
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2005,04/30/2013
* S. James Allen, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2013
* USD 1,991,000.00

The "Let's Explore Applied Physical Science" (LEAPS) program will build on the
successful GK-12 model established at UCSB in 2002. LEAPS graduate and
undergraduate science and engineering Fellows will work in interdisciplinary
teams with science and math teachers at 3 local junior high/middle schools to
deliver discovery-oriented instruction in Physical Science. In addition to
classroom innovations, LEAPS will organize after-school science clubs and
science fair project mentorship by Fellows and volunteer graduate students and
will participate in an "Ask-a-Scientist" internet project. LEAPS Family Science
Nights at each school will engage parents in discussion of Fellow and student
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The LEAPS program will
create a community of research scientists and engineers who have expertise in
effective teaching of inquiry-based instruction, supportive mentorship, and
accessible communication of science and technology to the general public. LEAPS
will enrich K-12 student science experiences through individualized engagement
in scientific inquiry and mentorship by Fellows. LEAPS will explore the capacity
of university researchers to become effective role models for Junior High School
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: LEAPS teachers will gain new
resources for classroom activities; help with mentoring science fair projects,
and mechanisms for engaging parents. LEAPS will partner with 3 local schools
with sizable Latino populations to deliver innovative science instruction to 8th
grade students. In California, grade 8 Science is the last science course that
all students must take, and therefore has great importance on their college
tracking path. Thus, mentorship and role modeling for students is an essential
focus of this project. Institutionalization efforts will increase faculty
participation, develop community, industrial and university support, and
cultivate an expanded network of UCSB volunteers. LEAPS will create a new
course, "Science for the Public: Communication and Mentoring", which will engage
the greater UCSB community in seminars on public perceptions of science and
scientists, and in mentoring field-work in K-12 schools. Evaluation will focus
on long-term tracking of student attitudes towards science and on measures of
student performance. Participants will provide feedback on their LEAPS
experience and how it shapes their educational and career progress. Program
impacts and evaluation findings will be disseminated by LEAPS Fellows, Teachers,
Evaluator and PI's through campus newsletters, local media, a LEAPS seminar
series at UCSB, presentations at professional education and science conferences,
and publications in science education journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;