* 0440533
* High Resolution  Radar  Profiling of Firn Stratigraphy in East Antarctia: The ITASE II Traverse from Victoria Land to South Pole Station
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Steven Arcone, Department of Army Cold Regions Research & Engineering Lab
* Interagency Agreement
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 178,818.00

This award supports the acquisition of high resolution ground-penetrating radar
(GPR) profiles as part of the ITASE-2 traverse, along a route in East Antarctica
from Victoria Land to South Pole Station. The project will collect profiles of
the firn stratigraphy to aid in the selection of coring sites, measure spatially
averaged snow accumulation rates and determine the ice dynamics that cause the
stratigraphy. The radar profiles from the GPR work will be correlated with ice
core stratigraphy and GPS data obtained by others as part of the traverse. GPR
will also be used for crevasse detection and traverse route safety but this is
considered routine, based on experience from prior work.. The major GPR findings
in stratigraphic dynamics from ITASE I are: 1) most 400-MHz horizons are
separate and distinct wavelets that extend over 500 km; 2) horizons appear to be
caused by the density contrasts across clusters of thin, double-layers of hoar
and ice; and 3) the folding can be caused by differential accumulation processes
and the interaction between differential wavelength and ice speed, all tempered
by radar velocity pulldown. effects. This proposal is based on the hypothesis
that the same processes that generate and fold reflection horizons in the
relatively greater and warmer accumulation zone of West Antarctica, are also at
work in the relatively lesser and far colder accumulation zone of East
Antarctica, and will be detected despite the fact that the accumulation rates,
in cm of firn at any density, are far less than the vertical resolution of the
radar. The major objectives of this project are to test this hypothesis by
searching for thin layer signatures, and evidence of folding caused by
differential accumulation dynamics. Evidence will also be sought of tectonic
folding, most likely caused by convergence within feeder areas for the glaciers
of the Transantarctic Mountains, and of the small scale continuity of horizons.
For each of the two field years, the funding will also support a student for 4
months, minor equipment purchases, travel, editing, publications and supplies.
The student will be a temporary employee of USA CRREL to support him or her
during the summer months.