* 0440560
* (Track 2, GK-12) Sustaining the Maine ScienceCorps:  Collaborative Integration of Research Experiences and Active Learning into Biosciences Education
* EHR,DGE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2013
* Ah-Kau Ng, University of Southern Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2013
* USD 1,823,660.00

The Maine ScienceCorps connects science teachers and students at rural high
schools with the biosciences research community of the University of Southern
Maine (USM) and the Education Division of the Foundation for Blood Research
(FBR). This Track 2 project seeks to institutionalize and scale up this still
evolving synergistic partnership to foster a sustainable interdisciplinary
learning community that infuses active learning and collaborative research and
inquiry experiences into both pre-college and university bioscience education.
During the final year of Track 1 funding, ten USM Immunology and Molecular
Biology graduate student fellows (8 NSF-, 2 USM-funded) are partnered with
teachers in twelve schools across Maine to bring advanced standards-aligned
bioscience laboratory activities to about one thousand students during the year.
Significant benefits and outcomes with broader impacts have included: (1) Access
in rural schools to molecular biology and immunology lab activities not
previously possible; (2) connection of diverse students in rural schools with
scientific role models; (3) effective development of graduate student.s teaching
and communication skills while increasing their awareness of their potential for
contributions to pre-college science education; and (4) introduction of new
opportunities for motivated teachers and students to collaborate in authentic
research inquiry and in presentation of results at scientific conferences.
Outcomes with intellectual merit (not completely exclusive of those listed
above) have also included: (1) Increased active scientific learning in all
schools but particularly in those that participated in a new pilot research
project collaboration introduced in year three of Track 1 funding; and (2)
design and implementation of a potentially long-term regional interdisciplinary
research project expanding the scope and experience of collaborative scientific
inquiry for all participants.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The constructivist pedagogy and philosophy guiding this
project and its emphasis on active laboratory and inquiry-based learning at all
levels is supported by considerable education research on effective strategies
for reaching diverse students. The approach provides a framework for
collaborative professional development for all participants.

BROADER IMPACTS: The Maine ScienceCorps partnership addresses specific
educational needs of isolated severely under-funded rural schools for access to
laboratory-based inquiry activities and connection with the broader scientific
world. Contributions to bioscience education reform at all levels and to success
in sustained collaboration with two other GK-12 projects at another campus of
the University of Maine System are expected. Establishment of a new Institute
for Collaborative Research Experiences and Active Learning in Science will
provide interdisciplinary infrastructure for sustaining the project while
developing new resources and rewards for faculty engaging in the scholarship of
teaching and learning.

