* 0440156
* Localization of Deformation in Lithologically Heterogeneous Lower Crust, Arunta Block, Central Australia
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Basil Tikoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2009
* USD 315,577.00

Understanding the processes of earthquake rupture and mountain building requires
a quantitative understanding of how the earth responds to applied forces and
boundary conditions. The tectonic plates consist of three primary mechanical
layers: upper crust, lower crust, and upper mantle. The upper crust can be
directly studied using a combination of geological and geophysical tools. The
upper mantle has a relatively simple composition, and thus it is relatively easy
to predict its mechanical behavior based on laboratory deformation experiments.
The most poorly understood part of a tectonic plate, with respect to
deformation, is therefore the lower crust.

Constraining lower crustal rheology is a first-order problem in tectonic
analysis, highlighted by two separate, recent NSF-sponsored workshops. This
problem is the focus of an ongoing study of lower crustal deformation that
exploits the exceptional exposures in the Arunta block of central Australia:
100s of square kilometers of nearly continuous outcrop of rocks that record the
high temperatures typical of the lower crust in active tectonic areas. The
latter include a variety of typical lower crustal rock types, deformed at a
range of depths at pressure and temperature conditions that resulted in
granulite facies metamorphism prior to exhumation.

A major limitation to quantifying deformation in the lower crust is the typical
lack of strain markers. Work to date demonstrates that strain gradients in the
lower crust are recognized by: 1) comparison of length scales of heterogeneities
in areas in which primary structures are preserved with those in which they are
absent; and 2) determination of meso-scale fabric intensity, or degree of
development of foliation and lineation. This approach is allowng high strain
zones to be delineated. The latter record strain localization in the lower
crust, similar to more widely recognized shear zones in the middle crust. This
mapping, combined with strain and microstructural analyses, are being used to
determine whether or not a weak mineral or rock type consistently localizes
deformation ('weak element' concept). Deformation mechanisms of major minerals
are being constrained by light and back-scattered electron petrography, electron
back-scattered diffraction analysis of crystal lattice preferred orientations,
and transmission electron microscopy. The range in lower crustal depths exposed
in the Arunta block is allowing an evaluation of this 'weak element' concept to
determine whether it generally characterizes lower crustal deformation or is
applicable only to specific P-T conditions.

This grant is supporting a graduate student and an undergraduate field assistant
for each year of the study. The integration of different approaches allows thee
students to understand how different tools can be used to address a complex
problem, and to participate in the integration of multi-disciplinary data.
Recognizing the potential for this particular research project to unite elements
of the structural geology and tectonics community that do not generally
communicate regularly, this work will be used as a foundation for a workshop or
conference focused on constraints on the rheology of continental lithosphere to
be held in 2007 or 2008.