* 0440215
* A New Design for Manufacturing Process of Porous Resorbable Implant Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Emmanuel Lafond, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 01/31/2005
* USD 63,505.00

The objective of this research is to explore the possibility of manufacturing
resorbable implant material from powder phase via fiber stage to porous
scaffold. The envisioned manufacturing process will consider in particular the
mixture with collagen for extra tensile strength and toughness of implant
materials. The approach is to adapt some of the key manufacturing process in the
paper-making industry for a more efficient and economic production of
biocompatible open cell porous implant materials. The important manufacturing
concepts include both wet and dry end operations as well as an additional
ceramic hydroxyapatite fiber convertion process. In the wet end operation,
hydroxyapatite and collagen fibers will be mixed with chemical additives and
distributed uniformly to a moving wire mat. In the dry end operation, implant
material sheets will be transported through a serious of drying apparatus and
fit into different sized sheets or rolls.

The societal benefits of this proposed research include the potentially feasible
mass production of implant materials with open cell porous microstructures
mimicking the nature. The branching out of the paper manufacturing techniques in
the production of advanced biocompatible implant materials is beneficial not
only to the paper industry per se but also to the emerging bioscience and
bioengineering industrial sectors. The educational impacts include fostering
multi-disciplinary engineering education in the Othmer Interdisciplinary
Research Institute in Polytechnic University, an institute in the Metropolitan
New York area focusing the education of students with different religious and
ethnic backgrounds.