* 0440506
* Track 2: GK-12.  GeoKids LINKS in Philadelphia: Continuing a University, Museum, Elementary School Collaboration in Science
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2005,07/31/2012
* Scott Mc Robert, St Joseph's University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 07/31/2012
* USD 1,689,974.00

This Track 2 proposal builds on successful outcomes from GeoKids LINKS, a
collaboration bringing together faculty and students from Saint Josephs
University and the Wagner Free Institute of Science, a natural science museum.
The partners are collaborating with K-6 schools in the School District of
Philadelphia to develop and implement place-based thematic life science units
that incorporate hands-on activities, stimulate student inquiry and include
considerable reading and writing. Fellows are better communicators, more
knowledgeable about methods of education in general, and about issues facing
urban elementary children and teachers in particular. Elementary students who
had GeoKids improved more over the first year in reading, math, and science,
compared with students in the same schools who did not have GeoKids, based on a
standardized test administered nationwide. Their teachers report that the
students have an increased interest in science and in learning in general, and
children reading far below grade level seem to be especially motivated. Teachers
report increased knowledge of science content and comfort with teaching science.
Four teachers became involved in summer research with GK-12 faculty and Fellows.
Additional intellectual merit of proposed activities includes further
development of the collaboration and the curriculum as a model that works with
underachieving urban children living in poverty. The proposed expansion using
Service Learning students who are also future elementary school teachers, and
the potential for integrating GeoKids curriculum into the curriculum frameworks
of the School District of Philadelphia speak to broader implications. In
addition, documentation of a careful mentoring system for graduate Fellows
through two years of increasing responsibility for teaching and curriculum
development may be an important outcome. There is strong support for building
GeoKids LINKS infrastructure at Saint Joseph's University; 10 of the 34 graduate
Fellowship years and 12 of the 16 undergraduate Fellowships will be funded by
SJU through conversion of Graduate School assistantships. Faculty with Fellows
are supported by the University with summer stipends, and Fellows have access to
funds for research and travel to meetings. GeoKids also qualifies for corporate
donations through a state education improvement tax credit program for which the
Wagner is eligible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is receiving
partial support from the Directorate for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;