* 0440633
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Probing Dynamics in Open Shell Atoms and Molecules using Two Photons Experiments
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2011
* Nora Berrah, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2011
* USD 27,360.00

This three-year award for U.S.-France cooperative research explores the dynamics
of few- and many-body processes in laser-excited atomic and molecular systems.
Norah Berrah of Western Michigan University and a student will travel to France
annually to work with the French team led by Denis Cubaynes, a scientist in
Laboratoire d'Interaction du Rayonnement X Avec La Matiere at the University of
Paris South. Using high-resolution photoelectron spectroscopy and an ion-
managing detector, the investigators propose to carry out photo-excitation and
photo-ionization experiments on atomic metal vapors and molecules. They will use
different photon sources, including a high spectral-resolution monochromatic
photon beam from a third generation radiation source, the Advanced Light Source
at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will increase understanding of
fundamental VUV photon matter interactions. It will offer a gas-phase
perspective on the basic understanding of correlated systems and will set the
stage for future time-resolved studies with Fourth Generation Light Source (Free
Electron Laser) which are underway in Europe and the U.S. For example, time-
resolved studies of Auger processes could be investigated with some of the
proposed ultra fast light sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide research training
to graduate students and advance their careers through new connections to
leading European researchers. By working with the French team, students will
enhance their experimental skills and gain invaluable experience in
international collaboration. The resulting research will also impact other
fields and could be considered as an enabling science for nanostructures and
highly correlated materials.