* 0440643
* Collaborative: Geographic Structure of Adelie Penguin Populations-Demography of Population Change
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2011
* David Ainley, H.T. Harvey & Associates
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 09/30/2011
* USD 701,628.00

This project is an international collaborative investigation of geographic
structuring, founding of new colonies, and population change of Adelie penguins
(Pygoscelis adelia) nesting on Ross and Beaufort islands, Antarctica. The long-
term changes occurring at these colonies are representative of changes
throughout the Ross Sea, where 30% of all Adelie penguins reside, and are in
some way related to changing climate. The recent grounding of two very large
icebergs against Ross and Beaufort islands, with associated increased
variability in sea-ice extent, has provided an unparalleled natural experiment
affecting wild, interannual swings in colony productivity, foraging effort,
philopatry and recruitment. Results of this natural experiment can provide
insights into the demography and geographic population structuring of this
species, having relevance Antarctic-wide in understanding its future responses
to climate change as well as interpreting its amazingly well known Holocene
history. This ongoing study will continue to consider the relative importance of
resources that constrain or enhance colony growth (nesting habitat, access to
food); the aspects of natural history that are affected by exploitative or
interference competition among neighboring colonies (breeding success, foraging
effort); climatic factors that influence the latter, especially sea ice
patterns; and behavioral mechanisms that influence colony growth as a function
of initial size and location (emigration, immigration). An increased effort will
focus on understanding factors that affect over-winter survival. The hypothesis
is that the age structure of Cape Crozier has changed over the past thirty years
and no longer reflects the smaller colonies nearby. Based on recent analyses, it
appears that the Ross Island penguins winter in a narrow band of sea ice north
of the Antarctic Circle (where daylight persists) and south of the southern
boundary of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (where food abounds). More
extensive winter ice takes the penguins north of that boundary where they incur
higher mortality. Thus, where a penguin winters may be due to the timing of its
post-breeding departure (which differs among colonies), which affects where it
first encounters sea ice on which to molt and where it will be transported by
the growing ice field. Foraging effort and interference competition for food
suggested as factors driving the geographic structuring of colonies. The
research includes a census of known-age penguins, studies of foraging effort and
overlap among colonies; and identification of the location of molting and
wintering areas. Information will be related to sea-ice conditions as quantified
by satellite images. Demographic and foraging-effort models will be used to
synthesize results. The iceberg natural experiment is an unparalleled
opportunity to investigate the demographics of a polar seabird and its response
to climate change. The marked, interannual variability in apparent philopatry,
with concrete data being collected on its causes, is a condition rarely
encountered among studies of vertebrates. Broader impacts include collaborating
with New Zealand and Italian researchers, involving high school teachers and
students in the fieldwork and continuing a website to highlight results to both
scientists and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;