* 0440002
* Project Crossover: A Study of the Transition from Student to Scientist
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Robert Tai, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,003,717.00

The purpose of our project is to study the process of training new scientists.
The presumption among many is that this process is well understood. In fact, the
process has remained much the same for the past two centuries. However, our
review of the relevant literature reveals a scarcity of research about the
transition from student to scientist. A particularly critical, yet under-
investigated period is when graduate students enter their advisors' labs to
initially help with research and then eventually to carry out original research
for their dissertation. Up to this time, graduate students are able consumers of
scientific knowledge, with only a rare few who have done original research.
During this period, graduate students must become producers of scientific
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of
this project lies in uncovering the mechanisms of how this transition occurs. We
propose to study the empirical laboratory sciences of chemistry and physics. The
research will address the following questions:&lt;br/&gt;1) Do different faculty
advisors share common approaches to educating their graduate students? Are some
of these approaches more successful than others in fostering scientific
productivity? Are there common characteristics across programs that turn out
more productive scientists?&lt;br/&gt;2) What criteria do faculty advisors use
to determine that their students are prepared to become independent researchers?
Are these criteria common or idiosyncratic within specific labs?&lt;br/&gt;3)
How closely matched are the impressions of advisors and graduate students about
research independence? Do graduate students realize when they have achieved
research independence?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a mixed methodological
approach coupling a qualitative component with a quantitative component. The
qualitative component will include interviews and observations of an array of
scientists and graduate students. The information gained from this qualitative
component will be used to develop a survey to query a national sample of
scientists and graduate students. The statistical models developed from the
survey analysis, will be tested for validity by reviewing to the qualitative
data corpus. The objective of this study is to provide much needed information
about the mechanisms in the training of new scientists during their dissertation
research. Through our pilot study of chemistry and physics doctoral programs, we
have generated several hypotheses that include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A
student's past experience focused on science content knowledge rather than on
creative inquiry in formal school settings detracts from, rather than
facilitates, his or her transition to scientist. Common themes and approaches to
fostering the transition exist for graduate advisors across different
laboratories and institutions. These themes vary in their effectiveness in
training students.&lt;br/&gt;Effective approaches to teaching and learning
scientific research may be identified and connected with scientific
productivity. This connection between education and research may inform the
development of more scientifically productive and educationally effective
research laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project
outcomes are intended to have the following broader impacts: 1) provide detailed
analysis to inform the research training of graduate students in laboratory-
based empirical sciences, 2) provide data on the impact of prior science
education experiences on the learning of scientific research, 3) provide data to
inform policy for mitigating the erosion of US dominance in scientific research,
and 4) improve awareness and access for students interested in becoming
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;