* 0440793
* PROMPT Phase II:     Gamma-Ray Bursts as Probes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Paul Price, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Julian C. Christou
* 08/31/2006
* USD 185,158.00

Proposal: AST-0440793&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Daniel
Reichart&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of North Carolina Chapel
Hill&lt;br/&gt;Title: PROMPT Phase II: Gamma-Ray Bursts as
Probes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROMPT is an
instrument acquisition program that will enable the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill to probe the physics, environments, and diversity of gamma-ray
bursts and use them to probe the early universe in new and powerful ways. At the
same time, PROMPT will be a shared resource between University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill and every undergraduate institution in the state of North Carolina
with an astronomer or with an interest in astronomy, including historically
African-American and Native-American institutions, as well as the astronomy
community as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Observations of
gamma ray bursts and their environments over the past seven years now strongly
indicate that at least the long-duration/soft-spectrum GRBs are the death cries
of massive stars and the birth cries of black holes. Redshifts have been
measured for over thirty of these objects and their implied isotropic-equivalent
luminosities show them to be the biggest bangs since the Big Bang itself,
beating supernovae by six to nine orders of magnitude. Given the potentially
extreme brightness of their optical/near-infrared afterglows in the first
seconds and minutes after the burst, rapid multi-band and spectroscopic
observations of burst afterglows will not only enable astronomers to probe the
physics, environments, and diversity of gamma ray bursts in new and powerful
ways, but are also widely expected to be the next great probe of the early
universe. PROMPT will consist of six, 0.4-meter diameter telescopes on rapidly
slewing mounts that will automatically image gamma ray burst afterglows within
seconds of satellite notification. PROMPT will differ from robotic telescopes
that have been and are now being built to study gamma ray bursts in three ways:
(1) In addition to automatically identifying the afterglow within the satellite-
provided error region and measuring it at optical and near infrared wavelengths,
PROMPT, with seven-band spectral coverage and four cameras, will automatically
estimate the redshift of the burst from Lyman alpha and Lyman-limit dropout and
the extinction curve along the line of sight within minutes of the burst; (2)
PROMPT will measure the polarization history of the early-time afterglow; and
(3) PROMPT will be paired with a large telescope, the 4.1-meter diameter SOAR
telescope at Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory that is uniquely suited to
follow up PROMPT afterglows with optical and NIR spectroscopy on a similarly
rapid timescale: PROMPT will leverage SOAR into a significantly more powerful
facility, potentially the best in the world for probing the early universe with
gamma ray bursts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: In addition to PROMPT
being built and remotely managed primarily by University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill astronomy graduate and undergraduate students, and its GRB science
being carried out primarily by Chapel Hill students, PROMPT will more broadly
impact education through research across North Carolina: Since gamma ray bursts
will require no more than about 50% of PROMPT's time, University of North
Carolina Chapel Hill will share this resource with every undergraduate
institution in the state of North Carolina with an astronomer or with an
interest in astronomy, including three historically minority institutions (about
20% of PROMPT's time), with Chapel Hill's Morehead Planetarium and Science
Center, which is already designing broad-reaching K-12 programs for PROMPT,
funded by a NASA/STScI IDEAS grant (about 10% of PROMPT's time), and through a
peer evaluation process the broader astronomical community (about 10% of
PROMPT's time). The remaining 10% of PROMPT's time will go to non-GRB science at
Chapel Hill. Also, the PI and collaborators will distribute afterglow
astrometry, preliminary photometry, temporal and spectral information, and
approximate redshifts and extinction curves, which PROMPT will compute in real
time, to the broader gamma ray burst community through the Gamma Ray Burst
Coordinates Network on a similarly rapid timescale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is being funded jointly by the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.&lt;br/&gt;