* 0440841
* Interfacial Premelting and Geophysical Implications
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* J. Gregory Dash, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 07/31/2010
* USD 709,627.00

This project is a three-year continuation of a theoretical and experimental
study of the dynamics of liquid water existing at the boundaries of ice crystal
at temperatures below the freezing point of pure water. This process, called
premelting, has significant consequences in the redistributing of brine in sea
ice, the apparent migrating of contaminants through glacier ice, and the rate of
frost heave and weathering in soils and rocks.&lt;br/&gt; Premelting is common
to virtually all types of materials, but has been most extensively studied in
ice. It can be caused by adsorption forces, wetting, size effects, or substrate
disorder, and involves many aspects of surface physics and phase transition
phenomena. The macroscale consequences of these molecular-scale processes
include the relationship between seasonal freezing and the oceanic thermohaline
circulation, and the quantitative interpretations of paleoclimate proxy records.
On the longer climatic time scales, the overall features of recent glacial-
interglacial cycles have been revealed in the Antarctic ice cores, but higher
resolution is required to decipher the mechanisms that drive abrupt climate
changes. The accuracy of any higher resolution paleoclimatic information derived
from ice cores will have to rely on the proper treatment of processes that
affect the trace constituents during their long (100 kyr) residence times in the
ice sheets. Grain-boundary melting is believed to be the primary process
controlling the rate of material transport through the premelted-liquid networks
of veins and nodes that line the grain intersections of glacier ice. Moreover,
the role of grain-boundary melting can further increase the liquid content and
enhance trace-constituent mobility.&lt;br/&gt;The project has three distinct,
but interrelated components. Direct measurements of premelting of grain
boundaries in the presence of different impurities will be made as a function of
temperature and grain mismatch, and experiments on instabilities that are
predicted to occur at the growing sea ice/ocean interface in the presence of a
shear flow will be conducted. Both will be complemented by theoretical
calculations to prove experimental issues and to pursue the implications of
premelting in numerous contexts.&lt;br/&gt;