* 0440088
* Collaborative Research: Measurement of Transport Properties of Silicate Melts with Application to Crustal Anatexis
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Anne Hofmeister, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2008
* USD 66,737.00

Heat and mass transfer within the lithosphere are governed by the transport
properties, thermal conductivity and viscosity. Available data on these physical
properties are inadequate for confident modeling of the evolving thermal
structure of the lithosphere during mountain-building and crustal melting.
Models of lithospheric thermal structure typically assume constant thermal
conductivity, although this property is known to depend strongly on both
temperature and rock composition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
collaborative project will be to produce new data on the viscosity and thermal
conductivity of natural and synthetic silicate melts and chemically equivalent
glasses, minerals, and rocks. In particular, the research activities will be to
provide high-temperature thermal conductivity measurements, and test existing
models for the viscosity of hydrous silicate melts. Additionally, the work will
entail the application of the new data to leucogranite generation by crustal
melting, by integrating the new data into numerical models for the thermal
evolution of continental collisional orogenic belts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will support the training of three graduate students in thermal
conductivity measurements by laser-flash analysis, and viscosity measurements by
the parallel-plate and concentric-cylinder techniques. This study will impact
current understanding of large-scale lithospheric processes, including heat-flow
and magma transport, and also volcanic hazards, in which the transport
properties of magmas play a key role.&lt;br/&gt;