* 0440443
* SGER:  Distributed Optimization of Spatial Resources in Wireless Local Area Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Mung Chiang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 07/31/2005
* USD 110,000.00

Motivation: Wireless local area networks have very promising commercial
potential to be widely de-&lt;br/&gt;ployed and used in a variety of application
scenarios, but also suffer from a number of significant
engineering&lt;br/&gt;difficulties. For example, small cell sizes and unlicensed
spectrum lead to sophisticated spatial interaction,&lt;br/&gt;there is a lack of
common air-interface to support mobile and time-sensitive applications, and
interactions&lt;br/&gt;among competing users, both access points and mobile
stations, could form surprising and unpredictable&lt;br/&gt;patterns. In
addition, end-to-end transmissions in a wireless LAN often traverse a hybrid
network, with&lt;br/&gt;wireless hops as well as wired links in the backbone.
This presents unique challenges in cross layer TCP-IP-&lt;br/&gt;MAC-PHY
interactions and offers new opportunities to optimize medium access control
(MAC) and physical&lt;br/&gt;layer (PHY) algorithms to enhance the end user
experience.&lt;br/&gt;There is no shortage of near term ideas from both industry
and academia about how to improve the&lt;br/&gt;delivery of wireless Internet
services. What is missing is an optimization framework that captures utility
at&lt;br/&gt;the level of networked applications, and makes it possible to
figure out whether any particular incremental&lt;br/&gt;change at the MAC or PHY
layer is positive or negative. The gap is the focus of this SGER
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;Kelly and Low have created the counterpart of this utility
maximization framework in the wired world,&lt;br/&gt;and it has led to a deeper
understanding of TCP congestion control and to the development and
field&lt;br/&gt;testing of the new 'FAST TCP' protocol by the high energy
physics community. The key insight in this&lt;br/&gt;approach is to start with a
given network protocol and ask: 'If this distributed protocol is the solution to
an&lt;br/&gt;underlying global optimization problem, what is that optimization
problem?' The wireless world presents a&lt;br/&gt;very significant challenge and
the new framework needs to capture spatial interaction within a cell,
operation&lt;br/&gt;in unlicensed spectrum, a mix of contention and scheduling
at the MAC layer, and the flexibility of achieving&lt;br/&gt;different rate-
reliability tradeoffs by coding techniques.&lt;br/&gt;For example, we know that
TCP throughput can be improved through coordination of spatial
resources,&lt;br/&gt;specifically through space-time coding. Embedded diversity
transforms spatial diversity into a fine grained&lt;br/&gt;resource that can
provide opportunistic communication when the channel is good and reliable
communication&lt;br/&gt;with latency guarantees when it is less benign. We
expect to see significant benefits in specific cross layer&lt;br/&gt;designs
based on a completed framework of wireless utility maximization, but the value
of the proposal is a&lt;br/&gt;general proof of principle that can apply to an
arbitrary wireless protocol or coding technique.&lt;br/&gt;Project Focus and
Intellectual Merit: This SGER project is a proof of concept - the
particular&lt;br/&gt;focus is on modelling the medium access mechanisms and
leveraging the new coding paradigm of embedded&lt;br/&gt;diversity. The
particular objective in the next 12 months of SGER investigation is to identify
the global&lt;br/&gt;optimization problem to which coding (with embedded
diversity) and scheduling (for medium access) is
the&lt;br/&gt;solution.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results have recently been
obtained by the PIs on tackling interference in utility
maximization&lt;br/&gt;problems and on designing new space-time codes with
embedded diversity. We believe that by filling in&lt;br/&gt;two remaining holes:
modelling medium access and leveraging coding techniques, a complete and
widely&lt;br/&gt;applicable framework of wireless network utility maximization
will be completed at the conclusion of the&lt;br/&gt;SGER
project.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research activities in this SGER
proposal will be fully integrated with a variety&lt;br/&gt;of educational
activities currently pursued by the PIs. These include curriculum developments
of four new,&lt;br/&gt;inter-disciplinary courses at Princeton, two at
undergraduate level and two at introductory graduate level,&lt;br/&gt;active
supervision of undergraduate research projects on wireless LAN, and student
summer internships&lt;br/&gt;being arranged with our industrial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;A unique and important aspect of this proposal is a detailed
arrangement of close collaboration with&lt;br/&gt;five major telecom and
networking companies in the wireless LAN space: AT&amp;T Labs, Cisco,
Flarion&lt;br/&gt;Technologies, Intel, and SBC. These interactions with the
industry will further strengthen the research and&lt;br/&gt;education components
of the project and ensure visible impacts of the intellectual
contributions.&lt;br/&gt;A workshop on wireless LAN research, development, and
deployment will be hosted at Princeton by the&lt;br/&gt;PIs at the conclusion of
this SGER project. We will compile a list of major research issues associated
with&lt;br/&gt;wireless LAN and a list of industrial researchers or managers
interested in these topics, which may be helpful&lt;br/&gt;to future NSF
programs on topics related to mathematical models for wireless networks.