* 0440261
* Multi-Level Assessment for Enhancing Mathematical Discourse, Curriculum, and Achievement in Diverse Elementary School Classrooms.
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2005,10/31/2005
* Sonja Lanehart, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 10/31/2005
* USD 285,282.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study uses contemporary
insights about assessment, language, mathematics education, psychometric theory,
and educational research to "bridge the gap" between worthwhile mathematics
instruction and high-stakes testing. The effort builds on the research
summarized in several NRC expert panels and the ideas which have been emerging
in interdisciplinary efforts to develop a broader understanding the impact of
educational testing on teaching and learning. The project will start with a
multi-level model of formative assessment that emerged in two prior NSF funded
studies. In an unprecedented collaboration, this approach will be refined and
validated by a team of experts representing mathematics education, mathematical
sciences, linguistics, educational testing, and educational assessment. The
project advisory panel consists of international leaders in each area, including
individuals who are also spearheading interdisciplinary advance across these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact is expected
because the approach meets the demand of the NCLB act for immediate and
continual gains on criterion-referenced tests for all students, without
undercutting other educational goals. In addition to directly advancing
elementary mathematics instruction, the project offers a scalable, worthwhile
alternative to the ubiquitous "test-prep" interventions that often do more harm
than good. The project will broaden classroom assessment to directly advance
students' discourse, fluency, and understanding, and guide teachers' remediation
and curricular refinement. As such the project will forge new insights for using
classroom discourse and formative feedback for accomplishing these broad goals
which oftentimes are treated as if they are in conflict.&lt;br/&gt;The approach
features two levels of classroom assessments (semi-formal and formal) and an
innovative "conversational" approach to formative feedback. Existing (commercial
and public domain) assessments will be used to create 26 open-ended quizzes and
2 multiple-choice exams. The quizzes are aligned to existing curriculum,
completed after appropriate regular lessons, and are ungraded. The exams consist
of items that are aligned with the subdomains of the pertinent criterion
referenced test, are completed at the end of the semester, and are formally
graded. .Learner oriented formative feedback rubrics will be developed for both.
The rubrics offer detailed, technically accurate explanations of the problems,
without directly stating the "correct" answer. Students use their completed
assessments and the rubrics to discuss their collective understanding of the
assessed topics. Simple video-based coaches guide them toward worthwhile
feedback conversations; materials and guidelines will help teachers (1) align
assessments to their existing curriculum, (2) use initial performance and
mathematical discourse to improve that curriculum, and (3) provide informal and
formal remediation.&lt;br/&gt;The study will focus on fifth-grade mathematics,
and take place in two Georgia elementary schools that serve a high proportion of
ethnic and linguistic minorities. Across three year-long implementations,
success is ensured by using design-based and linguistic methods to directly
enhance students' mathematical discourse and teachers use of formative feedback
, while indirectly maximizing students' performance on four outcome measures (an
innovative discourse-based assessment, CTB's open-ended Balanced Assessment in
Mathematic, Georgia's Criterion-Referenced Content Test, and the Iowa Tests of
Basic Skills). The schools will be randomly assigned to implementation or
comparison conditions. The first year will consist of piloting and iterative
refinements with just one implementation teacher. During the second year, the
three or four fifth grade teachers participating at the implementation school
will be assigned to different conditions to test the individual and collective
impact of the quizzes and exams. Gains on the outcome measures will be compared
to similar fifth-grade classrooms at the comparison school. These results will
be used to define a final version that will be implemented by all fifth-grade
teachers at the implementation school. Students' performance at the
implementation school will be compared to the performance of all of the fifth-
graders in the comparison school on all four outcome measures.&lt;br/&gt;