* 0440320
* Continental Crustal Composition and Evolution:  Constraints from Receiver Function Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Robert Cullers, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2006
* USD 192,688.00

&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at providing new or refined
constraints&lt;br/&gt;on models of evolution and composition of the continental
crust,&lt;br/&gt;by simultaneously measuring crustal thickness, Poisson's
ratio&lt;br/&gt;which can be uniquely determined by the ratio between P and
S-wave&lt;br/&gt;velocities, and crustal P-wave velocities beneath about 200
broadband&lt;br/&gt;seismic stations distributed all over the
continents.&lt;br/&gt;About 80,000 source-normalized broadband seismograms will
be&lt;br/&gt;visually checked and used for the proposed study. A set of
computer&lt;br/&gt;codes that the PIs developed to search for the optimal
combination&lt;br/&gt;of the three parameters beneath a station will be used for
the study,&lt;br/&gt;and the bootstrap procedure will be used to
estimate&lt;br/&gt;the errors of the measurements. The existence of dipping
Moho&lt;br/&gt;beneath each of the stations will be examined. Another part
of&lt;br/&gt;the project is for the collection of a set of published
tectonic&lt;br/&gt;history and petrological data obtained from lower crustal
xenoliths&lt;br/&gt;or terrains related to the composition and evolution of the
lower crust&lt;br/&gt;inthe vicinity of each of the stations. Those geological
data will&lt;br/&gt;be used for the interpretation of the seismological
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected results from the proposed work will be
used by&lt;br/&gt;geochemists, mineral physicists, and geodynamicists to address
a&lt;br/&gt;broad range of important questions regarding the formation and
evolution&lt;br/&gt;of early crust and mantle. Thus this study should have an
impact that is&lt;br/&gt;beyond the seismological
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;