* 0440233
* The Stress Path of Post-Solidus Granite Within the Crystalline Core of the New England Appalachians
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Terry Engelder, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2008
* USD 144,212.00

This study is developing a new approach for understanding the post-solidus
stress-temperature-time paths of granite during exhumation of the core of
mountain belts. The new approach is based on the interpretation of a suite of
microstructures characteristic of brittle deformation in granite known as rift
(direction of easiest splitting) and grain (a second direction of relatively
easy splitting). The hypothesis is that post-solidus isobaric cooling and
isothermal decompression lead to distinct brittle processes and that these
brittle processes reflect different paths during the cooling and exhumation of
post-solidus granite. At the solidus of granite, the state of stress is
lithostatic where the horizontal and vertical stress components are equal.
Isobaric cooling leads to a stress state where the minimum horizontal stress is
less than the vertical stress and eventually the minimum horizontal stress is
tensile. Tensile stresses act to drive simple mode I microcracks in the vertical
orientation normal to the minimum horizontal stress. Isothermal decompression
leads to a stress state where the maximum horizontal stress is greater than the
vertical stress and all stress components remain compressive. A large horizontal
stress can drive axial splitting cracks that are recognized as a complex network
of coalescing microcracks. Thus, isobaric cooling and isothermal decompression
can be distinguished by microcrack orientation and microcrack structure. Rift
developed during isobaric cooling is vertical and a rift developed during
isothermal decompression is horizontal. The hypothesis is being tested on a
suite of granites collected from various localities in the New England
Appalachian Mountains, where systematic patterns of rift cracks have been
identified by previous workers. Microscopic measurements on oriented samples
include line and area scanlines, orientation measurements, morphologic
observations in thin section and with the scnanning electron microscope, and
paleostress analysis.