* 0440673
* Planning Grant:  Life History Strategies of the South African Holoparasitic Genus Hyobanche (Orobanchaceae)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2005
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 01/31/2005
* USD 5,500.00

Wolfe 0440673 This award funds a research planning visit during which Wolfe will
collect preliminary data for ecological studies of Hyobanche (Orobanchaceae), a
parasitic genus native to southern Africa with most of the 15 species restricted
to the biodiversity hotspot regions of South Africa. Recent studies on several
species of Hyobanche have revealed interesting patterns of genome evolution
associated with the loss of photosynthesis. However, no studies of the basic
biology of this genus have ever been conducted. This planning visit will allow
Wolfe and her South African collaborators, Brad Ripley and Peter Craig from
Rhodes University in Grahamstown, South Africa, to determine the feasibility of
various methodologies for ecological studies in sand dune systems along the
coast of South Africa. The project will focus on pollination and seed ecology
and the ecophysiology of water relations of host and parasite and will develop
specific protocols for use in a research proposal planned for upcoming
submission.

The PI intends to use the planning visit to help build a long-term research
program that establishes a profile of the basic biology and ecology of this
genus, and facilitates an international collaboration with researchers from the
U.S. and South Africa. Researchers and students from South Africa would be
involved in long-term ecological studies at several sites along the coastline of
South Africa. An exchange of students from both countries would be facilitated
with students from Ohio State University given the opportunity to conduct
fieldwork in South Africa, and students from Rhodes University given the
opportunity to learn molecular techniques at Ohio State University.