* 0440617
* Track 1, GK-12, Applied Design Engineering Projects Team (ADEPT)
* EHR,DGE
* 04/01/2005,12/31/2008
* George Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2008
* USD 1,829,035.00

The University of California at Berkeley in conjunction with the Berkeley
Unified School District will create Applied Design Engineering Project Teams
(ADEPT). These teams will design and deploy a standards-based engineering
curriculum for middle schools and high schools meant to integrate mathematics
and science learning, inspire students and strengthen the classroom experience
of current and future faculty in math, science, and engineering. ADEPT
curriculum development teams will combine the best of inquiry- and activity-
based teaching and learning with cutting edge university-based research methods
and resources. Each team will be made up of local school teachers, university
faculty, graduate students, and advanced undergraduates; each of whom will
contribute unique perspectives and skills in the creation of discrete curriculum
modules. These modules will form the core of the curriculum and serve as
exemplary .hands-on . minds-on. model lessons that enrich the learning
experience of the entire range of students. The overall goals of the program are
to: Engage middle and high school students in doing mathematics and science
through engineering projects that strengthen their understanding of core
concepts in math and science; Engage and enrich learning for the diverse
population of middle and high school students found in urban classrooms; Create
and sustain a vibrant learning community of teachers, graduate students,
undergraduate students and university faculty who work together to develop
exemplary curriculum modules; Foster a college-going culture among middle school
students, parents, and teachers that provides a supportive and attractive
alternative to counter-academic pressures confronting students when they make
the transition from middle school to high school. Intellectual Merits: ADEPT
modules will be designed to serve the needs of the full range of students,
including those who do not learn core math and science concepts with the current
curriculum and teaching methods. These hands-on engineering design projects will
tap into a greater range of learning modalities than current textbook and
classroom practices. Second, ADEPT modules will serve the needs of students who
have mastered the core math and science concepts and are challenged by the open-
ended opportunities to integrate these math and science concepts, and apply
their understanding to engineering projects that have implications for their
lives and their community. Broader Implications: The modules to be developed
will go beyond the traditional views of engineering to value the community and
cultural context within which middle- and high school students learn. All
results will be made available to other school districts and universities who
may be interested in using these modules.

This project is receiving partial support from the Directorate for Enginnering.