* 0440787
* Bolometric Solar Imaging
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Peter Foukal, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 02/29/2008
* USD 199,999.00

This proposal is to design, build, and launch the Solar Bolometric Imager (SBI)
and a Multi-Spectral Imager (MSI) on the Long Duration Balloon (LDB) from
McMurdo during the austral summer of 2006-2007. The instruments will provide
bolometric (i.e., wavelength-integrated light) and color temperature images of
the Sun, which will be aimed to understand better sources of the solar
irradiance variation and the corresponding effects on global terrestrial climate
change. The current view is that during the 11-year sunspot cycle the total
solar irradiance varies in proportion to the changes of Sun's local magnetic
fields. At the upcoming sunspot minimum (2007), SBI observations will be able to
detect if there are other sources of solar irradiance variation with the least
confusion by signals from the magnetic fields. The SBI is a new instrument, a
new approach to studying one of the fundamental problems in solar physics. The
imager uses a 30-cm diameter F/12 Dall-Kirkham telescope with uncoated mirrors,
and neutral density filters to provide broadband (bolometric) sensitivity that
varies only by +/-7 percent over the wavelengths from 0.28 to 2.6 microns The
SBI sensor has the unique capability to record images of the solar photosphere
with a flat photometric response. The sensor is an array of 320 x 240 infrared-
sensitive barium strontium titanate (BST) ferroelectric elements, with a film of
gold black on the surface. The film will uniformly convert all absorbed solar
radiation into thermal emission detectable by the underlying BST array. MSI will
provide diagnostics of solar magnetic and thermal structures while SBI assesses
their radiance. Each frame from the SBI and MSI will be precisely calibrated.
Bursts of 60 to 120 frames of the same scene will be co-registered and summed to
increase the signal-to-noise ratio. The scenes will be mosaicked to form images
with 5-arcsec resolutions over the entire Sun. Sunspots, faculae, and magnetic
filed network will be identified from the MSI images. Sonic filtering of the MSI
images will isolate the oscillatory signal. That signal will be used to remove
oscillations from SBI averages to reduce the solar noise. The calibrated,
mosaicked SBI images will be used to derive data products such as 3D plots of
intensity contrast versus distance from Sun center and magnetic flux. The images
and data products will be openly available via the Web. The SBI/MSI telescopes
will be carried into the stratosphere by a balloon-borne gondola used in
previous Antarctic programs. Scientific ballooning is an ideal educational tool
because it is relatively inexpensive and quick to produce results. The science
team will include experienced experimentalists and a post-doctoral associate, at
least one graduate student, and several student interns. The campaign will
involve many ground-based observatories and satellite-borne radiometers from
several countries.