* 0440225
* Toward Understanding the Relation Between Volcanic Eruptions, Seismicity, and Infrasound
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2007
* Dork Sahagian, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2007
* USD 291,521.00

Toward understanding the relation between volcanic eruptions,
&lt;br/&gt;seismicity, and infrasound&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the
University of New Hampshire and Lehigh University are &lt;br/&gt;focused on
understanding the relation between volcanic eruptions and the &lt;br/&gt;energy
which is radiated into both the seismic and acoustic wavefields.
&lt;br/&gt;Through support from the National Science Foundation, they will be
&lt;br/&gt;investigating the temporal relation between explosive degassing and
the &lt;br/&gt;generation of elastic waves in order to gain greater insight into
&lt;br/&gt;volcano conduit source processes prior to and during explosive
&lt;br/&gt;fragmentation of magma. They will also be quantifying the elastic
&lt;br/&gt;energy release and comparing it with observed eruption intensities
&lt;br/&gt;(quantified through high-speed video), which will be used to develop
&lt;br/&gt;empirical and theoretical models for energy transfer during
eruptions. &lt;br/&gt;This topic has import implications for using elastic waves
to remotely &lt;br/&gt;asess the intensity of eruptions especially during
periods of inclement &lt;br/&gt;weather when visible or satellite observations
are not possible. A &lt;br/&gt;better understanding of the mechanisms and trends
of volcanic activity &lt;br/&gt;will ultimately increase our ability to predict
the timing and nature of &lt;br/&gt;destructive events&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish these goals, the grantees will analyze existing &lt;br/&gt;seismo-
acoustic datasets from seven diverse erupting volcanoes, which
&lt;br/&gt;exhibit intermittent and low-level explosive volcanic activity.
&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, two volcanoes located in Guatemala (Fuego and
Santiaguito) &lt;br/&gt;are to serve as field sites for an integrated seismo-
acoustic-video &lt;br/&gt;experiment to be conducted in the winter of 2006.
These two volcanoes &lt;br/&gt;have been selected because of the extraordinary
visibility of their &lt;br/&gt;active vents afforded from vantage points atop
nearby neighboring &lt;br/&gt;summits. High-speed, high-resolution, satellite-
time synced video will &lt;br/&gt;be acquired in concert with seismic and
acoustic monitoring. New video &lt;br/&gt;image processing techniques will be
developed to analyze and quantify &lt;br/&gt;eruptive manifestations. The
intellectual merit of this project &lt;br/&gt;includes improved understanding of
the enigmatic seismicity that is &lt;br/&gt;radiated during volcanic eruptions.
Other broader impacts include &lt;br/&gt;research opportunities for a graduate
student at the University of New &lt;br/&gt;Hampshire and expanded collaboration
and outreach with volcano &lt;br/&gt;observatories in other countries.
&lt;br/&gt;