* 0440400
* Simultaneous Inversion For Mantle Conductivity And Source Field: Towards A 3-D Global Reference Model
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Adam Schultz, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 99,992.00

A research program will be carried out to reconstruct the three dimensional
variability of the electrical conductivity of the mantle. First, a set of
recently published globally-distributed 'response functions' will be transformed
into a global-scale mantle model with greater detail than previously possible.
Following this, geomagnetic observatory time series data will be analyzed with
the goal of devising new methods to extract an even higher resolution view of
mantle conductivity, particularly at frequencies where the Earth's external
magnetic field is dominated by the diurnal (and harmonic) Sq (solar-quiet)
magnetospheric and ionospheric electrical current systems. This promises to
provide a framework to improve the spatial resolving power for future upper
mantle investigations, and to improve our view of the geodynamics of the region
most closely associated with plate tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific
and technical merit. The electrical conductivity of the mantle depends on
temperature, composition (e.g. Fe content), state (e.g. partial melt fraction),
and the presence of volatiles. Mantle conductivity primarily increases radially
with depth, but a growing body of evidence indicates there is significant
lateral heterogeneity in the upper and mid-mantle. A research program is
proposed that will lead to significant improvements in imaging these 3-d
variations, and in interpreting and understanding the geodynamic significance of
global scale lateral conductivity variations. External electrical current
systems in the Earth's ionosphere and magnetosphere ("source currents"),
generated by variations in solar wind activity, in turn induce electrical
current to flow in the Earth's interior. This is a source of signal that may be
extracted in the form of electromagnetic 'response functions', which in turn
contain information about the distribution of electrical conduction within the
Earth's interior. Empirical orthogonal function analysis of geomagnetic
observatory data simplifies the task of interpreting the configuration of the
source currents, and improves the quality of the resulting response functions,
which are inverted to obtain a higher resolution model of the mantle's
electrical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. New constraints on
the 3-d structure and physical state of the Earth's deep interior are of great
importance to the broad community of researchers working to understand the
dynamics and evolution of the Earth. Co-registered electrical and seismic models
can be used to separate temperature and compositional effects in 3-d tomographic
images, and to develop equations of state relevant to deep Earth materials. A
global 3-d conductivity reference model can be used to provide boundary
conditions, as well as large scale context, for modeling and inversion of data
from regional electromagnetic studies, such as those supported by the NSF
Continental Dynamics Program, the Margins Program, and Earthscope
(http://www.earthscope.org/links_pubs/index.html). A global 3-d reference model
can be used by academic, government and industry groups to address the problem
of contamination and biased interpretation of data in situations where the
induced internal magnetic variations are a source of noise, e.g., in studies of
crustal magnetization with satellite data, or long-baseline aeromagnetic data.
The improved characterization of magnetospheric and ionospheric source fields,
as viewed from an Earth fixed reference frame will be very useful to researchers
working with satellite data, e.g., to provide improved external field
corrections for modeling of the main or crustal fields, and for studies of
ionospheric and magnetospheric physics. Improved characterization of source
fields is essential to progress in satellite-based induction studies.
&lt;br/&gt;