* 0441379
* SBIR Phase I:     Ad Hoc Networking  to Empower First Responders
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Joseph Birli, AUDIO PACK TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,859.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will help develop
the next generation of communication devices for firefighters. A report from the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) analyzing on-duty firefighter deaths
from 1977 to 2000 concluded that the number of deaths has not significantly
improved since the 1970s. One of the key elements in firefighter safety is
reliable communication between individual firefighters and with incident
command. This development would pursue the creation of a family of products
based upon ad hoc communication technology. This technology has been developing
in the military and is now becoming available to the civilian market. Ad hoc
networks have the capability of relaying messages between individual
transceivers, by finding the best path. While fighting a fire within a building
a firefighter could lose communication because of the construction of the
building. With an ad hoc network a device could be mounted in a window of a
burning building and the individual firefighter could be certain that they would
be able to communicate with incident command. This technology is also applicable
to other law enforcement and public safety groups, such as EMS. According to the
Building and Fire Research Laboratory 2003 Annual Report from NIST, it is
estimated that the US annual losses attributable to fire include: 3600 lives,
22000 serious injuries, $10 billion in direct property loss, and $128 billion
total cost. By providing a system that would ensure firefighters and other first
responders have reliable communication it would be possible to significantly
reduce the number of causalities (both firefighters and civilian). This
development will further assist in the transition of this ad hoc communication
technology from military to civilian use. After developing the fundamental
features of this technology, Audiopack would look at advanced features such
position location. As this is one of the first opportunities for such a system
exist the management and staff of Audiopack believes that there is significant
commercial potential.