* 0441395
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Proyecto Arqueologico Los Horcones
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Karl Taube, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Karl Taube, Claudia Garcia-Des Lauriers will direct
the Proyecto Arqueologico Los Horcones (PALH), which will examine the nature of
cultural interaction between the Pacific Coast of Chiapas and Teotihuacan, the
largest city in the New World prior to European contact during the Early Classic
(AD 300-500). The project will amplify and diversify currently held ideas about
interaction between Teotihuacan and other regions outside of the Teotihuacan
Valley through archaeological fieldwork at the site of Los Horcones on the
Chiapas Coast. The fieldwork includes limited mapping of the site, location of
sculpted monuments, and a systematic investigation of surface materials through
the use of shovel test pits. Based on preliminary evidence, excavations will be
conducted in an effort to retrieve information on datable contexts for the
various materials. Through this fieldwork strategy, PALH will address the
specific guiding question: what is the nature of cultural interaction between
Teotihuacan and the Pacific coast of Chiapas? In order to begin to answer this
larger query, a series of more targeted questions will guide the fieldwork and
subsequent analysis. These questions will largely address issues of chronology,
political, economic and militaristic motivations for Teotihuacan's interest in
Los Horcones and an understanding of ideological dimensions of interaction. In
an effort to synthesize both economic and ideological aspects of interaction a
World-Systems perspective will be used to provide organizing framework for the
investigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PALH is situated within the larger dialogue
of Teotihuacan interests in distant regions of Mesoamerica and stands to make an
important contribution to this larger intellectual polemic because of its
ability to provide new information about the diverse relationships which
Teotihuacan had with different sites. Los Horcones was strategically located at
the crossroads of trade routes that led into the Soconusco and the Pacific Coast
of Guatemala. The possibility that Los Horcones played a mediating role between
Teotihuacan and the Pacific Coast of Guatemala needs to be investigated
empirically, but certainly the geographic location of Los Horcones is suggestive
of its capacity to have served in some mediating role. Through its potential to
provide new information from an intermediate region rather than simply
reanalyzing existing data, PALH will make an important contribution to the study
of cultural interaction during the Early Classic Period in
Mesoamerica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pacific Coast of Chiapas is rich in
history and archaeology, but has received little attention. &lt;br/&gt;PALH will
add to this history through its results and through incorporating the local
community via the local radio station and lectures at local schools. PALH will
also provide training in archaeological methods to participating students from
the US and Mexico. On a broader level PALH, seeks to investigate the broader
impact of cultural interaction between two distant regions, a question that is
even more relevant today in the age of globalization. Certainly, it provides an
important example of a community at the crossroads of trade and exchange of
goods, services and ideas that was affected and affected the people they were
interacting with in important ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;