* 0441509
* STTR Phase I:     Parallel Algorithms for Route Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Robert Chase, Scalable OR Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I
project will investigate the integration of parallel algorithms into commercial
software applications. Specifically, the research will focus on the development
of parallel algorithms for use in an automatic vehicle location (AVL) and route
optimization (RO) application, with a long-term goal of expanding to other
markets. The AVL/RO market has significant growth opportunities and can benefit
greatly from the improved business practices the technology will enable. The
intellectual merit of this research is in the development of new techniques for
parallelizing neighborhood search and other so-called metaheuristics, and making
this technology available to commercial users. The project will also investigate
ways in which these methods can be integrated with exact optimization methods to
form powerful hybrid algorithms that will allow potential commercial users of
this technology to solve large, complex optimization problems more quickly than
is possible today. Exact optimization methods can provide provably optimal
solutions to modestly sized optimization problems, as well as providing
information useful for post-facto solution analysis. However, this information
comes at a high cost. Parallelization can improve the situation, but for
attacking large, difficult problems with real-world constraints, metaheuristic
methods are the prevailing methodology. These methods employ a solution space
search procedure, like exact methods, but the search is performed in an ad-hoc
manner that accommodates a much larger space. Parallelization of these methods
has received little attention in the literature, but has the potential to
dramatically extend their reach. In Phase I of this project, parallel
implementations of neighborhood search and other metaheuristic algorithms
through a generic C++ class library will be developed.

The broader impact of this research is in making the power of parallel
processing accessible and affordable to a wider range of commercial users of
optimization applications. This will be done by lowering the financial and
technical barriers to the use of this technology. The first test market will be
the AVL/RO market, which is largely untapped and has an overall market
penetration of only 10 percent. This market is set to expand at a rapid pace
with the recent explosion in affordable wireless GPS tracking systems spurred by
the federal mandate to equip all cellular phones with E911 receivers by the end
of 2005. Applications capable of using the information provided by these devices
to optimize fleet routing and scheduling will have a huge potential impact, if
the technology is made affordable. This business model will be designed to
provide the client with access to an on-demand remote server capable of
analyzing large, complex models in parallel through a front end installed at the
customer site and integrated with the customer's own databases. The product will
have a low initial cost along with a monthly subscription fee covering the cost
of server maintenance and upgrades.