* 0441438
* STTR Phase I:    Nonintrusive Electrical Monitor (NEMO)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* John Rodriguez, NEMOmetrics Co.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop and
qualify a Non-Intrusive Electrical Monitor product (NEMO) to provide
inexpensive, accurate, in-depth monitoring of electrical usage, permit expanded
energy savings and provide additional information, like potential equipment
faults and failures. NEMO can greatly increase the amounts and kinds of
diagnostic information that can be gleaned from a single set of electrical
measurements, thus lowering the cost of monitoring building energy management
systems. NEMO needs only voltage and current measurement at the point of
electrical service entry to the building. By analyzing the transient signatures
produced when different electrical equipment draws power, NEMO can identify
which of multiple loads turn on and off and assess their condition. The
objectives of the research are to determine: the reliability of NEMO algorithms
in the presence of multiple loads, prioritize several possible diagnostic
analyses for the commercial product, and maximize the automation of NEMO data
analysis while minimizing the need for human scrutiny and intervention. The
Phase I research plan calls for installation of qualified prototype hardware in
commercial buildings and collection of energy use pattern data. Data analysis
will reveal inefficiencies in building operation and effectiveness of the
algorithms themselves.

This project will develop a system for non-intrusive detection and
identification of multiple electrical loads with major energy conservation and
other benefits. Time of use data can be used to create new automated algorithms
that minimize energy use and optimize heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
system operation without affecting occupant comfort, while electrical health
diagnostics can signal when a motor is nearing failure or a valve has jammed. A
reduction in the cost of in-depth monitoring allows more commercial facilities
to reap energy and maintenance savings from these algorithms and the NEMO
product that contains them. Actual measurement rather than estimation of initial
and ongoing electrical power consumption of electrical equipment within a
commercial building enables verification of upgrade performance. It also
facilitates design and operation of intelligent, energy efficient buildings and
assists in attaining Leadership in Energy Efficient Design (LEEDTM)
certification. By promoting energy efficiency in buildings, NEMO will enable
commercial and government building customers to reduce their energy costs and
increase their profitability. The net result should also be a decrease in
America's reliance on imported energy sources.