* 0441169
* STTR Phase I:    Investigating, Modeling, and Supporting the "Good Enough to Release" Decision for Computer-Based Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Susan Donohue, TechWrite, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2005
* USD 99,899.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I research project is to
investigate the "good enough to release" decision for computer-based systems,
and develop a decision support tool prototype based on the results of the
investigation. This release decision, hereinafter referred to as the GETR
decision, is fraught with uncertainty, since it is not possible to have complete
knowledge of a system's true state before release. There is, then, always an
element of risk when making the decision. The research in this project is aimed
at mitigating this risk through understanding and support. Research objectives
include validating a proposed GETR decision model of qualitative and
quantitative evidence shown to be effective indicators of system quality,
validating an innovative method for populating the model using expert opinion,
and developing and validating sensitivity and uncertainty analyses.

One of the broader impacts of the research is that gaining a better
understanding of GETR decision elements and dynamics benefits more in society
than the target audience for the decision support tool. Incorporating the
findings from this project into release decisions would result in more informed
release decisions, which would benefit both system owners and end users. Another
of the broader impacts of the research is the transferability of the knowledge
gained to similar decisions. The research can stand as a model for similar
explorations of assessments of characteristics of computer-based systems,
supporting research into areas such as evaluation of system dependability
characteristics such as reliability, safety, security, availability,
maintainability, and integrity. The project also provides a means for enhancing
research partnerships, affording chances for learning. Prior work on the
research topic has led to the strengthening of current research partnerships and
the development of additional partnerships among government research centers and
universities. Also, research partnerships have developed through the process of
eliciting expert opinion used as input for model population and processing.