* 0441046
* Collaborative Research: Substorm and Storm Injection Studies Using a Coupled Global MHD - RCM Model
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Joachim Raeder, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 12/31/2004
* USD 12,488.00

The investigators will study the physics of plasma injections into the inner
magnetosphere during magnetospheric substorms and storms. The project will use a
newly coupled model consisting of the UCLA global magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
model and the Rice Convection Model (RCM). The coupled model will eliminate the
shortcomings that are currently inherent to the models: the lack of a ring
current and correct particle drift physics in the MHD code, and the dependence
of the RCM on empirical submodels and ad hoc assumptions. The coupling process
will be done by using a novel data structure to exchange information between the
models at certain times during the calculation, allowing the models to run in
parallel, and not necessarily on the same computer. The data exchange will be in
the form of a protocol, similar to the protocols that are used on the World Wide
Web, which will allow for maximum flexibility, extensibility and openness.
Coupling of the models will proceed in six stages of increasing complexity. As
each coupling stage is completed the investigators will model a set of selected
substorm and storm events and perform comprehensive comparisons with in situ
observations. The comparisons will yield information about the relative
importance of different processes. The goal is to develop a global magnetosphere
model with much improved capabilities compared to contemporary models, and a
much more thorough understanding of substorm and storm time injections.