* 0441484
* SBIR Phase I:    Hybrid Stochastic-Deterministic Method for Modeling Molecular and Morphological Structures of Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Glen Ko, RES Group, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will prototype a novel
modeling technology--the Hybrid Stochastic-Deterministic Method--for use in
precise modeling of molecular and morphological structures of advanced
materials. Because the evolution of molecular and morphological structure is
complex, mathematical modeling is an invaluable tool for product and process
development and optimization. The current state of the art modeling technologies
cannot predict the complete structural information required by the industry.
This proposal presents a novel and unique method for integrating the state of
the art techniques from deterministic and stochastic mathematical sciences in
the modeling and simulation of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result of the
proposed work, commercial modeling software, has the potential for significant
economic impact because it addresses an important need in large industries such
as the polymer industry. The modeling technique is also relevant to other
chemical industries and to the pharmaceutical industry.. The proposed work has
the potential to spawn a new multidisciplinary research field and education
curriculum, currently not covered by those using the deterministic or stochastic
method alone; and to make a technological impact in solving other mathematically
equivalent modeling problems such as nanoparticle synthesis and biological
cellular systems. &lt;br/&gt;