* 0441659
* SBIR Phase I:   Sports Performace Improvement Through Novel Methods of Computer Human Interaction
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Paul Antonucci, Alberti's Window, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 94,885.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will research,
prototype, and test a novel system for improving performance and reducing
injuries due to improper body mechanics in sports such as baseball, football,
and tennis. The innovation of the proposed system is twofold: First, it builds
on the learning theory of real-time feedback combined with inexpensive data
collection technologies, that is, ordinary video cameras, wireless
accelerometers, personal computers, and computer generated sounds. This makes it
an ideal learning tool for a wide audience and puts it within the financial and
technical reach of organizations devoted to the development of student-age
players. Second, Alberti's Window plans to research the effectiveness of real-
time auditory feedback of motion variables (with and without visual feedback on
a computer screen), an area that is highly under-explored, and, one that has
large potential to leverage learning through human-computer interactions. The
application area during Phase I will be youth baseball
players.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recreational sports is an area that involves a
large number of people; for example, there are nearly 3 million participants in
Little League Baseball. Companies that sell to this market are typically billion
dollar companies. While computers and modern technology have been used to
advantage in professional sports, they are not extensively used in amateur or
recreational contexts. Potential benefits of this technology include 1)
reduction in injuries that are due to improper body mechanics, and consequently
wider and more enjoyable participation , 2) better athletic performance , 3)
increased scientific and technological literacy to the target population of
young sports enthusiasts, and 4) increased understanding of the possibilities of
using real-time multimodal sensory feedback in Human-Computer
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;