* 0441212
* SGER:     Independent Component Analysis on Coarse-Grain Reconfigurable VLSI (For Sensor Analysis and Fusion)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* V. Jain, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 07/31/2006
* USD 40,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;SGER (Small Grants for Exploratory Research)
Proposal&lt;br/&gt;Title: Independent Component Analysis on Coarse-grain
Reconfigurable VLSI&lt;br/&gt;(for sensor analysis and
fusion)&lt;br/&gt;SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this SGER project is to conduct
a one-year intensive study on inmapping the&lt;br/&gt;Independent Component
Analysis (ICA) technique to a coarse-grain parallel-processing-
chip&lt;br/&gt;architecture and the associated issues in design, fabrication and
test of the corresponding VLSI&lt;br/&gt;chipls for networked sensors. However,
several practical and fundamental issues, critical to the&lt;br/&gt;complete
solution, will also be investigated. These include sensor
calibration/validation, defect&lt;br/&gt;and fault tolerance through redundancy
and reconfiguration, and signal interpolation in scenarios&lt;br/&gt;where the
data rates from the various heterogeneous sensors are disparate. The urgency of
this&lt;br/&gt;project arises from the fact that while sensor research is
advancing rapidly, the extraction of&lt;br/&gt;information and fusion of multi-
modal sensor data in real time is not keeping pace. To harness
the&lt;br/&gt;full power of networked sensors, such processing capability,
resident at the sensor nodes, is&lt;br/&gt;imperative.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Intelligent sensor systems are of critical importance to the nations
security&lt;br/&gt;and economic growth. Graduate students will be involved in
this research, one or more of whom&lt;br/&gt;will be supported by the grant
funds. Special effort will be made to recruit women, minority,
or&lt;br/&gt;disabled students to fill these research positions. It is also
useful to remark that the project will&lt;br/&gt;significantly benefit two
graduate courses: a unique graduate course that is under
development&lt;br/&gt;by the PI, namely Heterogeneous System on a Chip, which is
aimed to fulfill a serious national&lt;br/&gt;need; and a Low Power VLSI Design
course being developed by the Co-PI which has a project&lt;br/&gt;based learning
component.