* 0441104
* SGER: Sr, Nd Isotopic Investigation of the Source and Age of Antarctic Surface Salts
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Ethan Baxter, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 06/30/2005
* USD 26,504.00

Antarctica's Dry Valleys host abundant salt deposits concentrated in layers
within soil profiles or in evaporative lakes, and also on the undersides of
cobbles. These cobbles rest on modern and ancient surfaces, some buried and
preserved by deposits at least 15 million years old. This work will 1)
investigate the possibility that these salts, and the processes responsible for
their formation and preservation, may be directly dated by the Rb/Sr isochron
method; and 2) investigate the source(s) of the cations specifically in surface
cobble salts by means of Sr (and Nd) isotopic analysis. If these salts can be
dated, the technique will provide a new means of dating paleo-surfaces to aid in
stratigraphic, paleontologic, geomorphic, and paleo-climatologic
interpretations. The salts could also be used to date pulses of increased
weathering and/or precipitation during which the salts were formed, and since
which the salts were preserved. This potential geochronometer alone would be of
great utility to studies of cold desert regions like Antarctica. Depending on
the Sr source, there also exists great potential to exploit the archive of
modern and ancient surface salts to produce a 15+ million year record of Sr, Nd
from atmospheric precipitation and/or from surface weathering processes in
Antarctica. This exploratory work is particularly high risk given the limited
previous Sr, Nd analysis of these salts and related materials, and because the
potential to directly date these salts by Rb/Sr has yet to be explored and
evaluated. The broader impacts include new research collaborations and education
of graduate and undergraduate students, one of whom is a woman.