* 0441422
* SBIR Phase I:    Data Recovery from Low-Cost High-Capacity Backup/Archival Storage Systems for Small Enterprises
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Chun Tse, Data and Information Solutions Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,681.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
a novel approach for recovering mission-critical hard disk data from disk-based
archival/backup systems that are unreadable due to hardware failures of the
drive systems (such as a head crash or physical impact). Under these
circumstances, read channel techniques like Partial Response Maximum Likelihood
(PRML) often cannot correctly detect the data because prior knowledge of the
write channel may not be available at the time of recovery. As such, this SBIR
research is a new approach of data recovery using a drive-independent read
channel technique that is insensitive to the specifications of the write
channel. This technique is based on the "response function" characterization of
giant-magnetoresistive heads of hard drives. It has the promise of effectively
removing intersymbol interference (ISI) that in turn (after the appropriate
decoding) will lead to the recovery of the otherwise unreadable backup/archival
data.

The anticipated result of this research will be a new data recovery technique
and related software that will remove ISI without prior knowledge of how the
data were written. In addition, this research may also lead to new designs of
hard disk read channels that will significantly increase the data storage
density of future backup/archival systems. It fills an existing void of
recovering hard disk data from disk-based backup/archival systems that are
unreadable by current data retrieval techniques. The commercial benefits of this
research are promising due to the growing need for computer data recovery. From
backup/archival databases in small enterprises to large mission-critical servers
in corporate enterprises and federal agencies, this recovery technique
potentially could save America hundreds of millions of dollars per year in data-
loss-related costs. This research also has a broader societal impact in the
intelligence, security, and law enforcement communities where, in the field of
computer forensics, for example, the retrieved data may serve as digital
evidence for criminal and terrorist prosecution, thus promoting homeland
security. Furthermore, the successful implementation of this ISI-removal
technique may substantially increase the capacity and reliability of future
backup/archival hard drives. In addition, this technique also consumes less
power and assumes a lower cost of implementation, making it suitable for mobile
applications and a viable contender for read channel products in the multi-
billion dollar hard disk market.