* 0441619
* ACT/SGER: Metastable Titania-Germanium (Ti02-Ge) Nanocomposites for Photovoltaic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* S. Ismat Shah, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

Nanostructured titania (TiO2) is a promising semiconductor for photovoltaic
applications due to its stability, chemical inertness, cost, etc. The optical
gap of titania is 3.2 eV that lies in the ultraviolet region of the solar
spectrum. However, the peak of the solar spectrum is in the visible region.
Therefore, to increase the efficiency of the photovoltaic processes, titania
nanoparticles are customized by various methods in order to make them useful in
the visible light. We propose to study a new nanostructured material, titania-
germanium which will be a stable alternative to dye sensitized titania. We will
use already mature deposition techniques, e.g. sputtering and metallorganic
chemical vapor deposition, to synthesize the samples. Preliminary experiments of
composite samples using selected area diffraction analyses in a transmission
electron microscope showed uniform distribution of germanium nanoclusters
(quantum dots) in the titania matrix. The formation of elemental germanium
nanodots is facilitated by the relatively higher heat of formation of germanium
oxide, compared to that of titania. The size of the germanium nanodots will be
modulated across the thickness of the thin films by controlled annealing
techniques. Such size variation will allow the possibility to use quantum dot
size related change in the bandgap of germanium nanodots to sensitize titania
and improve its photovoltaic properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Approaches to
Combat Terrorism Program in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical
Sciences supports new concepts in basic research and workforce development with
the potential to contribute to national security. To combat diffused and hidden
terrorist activities, there is an obvious need for self-powered portable
devices. For this purpose, solar electric power is an ideal renewable energy
source. Currently, crystalline or amorphous silicon solar cells with efficiency
to convert solar power to usable electricity as high as 20-30% are possible and
even commercially produce. Crystalline silicon suffers from the complexity of
the fabrication process where as relatively inexpensive amorphous silicon (a-Si)
photovoltaics have a fundamental drawback of light induced degradation of
photovoltaic properties. We propose to study a new stable material titania-
germanium for photovoltaic applications. Titania absorbs only high-energy
ultraviolet component of solar energy. Several schemes have been devised to
overcome this limitation since the majority of the solar light is in the visible
range. Forming titania-germanium nanocomposite is a new method of inducing
visible light absorption in titania. Germanium serves as the light absorber. Ge,
in the bulk form, absorbs only the infrared component of the solar energy. By
forming nanometer size germanium clusters, also known as nanodots, the
absorption properties of Ge can be varied from infrared to visible, thereby
improving the solar light absorption efficiency of the titania-germanium
nanocomposite. Fabrication of such materials will require the use of techniques
that are already developed. The proposed study includes the fabrication of
TiO2-Ge nanocomposite, its complete structural and electronic characterization,
and investigation of its photovoltaic properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;