* 0441500
* SBIR Phase I:    Removal of Viruses from Drinking Water Using Granular and Nano-Scale Zero-Valent Iron
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Aniruddha Bhattacharyya, Corporate Environmental Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,988.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the zero-valent iron technology for removing
biological contaminants from water. Results of the Phase I study are expected to
demonstrate the potential feasibility of this technology and will serve as a
basis for conducting a Phase II study before commercialization. A recent study
by the University of Delaware in 2003 (You, et al., 2004) demonstrated that
zero-valent iron could potentially remove and inactivate viral and other
microbial agents in water. This discovery suggests the possibility for the
development of an innovative security technology. This process for virus removal
from drinking water is straight forward, economic and can be readily retrofitted
to the sand filter units of the existing drinking water treatment plants or
adopted to meet mobile drinking water needs, thus reducing concerns of drinking
water contaminated with viruses by terrorist activities.

A recent report by the Department of Homeland Security suggests that the
presence of chlorine tanks in drinking water and wastewater treatment facilities
for disinfection use also may attract terrorist attacks thereby presenting a
security risk. The use of zero-valent and nano-iron particles in drinking water
treatment plants could reduce or possibly eliminate the current chlorine use for
disinfection thereby mitigating this potential terrorist threat. This technology
could also be used in developing mobile drinking water units for use by the US
military or other field operations in remote regions.