* 0441489
* SBIR Phase I:    Improving Infection Control Through RFID-Based Patient Tracking
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Daniel Kokotov, Vecna Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 88,984.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will test the
feasibility of improving patient safety in hospitals by reducing medical errors
and infection outbreaks through patient tracking using Radio Frequency
Identifier (RFID) technology. In light of recent media attention on patient
safety and high commercial interest from hospitals in reducing the incidence of
nosocomial infections, an RFID patient and infection tracking module integrated
into a larger patient safety system has high potential for success. This project
has three primary research objectives: 1) to design an RFID network appropriate
for accurately tracking patients in a hospital setting; 2) to design a set of
reports and visualizations to enable hospital staff to analyze location data
produced by this network; and 3) to investigate algorithms for using patient
location histories in conjunction with an infection control tool for identifying
sources of nosocomial infection outbreaks. Determining the source of infections
will allow hospital staff to intervene and prevent further incidents of
infection. In Phase II, the results of this research can be integrated into a
larger tracking and alert system for both infections and medical errors.

The need for higher standards of patient safety and effective infection
surveillance in health care facilities is well recognized. Every year billions
of dollars and tens of thousands of lives are lost to infections acquired in a
health care facility (7, 8). The result of this project is software that will
dramatically improve patient safety by integrating with improving its current
package's ability to analyze the source of an outbreak. This will enable
hospital staff to better address the outbreak and prevent future occurrences,
saving lives and money. In addition, the core patient-tracking component can be
integrated into other patient safety applications, such as rapid response to
patient emergency and automatic patient identification, to reduce medications
and procedural errors.