* 0441558
* SBIR Phase I:    Fast Remote X-ray Screening
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Edward Sommer, National Recovery Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project proposes
to develop a flexible networked high capacity security checkpoint system. The
proposed system is designed to enable cost-effective high throughput x-ray
screening of items carried by individuals into areas having high numbers of
people passing through or congregating. It is widely felt that conventional
security checkpoints, such as those in airports, are too bulky and slow for
applications where there are large numbers of passengers such as railways. A
primary need is to be able to screen persons and their carried items at
significantly higher processing rates. Projected capacity of the proposed system
is an order of magnitude greater than the capacity of current security
checkpoints modeled on checkpoints in our nation's airports. Typical venues that
could be served by the proposed system are mass transit systems, auditoriums,
sports arenas, shopping malls, conference halls, and other venues having high
concentrations of people vulnerable to terrorist attacks. The proposed
technology would provide protection against terrorist attack to persons in such
crowded areas by providing x-ray screening for weapons and explosives of
briefcases, knapsacks, backpacks, packages, etc. carried into the area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed technology can be
significant. Terrorist attacks on mass transit systems or other places having
large crowds in the U.S. could have significant adverse effects upon our society
and our economy. There are many venues in the U.S. where crowds gather. Many
such as sports arenas, auditoriums, concert halls, and conference centers and
are used intermittently. Others, such as mass transit, shopping malls, schools,
universities, and office buildings have high traffic daily. For these venues the
installation, maintenance, and manning of permanent fixed security checkpoints,
such as those used at airports, is very expensive and in many cases not
feasible. As protection of our national critical infrastructure becomes a higher
priority in the face of increasing terrorist threats security for these high
traffic areas must be effectively addressed. In these situations the ability to
quickly set up and efficiently operate flexible, compact, and fast security
checkpoints when needed can be a real benefit and make the difference for being
able to provide an effective level of security. The proposed technology can be
adapted to integrate with existing checkpoint screening systems and has a
significant upgrade market for existing systems in addition to markets for new
systems. &lt;br/&gt;