* 0441666
* SBIR Phase I:     Customized Ontology Information Retrieval
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Mary Merrell, INRAD, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,970.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
develop and demonstrate a prototype information retrieval application that
creates a customized view of a domain ontology to assist users in retrieving
relevant documents from a collection of information. The ontology will be
employed to guide users to optimize their query formation; the system will
capture and analyze the user's query development process and term preferences in
order to identify term usage patterns. The system will also analyze the choices
the user makes to view documents from the search results. The results of the
user query analysis and document selection analysis will be used to create a
user-specific unique view of the ontology for future searches. This capability
will dramatically improve the accuracy, speed, and "intelligence" of context-
aware information retrieval systems. It will also enable refinement of the
ontology for greater semantic depth and utility. This development will have
broad impacts for the information management community. By increasing the depth
of semantic understanding through interaction with users, the system will "mine"
the expertise of its users to enrich the source ontologies, increasing their
usefulness for a broader base of users.

The customizable ontology capability developed under this project will find uses
in healthcare, pharmaceuticals, defense/counterterrorism, and manufacturing at a
minimum - in every sector reliant on "deep knowledge." Customizable ontologies
will reduce the volume and diversity of information presented to users,
improving retrieval accuracy and speed by orders of magnitude and enabling
future search engines to deliver - with a single "hit" - exactly the information
sought. By enabling clearer articulation of user needs based on term usage and
preferences, this project is expected to improve information retrieval system
efficiency tenfold. The customizable ontology will provide a pathway to dynamic,
real-time knowledge management. As just one example, ontology-based advisors
offer tremendous opportunities for innovation in product and process
development, by enabling designers to draw effectively on the captured knowledge
of the enterprise.