* 0441705
* SBIR Phase I:  Knowledge Based Decision Support of Retail Merchandise Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,11/30/2005
* Shah Yunus, Sentrana, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 11/30/2005
* USD 99,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
provide a new paradigm of decision support capability needed to empower non-
scientifically oriented retail managers to scientifically determine optimal
pricing and inventory levels given the uncertainty of consumer demand and
qualitative optimization criteria. Retail managers need to construct models of
demand, and use those models to determine inventory levels and pricing that will
maximize profitability. Bayesian Networks provide a parsimonious and accessible
method for codifying complex causal links between variables, and encoding the
probabilistic relations amongst them. Exploiting this powerful knowledge
representation capability for retail decision making presents a two-fold
challenge: Creating a modeling framework which satisfies the need for intuitive
knowledge engineering while providing robust reasoning capability for uncertain
and qualitative elements of the optimization function; and secondly, enables
retail managers to visualize the complex mechanics of the optimization function.
The objective of this Phase I research is to demonstrate the feasibility of
overcoming these challenges using a knowledge-based decision support tool for
retail pricing and inventory optimization, which departs critically from
previous constraint logic based, "black box" approaches to optimization that
have failed to interact with users' intuition, subjective optimization criteria,
and pervasive consumer demand uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The retail
sector accounts for 9.2% of the national GDP, and generate over $3.2 trillion of
sales yet it loses over $900 billion due to inventory surpluses and shortfalls.
To determine optimal inventory (or pricing) levels, a regional supermarket
retailer must perform 156 million decisions per year (30,000 products x 100
stores x 52 weeks). This number far exceeds the organization's decision-making
capabilities, and the results are evident in the poor operating profit margins
of the retail sector. Gross profit margins for retailers are typically 25%, but
once inventory and marketing costs are deducted, the net profit margins are only
1-2% (Montgomery 1997). Retail managers are grossly failing to learn from the
data available to them, and are subsequently failing to make optimal inventory
and pricing decisions. The broader impact of this SBIR initiative will be to
radically accelerate this learning process and reduce inefficiencies in the
decision loop. The results of this research effort will not only improve the
economic productivity of the retail sector, but also introduce new research
streams on knowledge-based decision support to both academics and industry, and
provide the intellectual foundations for much needed interchange between the
two. &lt;br/&gt;