* 0441999
* SGER: Technologies of Civil Society in East Central Europe
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* David Stark, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 74,992.00

The first component of this project will examine civic association websites. The
grantee will gather data on the features, functionalities, and incoming and
outoing hyperlinks of approximately 1600 prominent civil society websites in
four East Central European countries (Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, and the Czech
Republic). Replicating a study conducted in 2002 will enable charting the
dynamics of civil society website organization. Questions such as the following
will be addressed:

o Overall, did websites move towards including interactive features? o Were some
genre forms of online civil organizing more likely to inhibit website
development, making it significantly less likely that websites were updated? o
Is there more transnationalization after EU accession? o How do the websites of
civic associations differ from government websites in East Central Europe?

For comparative purposes, the research team will gather the same kinds of data
on civic associations in:

1) two other recent entrants to the European Union from the Baltic states,
Estonia, Latvia, or Lithuania, 2) two other countries that entered the European
Union in a previous round of accession, most likely Ireland and Spain, 3) four
core West European countries, Britain, France, Germany, and Italy, and 4) Russia
and the United States.

The project will also analyze survey data on 1000 of the largest civic
associations in Hungary. The comprehensive questionnaire will include questions
on technology use, the mission of the organization; its objectives, goals, and
values; the types of activities it undertakes (e.g., demonstrations, petitions,
lobbying, educating the public, conferences, and so on); patterns of technology
adoption; patterns of funding; forms of organizational decision-making; patterns
of accountability; and types of partnerships, collaborations, and linkages to
other organizations.