* 0441297
* SBIR Phase I:    A Decision Support System for the Train Schedule Design Problem
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Ravindra Ahuja, Innovative Scheduling Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project entails
developing a decision support system for the train schedule design problem, one
of freight railroad transportation's most significant optimization problems.
Railroad transportation presents a rich collection of optimization problems;
however, the mathematical complexity of these problems has precluded the
development of optimization algorithms for solving them. As a result, the
railroads have not benefited from the advances taking place in the field of
optimization. They are still relying on manual decision-making processes for
most of their planning and scheduling needs. This project is intended to
automate an important railroad decision process. The first step in the railroad
planning process is to determine a blocking plan. This plan consolidates rail
cars originating at one location but heading for different destinations into a
single block, so as to reduce the car handlings. Once a railroad has identified
a blocking plan, it must design a train schedule so that trains can efficiently
carry blocks from their origins to their destinations. The train schedule design
problem determines the following: how many trains to run; the origin,
destination, and route of each train; the train arrival and departure times for
each station at which it stops; the weekly operating schedule for each train;
and the assignment of blocks of cars to trains. All of this is accomplished
while keeping the total cost of transportation at a minimum. This problem is a
very large-scale integer programming problem containing trillions of decision
variables. This research will develop customized algorithms using state-of-the-
art network optimization and heuristic techniques so that this problem can be
solved within two hours of computer time on a workstation. It requires
significant advances in modeling, algorithmic, and implementation technologies,
and it will provide much needed software to schedule freight trains worldwide.
Two US railroads, BNSF and Norfolk Southern, have agreed to assist in this
project by providing data and sharing their insights and experiences. They will
also verify, validate, and implement the solutions obtained by the algorithms
within their environment. It is anticipated that the use of this software will
reduce operational costs from between $12-$20 million annually for each of the
major US railroads.

This research is motivated by the need to develop network flow based heuristic
solution techniques for large-scale and complex optimization problems that arise
in railroad scheduling. There is also a significant need to incorporate these
techniques in software products that railroad management personnel can use in
their daily decision-making practices. This research will therefore establish
the efficacy of network optimization and heuristic methodology to solve railroad
scheduling problems. The success of this project and the use of these software
products in industry will lead to a greater acceptance of the optimization
models and optimization-based software in the railroad industry. It will pave
the way for new software products for several other equally important railroad
scheduling problems. In the long run, this research will lead to more efficient
US railroads with improved profitability.