* 0441490
* SBIR Phase I:    Automatic Language Detection Using Fast Wordspotting
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Jon Arrowood, NEXIDIA INC.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2005
* USD 0.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will perform the
research and development necessary to integrate extra information gathered from
an existing phonetic word-spotting technology into a language and dialect
identification system, thus enhancing the identification system. The research
objective of this proposal is to use Nexidia's existing wordspotting technology
to improve a state of the art language identification system. Wordspotting is
the technique where a word (or phrase) is searched for in audio, with the return
being a set of timestamps where the word or phrase might have occurred, along
with a confidence score for each timestamp. Standard state-of-the-art language
identification systems currently are based on Gaussian Mixture Models and
phoneme statistics of each candidate language. They cannot use full speech
recognition for computational reasons. However, wordspotting is lightweight,
needing only a fraction of a CPU. If a list of several thousand common words and
phrases is generated, it is very likely that in speech more than a few seconds
long, an item from this list will be spoken. Thus for this project, it is
proposed to begin with a state of the art language identification system, and
augment it by such a search from each candidate language. The expected result is
a language identification system capable of outperforming current state of the
art systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to automatically classify which
language is being spoken in a segment of speech would be a highly desirable
feature in many speech communications systems. The proposed method for language
identification is an extension to state of the art systems. As such, a baseline
for performance can be considered to be current state of the art, and it is
probable that the proposed research will result in better classification
accuracy than is currently reported in the literature. If better accuracy is
achieved, the proposed structure could become a standard. Further, there is no
commercial product available at this time to perform language classification, as
existing systems are all in the research lab and not commercialized. Were the
proposed research to be even moderately successful, a new class of commercial
offering would emerge. Possible applications include routing, monitoring, and
quality assurance in call centers, data mining and intelligence applications,
and to enable the proper speech recognition system. Call centers could
automatically route incoming calls to appropriate CSRs, and surveillance
operations could add additional filtering criteria to their intercepted records.
The integration of this feature along with the original functionality of fast
phonetic keyword spotting would greatly enhance data-mining
capability.&lt;br/&gt;