* 0441650
* STTR Phase I:    Novel Biomimetic Nanostructures for Air Monitoring in Smart Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Russell Mileham, MIDWEST MICRO-TEK LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project combines
nanotechnology and biotechnology to develop a new type of biomimetic sensing
structure for monitoring air quality in buildings as a part of a smart system to
enhance security by preventing current and future vulnerabilities. The
innovation in this work is the combination of new nanoscale fabrication
technologies with a new theory on biological olfaction based on electron
tunneling, which may make possible the development of a true electronic nose
that has significant performance improvements as compared to existing
technologies. The objective of this work is to determine the feasibility of
using nano-fabrication techniques and structures to mimic biological olfaction
so that toxic gases can be measured with significantly improved selectivity,
stability, sensitivity, and response times.

This research will enhance scientific and technological understanding, and if
successful, will allow the development of an electronic nose with significantly
improved capabilities over existing technology. This technology will provide
significant benefit to society by improving homeland security and detection
methods in other fields where odor analysis is important such as medical
diagnosis, food and beverage characterization, and chemical and pharmaceutical
industries.