* 0441796
* SBIR Phase I: Development of a Nemeth Math to Latex Backtranslator System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Deepa Gopal, Logical Software Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 12/31/2005
* USD 94,440.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will conduct research to
develop a commercial quality PC-based system for automatically back-translating
mathematics encoded in Nemeth Math Braille notation to LATEX. The system will
greatly facilitate communication of visually impaired students, scientists, and
engineers with their sighted instructors and colleagues. It will also greatly
help in facilitating learning of mathematics by elementary, middle and high
school students. Translation of Nemeth Math Braille to LATEX is known to be a
hard problem. Using novel approaches of denotational semantics and logic
programming in earlier research, Logical Software Solutions (LSS) developed a
proof-of-concept system that can back-translate complete mathematical documents
containing both Nemeth Math and literary Braille text to LATEX. The prototype
system developed, however, is limited. It does not handle all the spatially laid
out Mathematics (matrices and grade school arithmetic and algebraic
addition/subtraction problems.). In this project, LSS will conduct research to
extend the prototype system so that spatially laid out mathematics can be fully
handled. The research should make good progress toward a complete software
environment approach commercial quality. It should be noted that until recently
the back translation problem was widely believed to be unsolvable due to the
language-complexity of Nemeth Braille Math.&lt;br/&gt;The proffered back-
translation system will be usable a stand-alone software system that can convert
math documents coded in Nemeth code to LATEX. The system has the potential to
have a significant impact in the classroom environment, as blind students of
mathematics, science and engineering at universities and community colleges will
be able to write answers to homework and exam questions in Nemeth Math notation
and have them automatically converted to LATEX for grading by a sighted
instructor. Blind students at middle schools and high schools will also be
significantly affected. According to the National Federation of the Blind, there
are 93,600 blind children attending school in the U.S. alone. Likewise, the
1,166 community colleges in the U.S. and 417 universities with enrollments of
more than 10.000 students serve tens of thousands of visually impaired students.
The firm's market survey indicates that these institutions of learning (school
districts, community colleges and universities will be potential
customers.&lt;br/&gt;