* 0441090
* SBIR Phase I:    Removal of Toxic Microcystins in Water Using Graphite Nanofibers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Xuejun Xu, CATALYTIC MATERIALS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,876.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project deals with the
use of graphite nanofibers (GNF) as novel adsorption media for the removal of
bio-toxins from water. Specifically, the research will focus on the removal of
microcystin-LR, a potential biological weapon that could be used by terrorists
to attack human beings. Various methods have been proposed for the removal of
microcystins from aqueous media, including adsorption by activated carbon,
chlorination, ozonation, permanganate, hydrogen peroxide, photolysis, and
semiconductor photo-catalysis. Of these approaches, the activated carbon
treatment appears to be one of the most effective procedures. Various
microcystins can be adsorbed on the porous surface of activated carbon and the
efficiency of removal depends upon the pore size and surface functionality. It
is claimed that the dominant factor in the adsorption process is the volume of
mesopores (2-50 nm diameter) rather than the volume of micropores (diameter < 2
nm) or megapores (diameter > 50nm). In addition, the removal efficiency
gradually decreases over a period of time due to the accumulation of a bio-film
on the activated carbon surface.

The regeneration of the spent activated carbon is not a simple task and as
consequently the contaminated material is frequently discarded. Improper
disposal procedures of used activated carbons could give rise to serious
problems because microcystins are known to persist for many years when stored in
dry conditions at room temperature and to withstand many hours of boiling in
water. Since GNF contain an abundance of edge sites, the surface functionality
can easily be transformed to give either hydrophobic to hydrophilic properties.
In addition, it has recently been discovered that following suitable thermal
treatments it is possible to generate GNF structures that possess a large
fraction of mesopores having average dimensions of 12 nm. This unusual blend of
properties makes GNF ideal candidates for the adsorption of microcystins from
water. Furthermore, the high degree of crystalline perfection exhibited by GNF
enables one to heat the materials in the presence of oxidizing gases to
temperatures in excess of 500 C, thereby allowing for the removal of trapped
microcystins and the regeneration of the adsorbate.