* 0441621
* SBIR Phase I:    Content Authoring, Presentation and Communication System for Informal Science Education Exhibits
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Mabel Ney, Image Works
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 98,591.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will determine
the feasibility of using a content authoring, presentation and communication
system in science centers for ongoing interactive learning experiences. Human
factors research and development will result in a detailed specification and
demonstration system that connects collaborative exhibits to personalized
interactive web content. Science centers are struggling to find more effective,
sustainable means of engaging the public in ongoing informal learning
experiences. The proposing business has completed 2000+ hours of research and
development on an integrated, onsite and online participatory interaction
platform to address this need. Prototypes of components of the onsite structured
learning system were user-tested and evaluated by an independent team from
Lesley University resulting in a favorable report indicating that these
components meet or exceed the learning and design objectives. The proposed
research consists of designing, developing, and evaluating prototypes of the
self-directed visitor experience. The objective is to understand how to engage
visitors in a self-sustaining cycle of personalized, participatory science
discovery. The desired outcome is to foster long-term, free-choice learning
through ongoing visitor engagement with science centers. The goal is to design,
document and demonstrate a commercially feasible content authoring, presentation
and communication system supporting this outcome.

This content authoring, presentation and communication system enables exhibit
developers, researchers and educators to partner on active constructivist
learning experiences incorporating technologies (HTML, digital imagery, video
microscopes, etc.) with tactile objects. Multi-station exhibits allow exhibitors
to construct a learning flow across related topics. The system leverages limited
space and allows shared cost between several venues in the form of traveling
exhibits. This cost-effective, flexible system enables exhibitors to easily
incorporate cutting-edge research, collaborate on exhibits, and generate
personalized visitor Web sites integrated with virtual exhibits. Reliable,
robust technology reduces the burden on the venue's IT staff. The visitor's
learning experience will transcend the museum walls, and museums can continue
the thread of the exhibits. The system facilitates young people's social
interactions through common technologies such as e-mail, instant messaging, cell
phones, Web logs and networked multi-player gaming. Technology identifies
individual visitors permitting creation, collaboration on and collection of
personalized artifacts during the interaction. Networked digital imaging allows
a visitors to incorporate herself into the content by attaching her own digital
video, still imagery, and audio to personalize the experience. The visitor can
access /her personalized web page to share with her peers, parents or teachers,
and continue into deeper self-directed learning.