* 0441904
* SBIR Phase I:    Water Remediation Technology for Removal of Chemical and Biological Contaminants
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Lisa Farmen, Crystal Clear Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop an
inexpensive, passive water purification system that will remove chemical and
biological contaminants from water for home and personal use. Worldwide there is
grave concern with the potential for terrorist acts to pollute municipal water
systems. The uncertain nature of terrorist action makes defensive measures
equally uncertain. A low cost water purification system which is effective
against most biological pathogens and organic contaminates provides an
additional resource to our homeland defenses. The passive nature of the proposed
treatment module makes it independent of other factors such as power
requirements or water pressure. The initial product, in its smallest embodiment,
is designed to be portable so that a person or family can take it wherever
circumstances may dictate. The most promising single water purification
technology, which meets all of the constraints, is one based on surface modified
zeolite adsorption. A key issue is the scalability of any technology; with the
completion of this development project, a demonstration not only of the initial
product for homeland defense but a product path to a complete self-powered home
water treatment system will be made.

It is widely accepted that inevitably water is becoming the world's most
precious commodity. Innumerable deaths and diseases are constantly linked to
polluted water, not to mention the lack of water in certain locales. From the
executive summary of the World Water Assessment Program sponsored by the United
Nations under UNESCO: "In 2000, the estimated mortality rate due to water
sanitation hygiene-associated diseases, was 2,213,000." That calculates to one
person every 15 seconds. In China, over one billion people lack acceptable water
resources. News reports chronicle the fact that thousands if not millions of
people spend a significant portion of their day seeking potable water. Recent
geopolitical events as well as local budgetary constraints are doing nothing to
improve the situation. A low cost water purification system, which has broad
applicability in third world regions, would be a major step in improving the
health and well being of millions of people.