* 0441632
* SBIR Phase I:  Design of a 10-Gigabit Ethernet Transceiver Over Copper
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Yongru Gu, Leanics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project will address the
tradeoffs involved in design and implementation of a 10-gigabit ethernet
transceiver over unshielded twisted pair (UTP) copper cables of category 6 or 7.
The IEEE standards committee 802.3-an was created in Feb. 2004 to study and
create a new standard for this purpose. Design and implementation of these
tranceivers at 10 Gbps have never been demonstrated. The receiver design is
challenging not only with respect to algorithm considerations for equalization
and decoding and noise cancellations but also with respect to hardware
implementations at 10 Gbps. The former requires extensive simulations of
receiver algorithms and performance tradeoff analysis while the latter requires
extensive architectural considerations with respect to feasibility of speed and
power consumption. The cost and power are primary constraints. Current Gigabit
transceivers consume about 1 Watt power. In order for the 10-Gigabit
transceivers to be attractive, they will need to consume less than 8 Watts.

This phase I study will expand and attempt to commercialize the current and
prior efforts of the PI. It will address both transmitter-receiver design and
architecture design for VLSI integrated chip implementation. The tradeoffs of
various modulation schemes and coding schemes will be studied. The results of
these studies will be presented to the standards committee and will be published
at various conferences. The architecture design issues will address 10-gigabit
implementation of complex blocks such as LDPC decoder, LDPC encoder, Tomlinson-
Harashima Precoder (THP), and other echo and next cancellers. Parallel decision
feedback equalizers and decoders operating at 10 Gbps will be studied. The
demonstration of this system will allow companies such as Cisco, Force-10 and
Avaya to include this as part of their 10-gigabit systems. The business
opportunities for 10-gigabit ethernet transceivers are many! The chips will
revolunize data transmission in data centers now and desktops in a few years.
The technology generated through this study will be of interest to other
ethernet systems such as 2.5 or 5 Gbps over low-grade low-cost existing copper
cables of type category-5 and 5e. The broader impacts of this research can be
felt by having data available at 10 Gbps at desktops everywhere in a few years.
This is an order of magnitude higher speed than what is possible to achieve
today. Other impacts include dramatic cost reduction by using copper instead of
fiber, longer distance reach by using sophisticated signal processing algorithms
and architectures in the transmitter and receiver.