* 0441765
* SBIR Phase I:    Distributed Optical Fiber Sensor Using Computationally Designed Fluorescent Proteins
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,10/31/2005
* Shiou-Jyh Ja, NOMADICS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 10/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes
development of a distributed optical fiber sensor using computationally designed
fluorescent proteins. Surface plasmon coupled emission (SPCE) has been shown to
be an excellent means to enhance fluorescence sensing technology. With our
innovation, grating-assisted SPCE (GASPCE), the fluorescence emission can be
coupled into optical fibers with great efficiency. The integration of the GASPCE
and existing optical fiber networking technology, such as spectral/time domain
multiplexing, provides a robust infrastructure to perform distributed real-time
resource monitoring. The core sensing technology is based on computationally
designed proteins (CDPs), proteins containing a ligand-specific engineered
binding site and conjugated fluorophore. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
system will address urgent needs related to homeland security and national
defense. Further, it will have numerous industrial and scientific applications.
The proposed enhancements have applicability across a wide range of fluorescent
detection methods. The low cost and adaptability of CDP approach promises the
expansion of detection systems into areas that were previously impractical to
address. &lt;br/&gt;