* 0441330
* SBIR Phase I:     SimulNation - Creating and Testing a Multi-User Learning Simulation for the Web
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Michael Hillinger, LexIcon Systems
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 98,703.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
web-based system to deliver middle and high school instruction using dynamic
models of real and complex systems, linked to engaging, multimedia simulations
that meld science and social issues. At the core, the approach is to use STELLA,
the premier tool for creating system dynamic models, as the engine for a server
and client-based models. Unlike previous applications of STELLA in K-12
education, the proposed models will provide data and outcomes to an interactive
multimedia simulation. Students will experience the power of the STELLA model
through this scenario-based simulation. Lexicon Systems will also leverage the
connectivity of the web by allowing multiple students to interact, compete, and
collaborate within the scenario. As students work through the scenario, they can
keep files and report findings using their own online portfolio. Lexicon Systems
will use this technical infrastructure to create an interdisciplinary series
called SimulNation where students assume the roles of countries dealing with
internal challenges of growth, sustainable development, and other scientific and
social issues. These students will also compete and collaborate in a
multinational body modeled after the United Nations. In this forum they must
address such global issues as trade, climate change, and distribution of
resources. The topic of the Phase I prototype will be each country's national
and global level efforts to slow global warming. In addition to dealing with the
sources and sinks for CO2 such as industrialization and forestation, users will
have to manipulate and negotiate the social, political, and cultural factors
within and outside their country.

The proffered technology will enable learning of complex problem solving, which
requires rich and interesting problems. The proffered product, SimulNation,
represents the melding of two powerful components; the STELLA modeling system,
interpreted through a scenario based simulation, and the peer-to-peer
connectivity of the web. This product and approach has the capacity to involve
students in rich and interesting learning environments that represent the
collaborative nature of scientific investigation and social interaction.
Combining flexible models, interesting simulations, and peer-to-peer
collaboration and competition opens up the kinds of learning opportunities that
the web has promised but, so far, has failed to deliver