* 0441249
* SBIR Phase I:    I-MINDS:   Intelligent Multiagent Infrastructure for Distributed Systems in Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Hong Jiang, I-MINDS Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 12/31/2005
* USD 99,611.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes an
innovative multiagent technology called the Intelligent Multiagent
Infrastructure for Distributed Systems in Education (I-MINDS). In this system,
the agents communicate and coordinate their actions to help support the students
and instructors that they serve by adapting to changing classroom environments
and student behaviors and by better analyzing the status of a classroom at
different resolutions for the instructor. Thus, I-MINDS supports cooperative
learning among students, assists instructors in managing real-time classroom
activities, and facilitates experimentation leading to a better understanding of
teaching and learning. The quality of interactions in Internet-based classrooms
fostered by I-MINDS will approach that previously attained only in live,
"synchronous" classrooms. I-MINDS will be used to improve distance learning and
teaching in post-secondary education and corporate training through a system of
intelligent software agents that communicate with each other to exchange
experiences and to cooperatively support instructors and students. The proposed
project will move I-MINDS from an encouraging proof-of-concept phase to a
pathfinder and prototyping phase, paving the way for full development and
commercialization. The project goal is to improve both learning and teaching in
online post-secondary education and training--through the use of technology. The
project objectives include (1) embedding structured cooperative learning into
I-MINDS to further support the collaborative learning environment, and (2)
providing the scalability and security necessary for the cognitive functions and
scaled deployment of I-MINDS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
project is twofold. The first impact is expected to be graduates with diverse
backgrounds and aspirations who are better prepared to enter their chosen
careers and to make knowledgeable decisions about issues they will face as
citizens of society. The second one is expected to be the enrichment of online
educational tools and the improved quality of Internet based classrooms to
better serve the fast growing market segment of online and distance education.
&lt;br/&gt;