* 0441570
* SBIR Phase I:    Automated Image Annotation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Ryan Benton, STAR SOFTWARE SYSTEMS CORP
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project examines the
feasibility of automatically assigning keywords to new images using instance-
based learning methods, content analysis and pre-annotated images. This project
will provide a new color quantization method that describes images using a
common set of representative and discriminatory colors. This results in a
reduction of the number of calculations required by the distance metrics
employed by instance-based methods in determining which keywords to assign. This
project will also investigate the utility of transforming the low-level color
domain into a new feature domain, effectively removing the correlations between
color features. This reduces the potential for annotation error when the
instance-based methods employ distance metrics that does not account for
correlations. Users implicitly refine these initial annotations when they
perform searches using relevance feedback. By examining the user feedback, the
relative importance of the keywords assigned to an image is modified. The more
relevant keywords are assigned greater weights and the less relevant smaller
weights. This permits erroneously assigned keywords to be effectively ignored.
Hence, this system provides an efficient means for automatically assigning
keywords to images and allows for automatic corrections by incorporating the
results of user searches.

This project will provide organizations that are involved in image generation
and/or collection to easily and inexpensively annotate new images. Savings are
achieved in both the monetary and efficiency arenas. By automating the
annotation process, the need for a staff dedicated to examining and categorizing
raw data is greatly reduced, resulting in reduction of costs. Furthermore, by
automating the process, the speed at which annotations can be assigned is
enhanced, allowing for greater throughput. In addition, by annotating the
images, keyword-based search and retrieval systems can now be used on the
organization's image collection, allowing for greater leverage of existing
software products and permitting greater exposure and utilization of the
collection.