* 0441230
* 25th International Conference on Mathematical Geophysics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Marc Spiegelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to help support meeting costs and travel
expenses of U.S.&lt;br/&gt;participants to the 25th International Conference on
Mathematical Geophysics to be held&lt;br/&gt;at Columbia University in New York
City from June 16-18, 2004. The Conference on&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Geophysics
meets every two years and is sponsored by the Committee
on&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Geophysics of the International Union of Geodesy and
Geophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits This year's conference is
titled Frontiers in Theoretical Earth Science&lt;br/&gt;and brings together
earth scientists, physicists, applied mathematicians, and others
who&lt;br/&gt;seek to develop new ideas for better understanding the processes
and properties of the&lt;br/&gt;Earth. This year, the meeting will survey the
current and future state of theoretical Earth&lt;br/&gt;sciences ranging from
the core and mantle to the surface, oceans, and life. In
particular&lt;br/&gt;the meeting emphasizes advances in theory, techniques such
as advanced computation and&lt;br/&gt;data analysis and new problems and
observations in need of theoretical understanding.&lt;br/&gt;This meeting
provides a single multi-disciplinary forum for the exchange of ideas
and&lt;br/&gt;techniques across the disciplinary boundaries in the Earth
Sciences The conference web&lt;br/&gt;site can be found at
http://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/~mspieg/CMG2004/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts This meeting provides a rare opportunity for students and early-
career&lt;br/&gt;scientists from across the earth sciences and applied
mathematics to interact with senior&lt;br/&gt;scientists in a small informal
setting. This meeting also forms a principal activity of&lt;br/&gt;Columbia's
NSF IGERT Joint Program in Applied Mathematics and Earth &amp; Environ-
mental&lt;br/&gt;Sciences. It will be staffed by current IGERT graduate students
and will provide&lt;br/&gt;excellent exposure for these students to a wide range
of research opportunities, new peers&lt;br/&gt;and senior scientists. Space
permitting, the oral sessions of this meeting will be open to
the&lt;br/&gt;general public.&lt;br/&gt;