* 0441581
* SBIR Phase I:     Advancing an Interactive Learning Platform by Integrating Multiplayer Game Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Douglas Seifert, Syandus, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances
Syandus's interactive learning platform by integrating multiplayer game
technology. Syandus's current interactive delivery platform allows
pharmaceutical firms and content experts to communicate complex concepts to
physicians and patients through interactive presentations, discussion groups or
self-directed learning. The addition of network-enabled collaboration afforded
by this project creates the opportunity for interaction between users and
content experts without the constraints of geography. The integration of
multiplayer game technology into Syandus's platform requires the innovative
application of this technology to serve a new purpose. This project will develop
the functional requirements, assess technology options and deliver a detailed
design plan and proof of concept prototypes as needed to demonstrate
feasibility. Syandus is currently working with one of the top five
pharmaceutical companies in world to develop and deliver innovative medical
education to physicians. In the first business application derived from this
concept, physicians will be able to remotely connect with nationwide content
experts to interactively learn the latest best practices and medical science in
a more compelling way than currently available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
pharmaceutical industry strives to communicate medical science innovation and
new treatment methods through an information cascade from international and
national level thought leaders, to regional physician thought leaders, to
practicing physicians and their patients. The anticipated results from this
concept will be a learning tool for pharmaceutical companies that allow tens or
hundreds of physicians nationwide to have an interactive dialog about a disease
state and appropriate treatment. Longer term, in the educational realm,
Syandus's technology could be used to develop more sophisticated collaborative
learning environments where each individual or group is responsible for one part
of a large interactive system. Imagine a learning tool that allows science
students from around the country to collaborate to optimize the function of a
cell. Some students control protein synthesis, some RNA synthesis, others the
flux of nutrients in and out of the plasma membrane. Process algorithms control
the cellular outputs from each group based on students' inputs. Each optimizes
their function for the overall performance of the cell. Transforming Syandus's
existing platform with multi user capability adds rich human interaction into
the remote learning process, brings scientific models to life, and allows
greater dissemination of knowledge.