* 0441646
* SBIR PHASE I:     Individualized Guidance for the Blind (IGB)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Gary Livshin, TALKING LIGHTS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I program will develop and
qualify a new assistive technology to aid persons who are blind. The Improved
Guidance for the Blind (IGB) system will provide easy-to-follow, personalized
guidance and wayfinding information for people who are blind and others needing
assistance. In a separate effort, a wayfinding system for the blind using GPS
for outdoor location is now being designed and built. For indoor use, however,
this system requires a complex inertial guidance system for location and
guidance. In this project, Talking Lights will use and qualify powerful,
inexpensive Talking Lights optical locators to improve indoor wayfinding and
supply GPS-like location indoors. With minimal infrastructure modification, the
system will identify the user's location and desired destination, determine the
preferred travel path, and provide real time Braille or audio guidance,
directions and corrections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will demonstrate
the concept of using inexpensive illumination-based Talking Lights optical
locators to make very precise GPS-like guidance possible indoors. It will enable
a system to be created which provides location and guidance indoors and
outdoors. Context awareness is an active area for research in mobile computing
and the optical location technique demonstrated here promises to be a powerful
technique for context awareness indoors. Modified IGB ballast transformers will
be commercial products sold to replace current ballast transformers and allow
fluorescent lights to perform dual use as locators. IGB receivers will process
optical signals and provide location, context awareness for the
BrailleNote/VoiceNote PDA . Software developed will allow Talking Lights
locators to provide GPS-like locator information indoors and permit the input of
location to the PDA, updating of location and elimination of errors. The
software will be a commercial product. Application areas will include museums,
malls, hospitals, schools, retail stores, trade shows, transportation facilities
and other places where blind travel. &lt;br/&gt;