* 0441315
* SBIR Phase I:    Towards Meshfree Computer Aided Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Michael Freytag, INTACT SOLUTIONS
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will determine
feasibility of developing a new general-purpose software technology and toolkit
for computer-aided engineering (CAE). The unique feature of this technology is
the ability to perform engineering analysis and simulation directly from the
native geometric models created by scientists and engineers, while avoiding the
usual difficulties associated with finite element meshing and other types of
spatial discretizations. The patented technology was conceived as part of NSF-
funded research at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and has already been
tested on several applications. The key link between geometric and analysis
information is a parameterization of engineering problems in terms of distance
fields that can be constructed automatically from virtually all geometric
models. The approach is theoretically sound and has been experimentally tested
on a variety of problems. Intact Solutions seeks to determine the feasibility of
constructing a general-purpose software toolkit that would be seamlessly
integrated with a widely available commercial geometric toolkit. If successful,
the project would result in next generation tools for analysis and simulation of
scientific and engineering field problems with unprecedented levels of
automation and flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intact Solutions addressed one
of the most challenging aspects and fundamental limitations of computer-aided
engineering. By all accounts, representation conversions, and meshing in
particular, dominate most modeling activities and limit productivity,
necessitating substantial human, computer, and real costs. The proffered
technology has the potential of alleviating existing barriers in computer-aided
engineering and of opening doors to new products and services. Prototype two-
dimensional software for thermal modeling, plate vibrations, and experimental
fully automated Internet analysis service are demonstrated at the home page of
Intact Solutions at http://www.meshfree.com. A commercial strategy will
incorporate and market the developed technology as part of the most popular and
widely available commercial geometric toolkit, Parasolid.