* 0441114
* Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Research Program for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Carlos Castillo-Chavez, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2005
* USD 232,633.00

The focus of this project is to provide a first-rate research experience to
students who otherwise are extremely unlikely to get get it at their home
institutions or elsewhere. The sequential research experiences focus on the
applications of mathematics to the biological sciences. The Mathematical and
Theoretical Biology &lt;br/&gt;Institute (MTBI) scientific undergraduate program
is carried out primarily through consecutive summer research experiences that
have been specifically designed to train, mentor, encourage and support Chicano,
Latino, Native American and African American who have the potential to pursue
careers in applied mathematics or in scientific field where serious quantitative
training is fundamental. MTBI's main goal of increasing the pool of
underrepresented minorities getting advanced degrees in quantitative fields is
best achieved through the selection of participants who come from non-selective
universities. The effectiveness of this NSF funded project is being measured by
the number of students who enroll in graduate school, the &lt;br/&gt;number who
get advanced degrees and the ability of some MTBI alumni to gain access to
selective graduate programs in these fields. MTBI promotes its goals and
objectives through its intensive multiple-summer research training program, GRE
preparation program and long-term mentorship and support programs for its
alumni. Students receive four weeks of intensive training in mathematical and
computational techniques before developing their own research project (10
technical reports per year have been generated, on the average, since 1996).
MTBI summer research experiences opens the doors for underrepresented minorities
in fields of genomics, theoretical and computational biology, bio-statistics,
applied mathematics and many &lt;br/&gt;others. The success of the consecutive
summer research experiences is based on various factors that include "unlimited"
student access to faculty and support personnel (12 to 16 hours a day) and a
collaborative learning environment that enhances and nurtures the learning
experiences of all participants. Explicit summer outcomes include: the
completion a formal research paper (25-40 pages), a public oral presentation and
the preparation of a poster. The typical activities of most MTBI alumni include
the presentation of their MTBI work in poster sessions at two national
conferences: the SACNAS annual meeting and the joint AMS/MAA winter meeting.