* 0441652
* SBIR Phase I:    Video Mining for Customer Behavior in Retail Enterprises
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Satish Mummareddy, VideoMining Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims at
developing video mining techniques for automatically generating customer
behavior statistics to help retail enterprises. These statistics can be very
valuable for supporting critical decisions in merchandising, in-store marketing,
and customer service. This video mining tool can be used for accurate assessment
of the effectiveness of all consumer-facing elements in retail environments
designed to promote or sell products. The key problems addressed will include
view-independent person detection, multi-person tracking, a method for
specifying behaviors, and robust behavior recognition. The approach will be to
use a variety of computer vision and statistical learning techniques under the
constraints of a typical retail environment. An experimental prototype will be
implemented in Phase I and will use actual surveillance videos collected from
retail enterprises to establish the feasibility of the approach.

Tough economic times and hyper-competition in the retail sector demand a sense
of fiscal discipline and resource optimization. One key element of improving the
performance of the competing retailers and manufacturers is in developing a
deeper understanding of in-store consumer behavior. Current methods (human
observation and manual video indexing) for analyzing customer behavior are
limited in the kind of customer knowledge generated besides being expensive and
time-consuming. This SBIR Phase I effort has the potential to significantly
impact the use of technology in retail business process optimization. The
insights gained in customer behavior by the use of the video mining tool will
enable more informed decision-making for in-store marketing; merchandise
placement, and customer service. The project can impact the field of
observational research in general, and the spillover benefits could go to other
areas like video surveillance for loss prevention and homeland security.