* 0441487
* SBIR Phase I:    SEAMLESS - Systematic Electronic Assessment Management Leading to Effective Significant Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Kathryn Veit, Carolina Technical Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
tool to help engineering faculty design and administer assessments of
engineering education. The tool will also assist in the management of assessment
data to support instructional decisions for individual students, decisions on
courses and programs, and accreditation decisions through the Accreditation
Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET). The assembled team for this project
includes experts in assessment and software commercialization who will conduct
the research necessary to determine the technical and commercial feasibility of
the technology. The combination of expertise in making assessment-based
decisions with experienced computer programming talent produces a team that has
the experience and resources necessary to develop an expert system.

The broader impacts of this project include the following: 1) by making
assessment more manageable, better assessment efforts will be undertaken; 2)
with better assessment of student learning, the quality of the learning
experiences should improve; 3) as the quality of learning experiences improves
in engineering education, so too should the abilities of engineering graduates;
and 4) as other disciplines witness the successes associated with this
innovative educational tool, it can serve as a model for similar efforts in
other disciplines. This tool will facilitate better program planning by
assisting with the management of critical data, making evident to programs the
types of data that might be helpful and retrieving data for internal and
external use.