* 0441869
* SBIR Phase I: Nanostructured Materials for Portable Energy Harvesting Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,08/31/2005
* Michael Pottenger, SmartWear, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will prototype
and characterize piezoelectric (PZ) textiles and their application to energy
scavenging systems. SmartWear has verified that fiber spinning represents an
improvement over traditional methods for manufacture of PZ polymer materials.
The fiber spinning process allows for enhanced technical performance through
improved polymer recrystallization as compared to solution-cast thin films,
which eliminates the need for additional processing ("poling") to solicit the PZ
properties. With potentially lower cost and higher performance, SmartWear's PZ
fiber technology may also have significant applications to other existing
products where PZ thin films are currently used.

Textile forms of piezoelectric materials will enable development of portable
and/or wearable systems for energy scavenging and distributed passive sensing.
For example, garments utilizing PZ materials could capture or regenerate
electrical power from body movement, and would be beneficial to first responder,
security and military personnel in the field. In addition, unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAV's) could tow a PZ banner during flight and regenerate electrical
power for onboard electronics, either reducing battery payload or extending
battery lifetime or providing additional capability for the same battery weight.
While UAV's are currently used primarily in military applications, their use in
surveillance for border patrol and remote search-and-rescue is expected to
increase as systems become more affordable.