* 0441703
* SGER: Paleo-Solar Activity Recorded in Arctic Ice Cores
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Larry Kepko, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 01/31/2006
* USD 87,135.00

The over-arching project objective is to investigate 'paleo-solar activity.' The
main scientific goal is to reconstruct the unknown history of paleo-solar events
and their effect on Earth, as recorded by atmospheric tracers stratified deep in
the polar ice caps over the last 1000-2000 years. Such unprecedented knowledge
of past impulsive solar events (with timescales of days to weeks) is made
possible through recent novel ice core analysis techniques pioneered by project
collaborators. Their studies suggest that modern solar events can be identified
robustly in high time-resolution (decimal year) nitrate ice core records. Ice
core nitrates trace atmospheric nitrates and the processes that create them,
including those associated with major, impulsive solar events (i.e., solar
cosmic rays). This exploratory study will perform the first quantitative
nitrate-solar cosmic ray calibration using shallow (<50 meter) Arctic cores
spanning from the Space Age (~1960) to the present. This calibration is an
essential first step in our ability to interpret more ancient ice core samples.
Several target-of-opportunity ice cores are currently being drilled at Summit,
Greenland from another NSF-supported expedition; they will be made available to
this team at essentially zero cost. Our proposal requests funding to build an
ice core nitrate analysis facility using the most modern techniques, capable of
performing exploratory continuous flow analysis of nitrates at decimal year
resolution.

One immediate goal is of the PI is to develop the research tools, scientific
knowledge, and interdisciplinary depth needed to motivate, propose for, and then
perform similar analyses on new, deeper, and older ice cores. These larger
proposals will provide ample opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate
research projects; such opportunities are especially desired for educating the
next generation of scientist owing to their highly cross-disciplinary nature.
This work has the potential to essentially define a new interdisciplinary
scientific area within astronomy, space physics, and earth sciences. 'Paleo-
solar' science will study of solar activity over previous millennia as a means
to understand not only the Sun's past behavior, but also to provide clues as to
the Sun's long-term, future behavior as a star and its concomitant impacts to
Earth. The techniques proposed here will, for the first time, reveal these
important variations through cross-disciplinary research collaborations with
scientists from earth sciences, glaciology, astronomy, cosmic ray, and
atmospheric sciences. These studies will have significant relevance to diverse
research and technology areas, including the human exploration and development
of space, atmospheric science, space physics, and aerospace technology.