* 0441607
* SBIR Phase I:     Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS)-Based Nanoparticles as Covert Taggants for Anti-Counterfeiting Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Richard Freeman, NANOPLEX TECHNOLOGIES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,917.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
test a series of covert, nanoscale taggants based on Surface Enhanced Raman
Scattering (SERS) for use in the authentication of printed documents and
packages. SERS nanotags consist of a gold core, an organic label molecule and a
glass coating. These 50 nm diameter particles generate unique fingerprint like
spectral signatures, with a readout based on surface enhanced Raman scattering.
The tasks carried out during this project will: (1) determine the feasibility of
adding SERS nanotags to paper and inks, as covert tags, (2) define the
instrument parameters needed for a commercially successful hand held detection
system and (3) develop novel software algorithms to enable tag identification.
The successful combination of nanotechnology, optical engineering, and software
design proposed in this work present a new solution for product authentication
in the commercial markets, and have the potential to act as a covert tag in
matters of national security. Commercially SERS nanotags will have a broad
impact across many commercial and government sectors, because counterfeiting
affects such a wide variety of products. The protection of packaging on retail
products can save corporations, and hence the economy, millions of dollars. In
addition, counterfeiting threatens the security of our country as terrorist
groups are increasingly turning to counterfeiting as a method to fund their
activities. The protection of currency against counterfeiting can save
governments millions (if not billions) of dollars (or Euros). The protection of
pharmaceuticals against counterfeiting can save the legal pharmaceutical
industry millions of dollars and protect consumers against the consumption of
ineffective drugs. The protection of travel documents, including passports and
visas, can safeguard national security.

