* 0441788
* SGER: Rock Magnetism and Paleomagnetism of Corals From Pacific Volcanic Islands: A Feasability Study
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2005,06/30/2006
* Michael Fuller, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 50,991.00

The possibility of getting high-resolution paleomagnetic records of the
geomagnetic field from pre-observatory times has been an aim of researchers
since the early days of paleomagnetism. Corals afford the possibility of such
records. These records would have an enormous impact because at least in
direction and even possibly in relative intensity they would be like observatory
records. For short periods of time throughout the tens of thousands of years for
which dated coral records are available we could have detailed records of the
field. The rock magnetic properties of corals have already been used for
environmental purposes and this appears to be another possible application of
coral magnetism. For example, it may prove an excellent method of dating
sequences of volcanic activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several years ago,
preliminary studies with corals from the Bahamas were attempted, but the
combination of the sensitivity limits of instruments at that time and probably
the unfortunate choice of corals that were not from volcanic islands precluded
satisfactory paleomagnetic records. Recently, studies of corals from the
Hawaiian Islands, from the Solomon Islands and from New Ireland have been
undertaken. These have demonstrated that modern instrumentation provides the
possibility of successful measurement of the paleomagnetic record of corals from
these volcanic environments. &lt;br/&gt;The next steps are to investigate the
fidelity of the records and the magnetic material that carries these records
from different types of corals, which will be accomplished with this SGER
award.&lt;br/&gt;