* 0441424
* SGER: Effect of Soufriere Hills Volcanic Eruptions on the Plant and Soil Environment of Montserrat
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Robert Taylor, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2007
* USD 125,037.00

This project will investigate the effect of Soufriere Hills volcanic eruptions
on the plant and soil environment of Montserrat. The Soufriere Hills volcano
lies in the south-central part of Montserrat island, West Indies. In 1997,
following a major eruption, there was significant damage to the southern 2/3 of
the island because of heavy ash and pumice deposition, forcing evacuation of
this part of the island. The ecological damage caused by the extreme high
temperature and acidity of the ash was devastating. The volcano's dome collapsed
again in July 2003. This resulted in even more widespread deposition of ash and
serious damage to housing and vegetation. Volcanic eruptions are a natural
source of metals and metalloids in both the atmosphere as well as terrestrial
ecosystems. At present there is increasing concern with regard to the release of
potentially toxic metals into the environment. Therefore, we aim to study the
effect of the Soufriere Hills volcano on the biogeochemistry/mineralogy of the
soils, concentrating on the impact of high temperatures, acidity of the ash, and
metal deposition on soil characteristics. Additionally, the impact of the same
on the expression of plant genes resistant to acidity and metals (aluminum etc.)
will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The INTELLECTUAL MERIT of this
proposal lies in the fact that, to our knowledge, no study has been reported
that follows the time sequence effect of freshly deposited volcanic ash (hence
the reason for SGER) on the biogeochemistry/mineralogy of the soil environment.
Similarly, to our knowledge, no studies have investigated plant gene resistance
to acidic volcanic ash deposition. In addition to this, cutting edge technology
such as X-ray fluorescence microprobe, micro-XANES, and EXAFS will be employed
to investigate the chemical nature of the ash at the atomic
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BROADER IMPACT stems from the fact that minority
students from an HBCU will get the opportunity to participate in cutting edge
research, the information from which may have global significance.