* 0441807
* SBIR Phase I:    Magnetic Nanobead-Based Biosenor for Canine Immunity Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Curt Bilby, Seahawk Biosystems Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on the
development of a protein-based biosensor for immunity assessments in companion
animals. The objective is to develop a prototype of a disposable
biochip/fluidics cartridge and associated reader for a panel of canine diseases.
A sandwich immunoassay on a biochip will be developed to measure antibody titer
levels associated with canine diseases. In contrast to existing biochips, the
fluorescent labels typically used will be replaced by magnetic nanobeads. These
nanonbeads can be detected individually using an array of magnetic field sensors
embedded in the biochip. The anticipated result of this project will be a
biosensor that is simpler, more sensitive and less expensive than existing
fluorescent-based biosensors. Moreover, the commercial biosensor may be readily
adapted to detect biowarfare agents.

There is growing evidence that the standard protocol of routine revaccinations
of canines is often unnecessary because the animal still has protective immunity
levels. Not only do over-vaccination create additional costs for dog owners,
health risks exist with every vaccine - ranging from life-threatening conditions
to conditions that degrade quality of life. The ability to use a biosensor to
perform low-cost, real-time immunity assessments address the current over-
vaccination problem by allowing veterinarians to provide tailored disease
protection protocols. Immunity assessments are currently not part of the
standard vaccination protocol because current immunity assessments solutions are
either: 1) too costly, 2) take too long, 3) do not test a full vaccine panel, or
4) provide results that are difficult to interpret. This solution combines all
of the key features necessary to be part of a veterinarian's immunity assessment
protocol.