* 0441594
* SBIR Phase I:     A Rapid Proteomic Biometric Instrument for Detecting Exposure to Biowarfare Agents
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,07/31/2005
* Zoraida Aguilar, VEGRANDIS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will use a novel
self-contained micro-electrochemical detection technology to measure the human
protein response to specific biological agents. The end result will be an
embedded computer controlled, automated, hand held device that can be used to
measure protein levels down to 56 zeptomoles from a pinprick sample of whole
blood in less than 30 minutes. Each detection site on the array will consist of
interdigitized electrodes spaced within 100.s nm dimensions to optimize redox
cycling and amplification of signal. Although this patents pending technology
has been previously shown to detect a multitude of pathogens, anthrax was chosen
for the Phase I work because of its suitability for use as a biological weapon.
Anthrax is a naturally occurring organism with highly resistant spores that is
relatively easy to grow in multitudes. Its effectiveness as a biological weapon
was demonstrated when anthrax laced letters were distributed in October 2001
where 22 people were infected and 5 died before the organism could be detected.
In addition to having biodefense applications, the proposed device could also be
used to detect naturally occurring infectious agents or host produced proteins
to such naturally occurring infectious agents.

Individuals who manufacture or work with anthrax would likely be exposed to low
levels of the pathogen over long periods of time and may not have antibody
levels that are detectible by current methods. The results of Phase I of this
study will allow non-skilled personnel to inexpensively and rapidly detect low
levels of human exposure to anthrax. Suspected distributors of anthrax could be
quickly screened for further questioning on background and intent. Phase II will
focus on automated, simultaneous multiple pathogen detection and will have a
variety of applications. The proposed device could be used in the early
detection of exposure to pathogens such as Bacillus anthracis, Escherichia coli,
Salmonella, Cryptosporidium parvum, Clostridium botulinum, and the like.
Travelers and immigrants could be potentially screened for known pathogens
before being allowed entry into a country. Gravely ill patients with nondescript
symptoms could be diagnosed quickly to maximize prophylaxis and recovery. We
believe that this relatively inexpensive, user-friendly, hand held, low volume
detection devices will find a multitude of uses in the security and medical
fields.