* 0441729
* SBIR Phase I:    A System for Privacy-Preserving Data Mining from Multi-Party Distributed Data
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,09/30/2005
* Kakali Sarkar, AGNIK, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 09/30/2005
* USD 97,404.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
develop a collection of privacy sensitive distributed data mining algorithms for
immediate applications in domains that deal with sensitive private data. Privacy
is becoming a growing concern in many data monitoring and mining applications
such as network intrusion detection, fraud detection, and counter-terrorism
intelligence gathering among others. However, to date, there does not exist any
commercial data mining system that is capable of analyzing potentially
distributed multi-party data in a privacy-sensitive manner. This research will
develop technology to meet this immediate need. It will develop data mining
algorithms that can work without direct access to the original sensitive data.
The research will particularly focus on privacy-preserving statistical computing
and clustering techniques that are particularly suitable for security-related
threat management applications. The algorithmic approach is based on a
combination of random projection and secured multi-party computation-based
techniques. Deliverables will include a collection of privacy-sensitive
algorithms and a documentation of their performance along with a demonstration.

A successful completion of this project will open up many new possibilities
particularly in the domain of security and threat management for counter-
terrorism which are not possible today because of due concerns about the privacy
of the common citizens. Privacy-preserving data mining has numerous potential
applications, with enormous potential benefit for security and economic
efficiency. It also has the great virtue of offering transparency to providers
of information, allowing them to understand and control the revelation of
sensitive features.