* 0441179
* SBIR Phase I:    Knowledge Extraction from Support Vector Machines Models of Non-linear Drug Data Sets
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Frank Axe, Equbits LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,434.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the feasibility of knowledge extraction from Support Vector Machine (SVM) non-
linear models and their results for drug data sets. SVMs are an accurate method
of statistical machine learning for data mining. This project references
research papers where SVMs have performed very well at predicting activity and
properties for drug-like compounds. The lack of interpretability of non-linear
models has prevented successful commercial adoption of SVMs by the chemical and
pharmaceutical industry. This project describes experiments to test different
methods of non-linear feature discovery using drug data sets in order to
determine their potential for commercialization.

The broader impacts of this activity for improving knowledge extraction of non-
linear SVM models include a broad range of applications from improved oil
exploration to credit fraud detection. The company's goal is to provide
innovative drug discovery informatics software research tools to the
pharmaceutical industry. It will present the innovative capabilities discovered
from this grant to industry. The need for improved research tools for drug
discovery is great. This is demonstrated by the fact that the top ten largest
pharmaceutical companies spent over 33 billion dollars in 2002 on drug discovery
research. Improvements to data mining methods will assist pharmaceutical
companies in finding new cures to deadly diseases such as HIV. Predictive
modeling can be employed to virtually screen, prioritize and then decide which
of these compounds will be tested in the lab. This can reduce the number of
compounds tested and increase their success rate. By providing innovative
methods of knowledge discovery, deeper insight can be gained into why compounds
exhibit activity and properties necessary to treat certain diseases, leading to
improved derivatives. This insight will help scientists discover better drugs
faster.