* 0441338
* SBIR Phase I:     Creating New Learning Opportunities: Platform-Independent, Wireless, Task-Oriented Communities
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Michael Curtis, GOKNOW, INC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,525.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will design and
develop a challenging and critically important layer of software to facilitate
the development of educational applications for the diverse types of handheld
computers that will soon be used in K-12 classrooms. The Elmer middleware layer,
along with the Elmer Software Developer's Kit, will enable third-party
developers to easily add communications capabilities to their educational
applications, such that their applications are independent of the platform
(e.g., PalmOS, PocketPC, Cell Phone) on which their applications are running.
Thus, in a classroom, each student can be working in the same application, e.g.,
concept mapping, sharing information on their handheld and collaborating
synchronously, all the while working on different handheld (or even
desktop/laptop) computers. The intellectual merit of Elmer stems from its design
framework. Elmer provides educational software developers concrete guidance in
and support for designing the communications infrastructure of educational
applications.

While there is growing recognition that the benefits of computing on student
achievement and attitude growth will come when each student has his or her own
computer-1:1 computing-educators are reluctant to adopt the low-cost, available
handheld computers in classrooms; since there is a dearth of curricular,
communications-based applications for handheld computers that support state and
national curricular standards. Since Elmer makes the production of such
applications more cost effective, K-12 should see a significant rise in
available applications. When that happens, K-12 can truly come to understand how
best to utilize 1:1 computing in the classroom to improve teaching and learning
in the U.S., e.g., by carrying out scientific studies of the impact of 1:1
handheld use, providing new opportunities to learn science, math, etc. GoKnow is
a recognized leader in developing and marketing standards-based, curriculum-
supported handheld-based applications for K-12. GoKnow is well positioned to
design and develop Elmer, as well as to address the challenges that arise in
marketing into K-12. There is also potential for broader impacts as a result of
third party developers using Elmer.