* 0441068
* SBIR Phase I:    Proteomic-Based Detection Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Dobrin Nedelkov, INTRINSIC BIOPROBES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 91,562.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
proteomic-based security technology that will incorporate affinity-based mass
spectrometry assays and software for the detection of Biodefense Agents.
Existing immunoassay methods for proteomic detection of specific microorganism
pathogens are insensitive to structural deviations that might arise as a result
of spontaneous or deliberate biotoxin modifications. These methods of detection
can fail to detect genetically engineered biotoxins, and cannot delineate
protein structural heterogeneities that can significantly affect protein
functionality in vivo. This project aims to develop software and bioassays based
on mass spectrometric methods of detection for assaying biological warfare
agents that will address the shortcomings of the commercially available
immunoassays. To facilitate detection and delineation of biotoxin isoforms, data
evaluation software will be integrated into the MS-based assays designed for
detection of specific biodefense agents. A library of specific biotoxin isoforms
will be created and used in the generation of data for the software development
and validation. Data evaluation software will be created that is capable of
rapidly identifying biotoxin isoforms that register at different mass values
from those predicted from the amino acid sequence. The technical feasibility of
the project will be established by the successful demonstration of the data
evaluation software in the detection and delineation of specific biotoxin
isoforms structural changes.

These assays and software will innovate the ways biological agents are detected,
and provide structural information that no other commercially available assays
can. The broader value of the project is realized by the ultimate creation of
assays that encompass mass spectrometry and data evaluation software that can be
employed to analyze biological pathogens classified as Biodefense Agents. The
key technological enhancements are the rapid screening of protein biomarkers
characteristic of these pathogens, from a variety of samples, and the detection
of structurally modified pathogen toxins. The commercial impact from the
propagation of the MSIA assays as direct reading instruments in screening for
biological organisms can be significant. These assays and the accompanying
platform can be used in a network of Laboratories (members of the CDC.s
Laboratory Response Network) that are at the forefront of the biological and
chemical terrorism defense. These MS-based immunoassays and software will
complement the PCR-based methods of detections already in use in those
Laboratories, and will improve (and further enable) the detection and
characterization of the bio-threat agents.