* 0441316
* SBIR Phase I:    Knowledge Modeling for Data Driven Optimization Based Strategic Promotion Design
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Sridevi Sarma, Infolenz Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a
data-driven optimization-based approach to retail market modeling and strategic
pricing. Retail companies are faced with the persistently renewed challenge and
burden of designing sales promotions. The company's baseline technologies in
retail market model building and strategic pricing have field-demonstrated the
potential to turn large volumes of individual purchase history records into
profitable decisions. The objective is to extend the reach of the baseline
technologies to address a broader variety of promotion design problems. Specific
technical objectives are: 1) Time-sensitive market models (Derive a market model
of time sensitive behavior. Desirable elements include seasonality, timed
follow-on and sequential purchase analysis.), 2) Multidimensional market models
(Derive a market model of multidimensional associations in market behaviors,
such as customer attributes, catalogue alignment, or store differentiation), and
3) Streamlined promotion optimization (Enable an "automation" of the promotion
design process through the data driven extraction of market parameters, such as
the expected response to joint product offers or multiple promotion offers, for
mathematical promotion optimization). These advances to the baseline company's
technology can form the foundation of a commercial product for strategic
promotion design.

This project will have a broader impact on education and career training. As
part of its dissemination activities the company will offer a course on
"Scientific Marketing" in the MIT Industrial Liaison Program. The added value
specific to this project lies in its highly interdisciplinary nature, involving
scientific marketing, large-scale optimization, pricing theory, and data
analysis. Results from such activities inevitably allow cross-fertilization of
concepts that catalyze new educational or research initiatives. Indeed it is in
small companies where new economic theories emerging from academia have an
opportunity to be evaluated in a true data driven environment. Regarding career
training, Infolenz will continues its regular hiring of summer interns in a
stock compensated arrangement to get first hand startup company experience.