* 0441586
* STTR Phase I:  Lifelike Virtual Tutors to Support Authentic Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Edward Sims, VCOM3D, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 12/31/2005
* USD 99,970.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will develop a proof-of-
concept Web-delivered Virtual Reality (VR) simulation that incorporates lifelike
virtual tutors capable of manipulating simulated objects and communicating in
written or spoken English or sign language into TERC's Marble Roll--an online
challenge for Grades 4-8. This research builds on Vcom3D's and TERC's use of
avatars for communication of scientific concepts to Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing
students. However, it extends the current capabilities from being communication
aids to being mentors, participants, and/or interpreters who support all
students in developing standards-based abilities of scientific inquiry and
understanding of fundamental concepts related to forces and motion. The result
will include (1) ?developing a proof-of -concept VR simulation that challenges
students to solve a problem and integrates the publication, comparison and
analysis of their data; (2) ?evaluating the simulation's effectiveness in
supporting all students' understanding of standards-based science content and
process and attitude toward it, including those with special needs; and (3)
?identifying requirements for an authoring tool to create a group of VR
simulations. Successful proof-of-concept will lead to cost-effective, high
quality, and more accessible authentic learning experiences for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an opportunity through the
development and testing of new universal access and design features to broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in authentic learning experiences.
These features include the ability for students to select an avatar according to
race, gender, or ethnicity; low bandwidth modem requirements for use in areas
without a technology infrastructure; and sign language interpretation for
deaf/hard-of-hearing students. A Virtual Tutor provides constant attention to
students' actions and ideas, using verbal and visual modes of communication
appropriate for that student--a benefit rarely realized in most classroom
settings and one that advances discovery and scientific understanding and
promotes learning that can continue over a lifetime. Additionally, learning with
a VR simulation dramatically increases access to age-appropriate standards-based
learning for students in classrooms without laboratories, in hospitals, and for
those with mobility disorders or special learning needs including dyslexia and
attention deficit disorder. By publishing the Virtual Marble Roll and
commercializing an authoring tool for creation of new, universally designed VR
simulations, and by licensing the virtual tutoring technology, the partners will
promote widespread use of the proposed research and development that will
support future enhancement and application. &lt;br/&gt;