* 0441499
* SBIR Phase I:    Toxic Mold Sniffer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Debra Mlsna, SEACOAST SCIENCE, INC
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,040.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
MEMS sensor array for use in a small, battery operated system to detect
chemicals commonly produced by toxic molds. Most mold related health problems
result from exposure to Stachybotrys, a fungus, which causes the "sick building
syndrome." The Stachybotrys mycotoxin is a trichothecene, a stable, multicyclic
epoxide, which readily crosses cell membranes, attacking ribosomes and
inhibiting protein synthesis. This sensor will utilize an array of surface
micromachined capacitors, coated with chemoselective polymeric materials that
will be optimized for tricothecenes and similar analogs containing epoxides and
multicyclic organics.

The commercial application of this project will be to detect toxic molds that
cause the sick building syndrome. Toxic mold is a $1 billion problem in this
country alone. Growing awareness and concern about the health impact from fungal
toxins has made the detection and isolation of suspect molds a major
environmental concern. When combined with inexpensive wireless communications
technology, these sensors will be ideal for monitoring a variety of chemical and
physical targets in a distributed system where a premium is placed on early
detection. Minor modifications to the detector would allow for development of
products for other applications, such as monitoring of air pollution around
factories, and of oil degradation in power transformers and fuel cells.