* 0441218
* Novel Synthesis of Si/Ge-Based Magnetic Semiconductor Films and Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Frank Tsui, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2008
* USD 369,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities of this award focus on exploring MBE
synthesis of high quality, promising Si/Ge-based magnetic semiconductor
epitaxial films and heterostrucutres. It is aimed at meeting the future
challenge to electronic materials by enhancing our ability to control and tailor
both electronic and magnetic properties of semiconductors to be used for
preparing and processing the full electronic states in a single electronic
device, thus potentially revolutionizing the electronic and information
technology. Complementary doping using two or more transition metal elements
will be employed as the strategy to stabilize epitaxial growth at high doping
levels in order to achieve high temperature ferromagnetism and to tailor
electronic structures. Combinatorial approach will be employed for the
systematic study. The proposal is a collaborative and interdisciplinary effort
based on significant recent advances and expertise in MBE synthesis of magnetic
semiconductors made possible by the continued NSF support. It involves active
collaborations with research groups around the world. The work will train
students at all levels in areas of critical importance to the future scientific
and technological well-being of our country, particularly synthesis of novel
materials.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The key future challenge to electronics
technology is our ability to control and tailor both electronic and magnetic
properties of semiconductors on the silicon-based platform and beyond. If both
electronic and magnetic states can be prepared, processed, and integrated in a
single device or chip, it would revolutionize the electronic and information
technology. The proposed research is aimed at meeting the challenge by
systematically exploring novel synthesis and properties of silicon-based
magnetic materials. Complementary doping with several dopants will be used to
stabilize and tailor the novel materials in order to achieve the desired
electronic and magnetic properties. Combinatorial approach will make it possible
for examining a large number of materials candidates. The proposal is a
collaborative and interdisciplinary effort leveraged against significant
advances and expertise made possible by the previous NSF support. It will
involve active collaborations with research groups around the world. Education,
collaboration and outreach are the key features of the proposed work. The work
will train students at all levels in areas of critical importance to the future
scientific and technological well-being of our country.&lt;br/&gt;