* 0441423
* U.S. CMS Research Program
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Robert Cousins, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Morris Pripstein
* 04/30/2006
* USD 3,130,000.00

This proposal requests funds to empower physicists at U.S. Universities to
realize the physics discoveries made possible by the U.S. investment of the DOE
and the NSF in building the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) detector at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. This is an essential part of a broad effort to
maximize the scientific return at the high energy frontier. The LHC will
commence operation in 2007, opening a new regime in particle physics up to and
beyond the TeV energy scale. The unprecedented energy range and luminosity of
this new accelerator are expected to lead to discoveries of new elementary
particles and novel behaviors of the fundamental forces. Such discoveries at the
smallest distance scales could have revolutionary effects on our understanding
of the unification of forces, the origin and stability of matter, the ultimate
underpinnings of the observable universe, and the nature of space-time itself.

U.S. physicists, who constitute approximately 25% of collaborating LHC
scientists, are mostly based at U.S. universities. This fact underlies the basis
of this proposal, namely that in order to fully exploit the ambitious and rich
scientific program at the LHC, researchers at U.S. universities must have the
necessary resources required for full participation in all phases of the
scientific program. This opportunity brings with it ongoing responsibilities: to
ensure that the detectors developed and constructed by U.S. CMS physicists
function and are maintained at full capability and that the data are acquired
efficiently and made available for analysis by the U.S. members of the CMS
collaboration. A partnership of universities and laboratories is sharing the
development of Data Grids to provide a comprehensive framework for collaborative
research and training, supporting coordinated data analysis on an unprecedented
scale at facilities at many locations in the U.S. and around the world.

The broader impact of the research includes advances in technology, support for
university scientific infrastructure, and the opportunity to attract students
and the public to exciting frontier science. Numerous outreach possibilities
exist which are already being implemented in programs such as QuarkNet.
Extensive computer networks are being built as collaborative tools for the LHC,
and they can also be used to share the excitement of discovery with non-
collaborators.