* 0441276
* SBIR Phase I:    Next Generation Intelligence-Based Extensible Markup Language (XML) Compression Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Mark Davis, UTOPIACOMPRESSION CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project will research and
develop a next-generation enabling technology for networks and collaboration by
significantly enhancing the compression of Internet data sources and Web
Services. Current compression technologies are rarely integrated into the
technology stacks of collaborative technologies because their compression
performance does not add significantly to the overall performance of the system,
especially for relatively small and sparse data like HTML and XML. In this
project the research team plans to enhance its current XML compression
technology, which can result in greater than 500% better compression ratios than
standard methods on small Web Services documents, to operate over the broader
range of unstructured and semi-structured Internet and intranet data types,
including HTML and email. The firm will also research exploiting longer-range
redundancies inherent in these data types based on novel compression methods to
improve on their technology's existing XML performance characteristics. Finally,
they will assess the technological and economic impacts of pervasive compression
on the Internet ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
technology include basic scientific improvements on known methods for
compressing text and data, and improving the understanding of intelligent
compression technologies and how to apply them to common Internet and intranet
technology stacks. The technological approach is uniquely capable of supporting
routing, mining and filtering of Web data and email based on content while in
compressed form. Significant adoption of high-performance compression technology
has dramatic economic implications for modern business, academic and scientific
organizations in terms of the size, cost and nature of their information
technology infrastructure. The amount of semi-structured data is anticipated to
continue to grow dramatically and the economic impact of improving resource
utilization for transmission, routing and storage of that data will grow
dramatically as well. &lt;br/&gt;