* 0441458
* SBIR Phase I:    Development of ModelGlove - A Virtual Clay Modeling System Using Force/Position Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Kevin Chugh, TACTUS TECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2005
* USD 99,815.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
interactive NURBS modeling system using a force/position sensitive glove that
mimics in real time the process of modeling objects using a clay or similar
materials. The system will allow designers to use their artistic talents for
conceptualizing, modeling and modifying products, in a very natural and
intuitive manner. The Phase I work will address four objectives: 1) it will
develop a design framework for capturing force and motion applied by the human
hand during sculpting tasks; 2) it will develop a methodology to transmit and/or
synthetically simulate the patterns of force and motion on a virtual model; 3)
an intuitive user interface and interaction system will be proposed to make the
task of design both practical, easy and pleasurable; and 4) the system will
interface with commercial CAD systems and Rapid Prototyping systems, through a
neutral file exchange system, making this into a ubiquitous CAD peripheral
system.

The research effort will impact in the state of art in design, human factors and
ergonomics, education opportunities for students learning CAD fundamentals and
mechanical engineers designing and modeling products. Future leveraging of the
software and hardware infrastructure developed through this Phase I research for
a commercial system will revolutionize the process of product design and
manufacturing.