* 0441412
* SBIR Phase I:   Multi-Scale Computational Environment for Combinatorial Technologies:   Bridging Disparate Length and Time Scales
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Alexsey Vasenkov, CFD RESEARCH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,973.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
develop software for emerging combinatorial technologies. The feasibility of the
proposed approach will be investigated for plasma-assisted growth of carbon
nanotubes. Combinatorial technologies have been developed to grow nanocrystal
compounds whose properties are unmatched by other materials. These compounds are
used for many applications in molecular-scale electronics and sensors,
catalysis, and biomaterials. Progress in the virtual design of combinatorial
methods lags behind experimental advances since existing atomistic models are
too slow, while mesoscopic (continuum) codes are not capable of capturing
nanoscale effects. This problem will be addressed by developing Multi-Scale
Computational Environment (MSCE) that consists of a reactor-scale module for
gas/plasma-phase and surface processes, a Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) module for
the growth of molecular structures, a Molecular Dynamic (MD) module for the
self-assembly of atoms into molecular structures, a "Gap-tooth" module for
bridging reactor-scale and atomistic KMC simulations, and a "Coarse timestepper"
module for coupling KMC and MD modeling. This tool will work on length and time
scales that are a million times disparate. It is proposed to use continuum CFD-
ACE and atomistic KMC-FILM tools both developed by CFDRC as well as publicly
available MD-NAMD software. The focus of proposed work will be on the
development of the Coarse timestepper and the Gap-tooth modules as well as
integrating all modules into a single unit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will create a virtual laboratory for combinatorial technologies such as
advanced sputtering, thermal and plasma-assisted chemical vapor deposition, and
surface templating. This computational laboratory will be used for understanding
and optimizing critical processes in carbon nanotube nucleation and growth,
fabrication of nanophase biomaterials and semiconductor nanocrystals, nanoscale
magnetism, and ultra-selective catalysis. &lt;br/&gt;