* 0441833
* SBIR Phase I:    Multi-Environment Probability Density Function (PDF) Method for Modeling Turbulent Combustion Using Detailed Chemistry
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Qing Tang, REACTION ENGINEERING INTERNATIONAL
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the applicability and merit of applying the multi-environment probability
density function (MEPDF) method to model turbulent combustion problems with
realistic chemical kinetics within comprehensive CFD simulations of practical
combustion equipment. MEPDF retains many of the desirable properties of the
transported probability density function (PDF) method but at a fraction of the
computational cost, including the ability to treat the chemical source term
exactly and address the nonlinear interaction between turbulence and finite rate
chemical reactions with great accuracy. MEPDF originated from multi-environment
micro-mixing models used in the chemical engineering community to simulate
chemical processes with little heat release. Recently this method has been
extended to model gas phase combustion problems, but for only very simple
chemistry. This project aims to further advance this method by extending it to
incorporate realistic chemical kinetics for modeling combustion problems where
turbulent-finite rate reaction interaction is crucial for accurate prediction
such as pollutant emission (e.g., NOx, soot). The work would eventually extend
the MEPDF method to model heterogeneous combustion problems, such as coal
combustion, and provide means to simulate low NOx firing systems that are widely
used in the power generation industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of
extending the MEPDF method to simulate practical combustion systems using
complex chemical kinetics would lead to a solid foundation of the scientific and
engineering knowledge and understanding base. The value of an improved modeling
tool to provide more reliable predictions of complex combustion processes is
clearly evidenced by commercial concerns from various industries. The
development of advanced tools from this project provides means for companies in
the power generation, chemical process, mineral process, and incineration
industries to improve product designs and services that would ultimately benefit
the environment, global competitiveness, and national/homeland security. An
improved understanding of pollutant formation and destruction processes,
currently limited by the ability to accurately model these complex processes,
will result in reductions of pollutant emissions. Reducing pollutant emissions
from power plants, process furnaces, and incinerators will continue to be both a
necessary environmental objective and a challenging engineering problem
requiring the best investigational tools possible.