* 0441748
* SBIR Phase I:    Team Development Toolbox
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Rich Weider, Team Craft, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on
filling a gap in distance/distributed learning courseware: facilitating
collaborative learning. Web-based learning tools, in particular Learning
Management Systems (LMS), have yet to effectively marshal the benefits of team
collaboration, namely, deeper levels of knowledge creation. While this finding
is continually reinforced in research, new tools to develop these relationships
have not been forthcoming. A new type of tool is needed, and the Team
Development Toolbox (TDT) will be this new type of resource. Team Craft, Inc. is
collaborating with The University of Texas to develop the TDT as a commercially
viable suite of web-based software tools that are integrated into a LMS to
support team formation and relationship building among students participating in
asynchronous distance learning in science and similar courses in higher
education. The TDT will be accessible through a school's web-based learning
platform using a standard web browser and Internet connection. Among the
deliverables in Phase I, the project will produce detailed product
specifications, a rapid application prototype and related software evaluation
model, and a white paper describing key factors contributing to successful
distance learning and how the Team Development Toolbox will aim to promote this
success.

Effective teamwork is one of the most valuable resources for developing
successful learners. Teamwork is most effective when team members are aware of,
have access to, and commit to using effective processes. These processes promote
good decisions and timely action. Specifically, the Toolbox proffered will
foster positive relationships to support effective team process. Toolbox will
contain a combination of new tools and extant tools, some having existed
previously as a paper resource, others as isolated software. These tools have
not heretofore been integrated into one resource and promoted on major on-line
learning platforms. The Team Development Toolbox will enable students, otherwise
isolated by distance, to initiate collaboration with supportive processes that
instruct and draw-out best practices. It will help thus make the advantages of
team learning accessible to students who do not have an ability to meet in face-
to face interactions, including students with disabilities. The facilitation of
learning experience that are truly shared among a community of learners will
mean that learning from a distance can take its place as comparable in a
positive way to many traditional classroom formats. The development team will
disseminate non-proprietary research resulting from this grant through the
resources of the Learning Technology Center at the University of Texas at
Austin.