* 0441891
* SBIR Phase I:    Incorporation of Knowledge Base into Statistical Machine Translation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Yookyung Kim, Fluential , Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proffers an
innovative approach to machine translation. The project model aims to overcome
two important bottlenecks in the development of a high quality Statistical
Machine Translation (SMT) system: (1) the inability to handle structural
problems, and (2) dependence on huge amounts of parallel texts. The inability of
statistics to sufficiently handle grammatical problems such as word order
becomes more evident when the language pair is very different in structure and
morphology, such as with English and Korean. This project is a method to learn
linguistic knowledge crucial to handling word order and nonlocal dependencies
automatically from text and incorporate it into SMT along with simple
transformations, maximizing the strength of both knowledge-based approaches and
statistical approaches, and minimizing the need for ever-increasing amounts of
bilingual data. This approach aims to build a syntactic-phrase-based Statistical
Machine Translation engine that is not only more accurate than the existing
word-based ones but is also capable of decreasing the need for large data
sources. The primary impact of the project is the potential for achieving
automatic translation quality, which is as high as the quality of the best
knowledge-based machine translation engines but which, at the same time,
requires a minimum of handcrafting of knowledge and is therefore much lower cost
in terms of development time and human resources.

While the research is specifically concerned with MT between English and Korean,
the resulting translation models would potentially be usable for translation
between any pair of languages. In addition to benefiting machine translation
research and applications directly, the research will provide significant
progress towards building bilingual phrase lexicons from data, which in turn
will aid in multi-lingual tasks such as cross-lingual information retrieval.
Sehda's syntactic phrase based MT engine can produce unambiguous phrase
translations, useful for indexing foreign documents and constructing keyword
lists for document summary. Additionally, the project's method to learn features
to augment traditional language modeling will have an impact in many different
applications including speech recognition, search engines, genre and topic
detection, and document search and query. Lastly, this research has beneficial
impacts nationally and globally by helping to solve the "automatic translation"
problem, an area of paramount importance to the economic welfare and security of
the US, as well as to the rest of the world.