* 0441444
* SBIR Phase I:     A Multi-Media Data Structure for 3D Measurement of Human/Animal Motion
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Paul Mostert, Mostert Seales Research Company, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small-Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will explore the
feasibility of developing a multi-media data structure to model and store
geometric measurement and motion characteristics of a living, moving creature.
The objective is to develop tools for storing and accessing data on moving
animals from digital video streams in order to extract measurement data and
allow the three-dimensional reconstruction of the subject as well as its
position in time or as a function of action position (such as stride position),
together with efficient algorithms to navigate the information tree within the
stride space. Measurement by tape of any animal, including humans, is subject to
sizable error. The proposed project seeks to examine the feasibility of a bold
and ambitious undertaking which, if successful, would solve this and many
kindred problems and open up an area of considerable research and development
potential. Phase I research will focus on proving the feasibility of the idea of
obtaining a set of measurement data from an animal (specifically, the horse) at
a normal walking pace and adequate navigational tools to allow the user to sift
through the 3D video streams to make the adjustments needed to obtain a fully
tracked model.

The current methods for the static study and measure of humans and animals is
either the low-tech tape or the full-body laser or active-light scanner that
requires a large booth. Even after obtaining the whole-body scan, as with the
clothing industry, obtaining the desired measurements to use in applications is
difficult because of a lack of convenient landmarks. Landmarks are made visible
through motion. The goal is to make use of motion and its cyclical aspects to
identify the landmarks and to recover, not just a single-position 'statue' of
the subject, but its entire motion. In the U.S., there are around 10 million
dairy cattle, of which about 34%, or 3.4, million are measured every year by
tape or by little more than guessing. A capability to obtain measurements fast
and accurately would have ready use in the dairy industry as well as in the
thoroughbred industry.