* 0441702
* SBIR Phase I:  An Electronic Textile System for Gait Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* David Lehn, Virginia Electronic Textile Systems, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enhance
scientific and technological understanding through the development of novel
architecture, protocols, and applications associated with electronic textile
systems. These emerging electronic textile technologies have been demonstrated
to have the potential to create a mobile, cost effective alternative that would
enable widespread use of gait analysis. The primary Phase I research objective
is to address the feasibility of measuring several fundamental gait metrics
using an electronic textile. In partnering with Virginia Tech, the company plans
to build upon this research to construct an electronic textile capable of
measuring these gait metrics and reporting the metrics to either the user or a
clinician. The intellectual merit of this research lies in the design of the
textile for operation across a broad segment of the population, the design of
the algorithms for computing gait metrics based on sensor data, and the design
and implementation of the overall software system.

The outcome of this Phase I research project will be a garment capable of
accurately measuring and reporting several gait metrics. The broader impact of
gait analysis lies in the potential to prevent life threatening falls in the
elderly population and the identification of pathological conditions in the
general population. Within the company mission to design and market electronic
textiles for health applications, thos technology has significant potential for
improving physical therapy and creating garments for everyday use in mitigating
the effect of falls. The intellectual property developed by the company is
expected to be applicable to non-health related applications, including uniforms
for first responders, navigation aids for the disabled, and integrated human-
computer interfaces. In addition, a market for e-textiles could potentially
rejuvenate the textile industry of the Southside region of Virginia.
Manufacturing woven textiles has become a high technology, high- investment
industry and is no longer labor intensive, an ideal combination for a
manufacturing process to remain in the US. The addition of e-textiles to the
product line of a company could further enhance the competitiveness of US
textile manufacturers, leading to the retention and addition of jobs in the
economically depressed Southside region of Virginia.