* 0441403
* SBIR Phase I:    HEPbaseTM:    Specialized Software for Storage, Retrieval and Linkage of Hepatitis Data
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Johanna Craig, GATACA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will support the
development of software which will modernize the way that researchers of the
hepatitis epidemic manage and analyze their data. This project will provide a
solution for the hepatitis C virologist initially, and will expand to
accommodate data from other hepatitis virus strains during Phase II funding and
beyond. Scientists need new tools to maximize the value of their collected
information. The company will develop software that contains 1) unique
applications for integrating multiple sources of disparate data into an
automated high-dimensional warehouse, 2) applications that perform repetitious
tasks common to HCV genetic research projects, 3) tools that provide novel data
annotation capabilities and ultimately new querying methods 4) a specialized
alignment tool for automatic alignment of HCV protein sequences and 5) the
ability to link HCV protein sequences with host microarray expression data. The
result will be software that greatly improves analysis capabilities and reduces
data processing time &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF recognizes that management
and analysis of data are critical success factors. If successful the proposed
solution will be marketable to hepatitis researchers worldwide in academics,
biotechnology, and the pharmaceutical marketplace. The initial focus, hepatitis
C (HCV) infection is a serious concern because it is distributed globally, is a
chronic manifestation, and is a common co- infection with HIV. HCV infection
becomes acute within 20-years post-infection; as HIV infected individuals are
living longer because of better medications, HCV co-infection of the HIV patient
has become a serious problem. By the year 2005, an estimated 100,000 liver
transplants will be needed in the US alone. The importance of tracking the
epidemic, both genetically and experimentally, is becoming increasingly
important and exceedingly difficult. Understanding the genetic variation in HCV
is important because it is implicated in virus-host interactions, severity of
infection, sensitivity to infection, and treatment. The proposed solution will
dramatically increase the efficiency and productivity of HCV researchers by
providing analytical and organizational power specifically designed to address
their unique needs. &lt;br/&gt;