* 0441692
* SBIR Phase I:    Hybrid Haptic-Audio Touchpanels for Mobility
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* George Anastas, IMMERSION CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,771.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
demonstrate the value of multimodal haptic-audio displays for the mobile
marketplace. As smartphones, PDA's and other mobile devices become both smaller
and feature rich, visual feedback to the operator limits the bandwidth available
for human computer interaction. It is well known that by enhancing visual cues
with auditory and haptic feedback that operator performance on a variety of
standard tasks is increased. The proposed innovation is a prototype system
capable of producing tactile, audio and visual feedback. Immersion will
explicitly study the value of different combinations of haptic and audio
feedback using the prototype system. A virtual model, incorporating CAD
geometry, physics models and user impedance will be implemented. The virtual
model will then be validated both physically and perceptually using data
obtained from the physical prototype. This validated theoretical model will in
turn be used to understand how to overcome the required power, weight and volume
constraints in the mobility marketplace.

The proposed innovation will address the accessibility market by providing an
important non-visual information channel between the user and the computer
segment both for small format devices and more traditional displays. The
international mobile marketplace, including cell phones, PDA's and handheld
games, is well over 500 million units and continues to grow at a very high rate.
Mobile wireless devices have become indispensable in 21st century business, with
manufacturers such as Palm, Dell and HP frantically competing to provide the
most features in the smaller and smaller form factors. In addition, the rise of
the smartphone as a major portion of the PDA market dictates a much smaller form
factor than traditional PDA devices, but with an awkward stylus interface.
However the addition of multi-modal feedback has been demonstrated to improve
performance and reduce pointing error in numerous studies, indicating that new,
innovative technology capable of providing multi-modal feedback could become a
necessary feature in this market.