* 0441176
* Student Participant Support for Sixth International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces (ICMI 2004);  October 13-15, 2004; State College, PA
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Trevor Darrell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2005
* USD 15,000.00

This is funding to support attendance by approximately 15 graduate students in a
doctoral consortium (workshop) to be held in conjunction with the Sixth
International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces (ICMI'04), to be held October
13-15, 2004 in State College, PA, and sponsored by the Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM). The 3-day conference will bring together researchers from
academia and industry from around the world to present and discuss the latest
multi-disciplinary work on multimodal interfaces, systems, and applications. The
conference represents the growing interest in next-generation perceptive,
adaptive and multimodal user interfaces. These new interfaces are especially
well suited for interpreting natural communication and activity patterns in
real-world environments; their emergence represents a radical departure from
previous computing, and is rapidly transforming the nature of human-computer
interaction by creating more natural, expressively powerful, flexible and robust
means of interacting with computers. Participants in the doctoral consortium
will receive feedback from an invited committee of 3-5 senior personnel to
posters which reflect work-in-progress not mature enough for a full paper at
ICMI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The doctoral consortium will give
students exposure to their new research community, both by presenting their own
work and by observing and interacting with established professionals in the
field. It will encourage students at this critical time in their careers to
begin building a social support network of peers and mentors. The organizers
will make a special effort to recruit student participants from less well-funded
institutions, where adequate support for student conference attendance may be
otherwise unavailable. Participation by members of traditionally under-
represented groups, including women, minority students, people with disabilities
and veterans, will be strongly encouraged.