* 0441673
* STTR Phase I:    Parallel Lattice Kinetic Software for High Mach Number Fluid Dynamics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Hudong Chen, Exa Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will produce an
advanced parallel computational tool for unified prediction of continuum and
rarefied flow over reusable launch vehicles of real world complexity. The
technology will be an enhancement of the Digital Physics technology based on
Lattice Boltzmann Methods (LBM). The project will start with development and
implementation of a high Mach number model on the platform of commercial low
Mach/Knudsen number flow/acoustics simulator PowerFLOW. In this way, the highest
standards of numerical accuracy/efficiency, parallel scalability, and
geometrical flexibility will be achieved. After optimizing and benchmarking this
new numerical algorithm, the research team will simulate a full-scale problem
including complex geometry of a space vehicle operating across a wide range of
Knudsen and, especially, Mach numbers. The goal here will be to both demonstrate
the parallel computational efficiency of this approach and to analyze the flow
sensitivity to the flight regime and to design changes. If this proof-of-concept
effort is successful, the goal of the next phase will be to further develop this
parallel computational tool and test it on well-documented, full-scale vehicle
studies emphasizing aerodynamic shape optimization for flight envelopes of
interest to both Government and private industry.

The unified rarefied/continuum flow prediction tool in this project has the
potential to open major new commercial markets for the extended PowerFLOW
product, especially at the engineering design level. First, this new technology
shall enable high Mach number flow prediction within the aerospace industry.
Secondly, this new tool's parallel efficiency, due to the strong locality of the
underlying numerical schema, will enable the use of cost-effective, COTS-based,
parallel computing clusters to solve these difficult flow problems. Thirdly, the
ability of the LBM methods to address compressible flow problems should open
important new markets for novel LBM-based technologies in a variety of
industries. Finally, this new technology should open broad new markets for
computer-aided engineering by enabling shape optimization of vehicles operating
within nontrivial geometry and flow physics regimes, which are now
designed/optimized using either experiment or semi-empirical rules.