* 0441274
* A Comparison of Aerosol Organic Carbon Measurements and Models in the Free Troposphere at Mauna Loa Observatory (MLO)
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2011
* Barry Huebert, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 03/31/2011
* USD 773,891.00

This project will continue and enhance an ongoing measurement program at Mauna
Loa Observatory (MLO) to routinely collect and analyze aerosol filter samples
for non-sea salt sulfate (NSS), nitrate, sodium, ammonium, and nitric acid by
now adding semi-continuous measurements of organic aerosol mass (OM).
Instrumentation acquired under this award will make operationally defined
measurements of organic carbon (OC) at MLO where air characteristic of the free
troposphere can routinely be sampled. In addition, a number of seasonal
intensive field measurement campaigns will be conducted at MLO to characterize
OM in with even greater detail. The behavior and variability of the OC/NSS ratio
will be determined over several years and through collaboration with other
groups the results will be compared with numerical simulations using a variety
of models. Results from this study will lead to an improved understanding of the
role of organic carbon compounds in tropospheric aerosol chemistry, and a better
quantification of organic aerosol mass will enable more accurate representations
of organic matter in model treatments. The broader impacts of this work include
continuing a long-term heritage of highly climate relevant observations at MLO,
producing important insights on how to better constrain chemical transport
models and reduce uncertainties in climate model simulations, and providing
research and educational opportunities for students at the University of Hawaii.