* 0441965
* Collaborative research: Retreating-trench, extension, and accretion tectonics (RETREAT): a multidisciplinary study of the northern Apennines
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Richard Bennett, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 12/31/2009
* USD 520,942.00

0207438&lt;br/&gt;Bennett&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The paradox of how horizontal
contraction and extension can occur simultaneously in convergent mountain belts
remains a fundamental and largely unresolved problem in continental dynamics.
The Apennines represent one of the most accessible "type locality" areas of syn-
convergent extension. Rollback - which describes the tendency of a subducting
plate to retreat from the orogenic front - is commonly invoked as an explanation
for syn-convergent extension, but this idea does not address how the retrograde
motion of the subducting plate, which is a mantle-based process, causes
horizontal extension in the overlying zone of crustal convergence, especially in
light of the large accretionary fluxes typically associated with continental
subduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project (project RETREAT) is to
develop a self-consistent dynamic model of syn-convergent extension, using the
Northern Apennines as a natural laboratory. This part of the Apennine orogen has
been the site of relatively steady orthogonal convergence and 2D (plane strain)
orogenic deformation since ~30 Ma. GPS measurements indicate that convergence is
presently active, and tomography indicates that the full length of subducted
slab is still intact to depths of 250 km. Syn-convergent extension has been
active since at least 15 Ma. The Northern Apennines are well studied, and all
important features of the orogen are onland and thus directly accessible for
detailed geological and geophysical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives of project RETREAT are 1) to determine in detail the velocity field
across the orogen, including deformation in the orogenic wedge, the motion of
lithospheric plates, and the flow fields in the surrounding asthenospheric
mantle, and 2) to use this kinematic information to develop and test specific
dynamic models for deformation in the orogenic wedge and underlying mantle. The
research techniques to be used include; geodesy, tectonic geomorphology, low-
temperature thermochronometry, structural geology and tectonic syntheses,
seismic studies, and geodynamic modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RETREAT
project links together a broad multidisciplinary group with eleven PIs from six
institutions, plus some 27 foreign collaborators in Italy, Switzerland, Canada,
and France.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;