* 0441240
* SBIR Phase I:    Adaptive/Cognitive Software Radio Architecture for Gbps+ Wireless Networking
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Ahmed Eltawil, Silvus Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,933.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project approach to
address the next challenge in wireless networking: to increase overall network
throughput rates well in excess of a Gbps utilizing broadband links. This is an
order of magnitude increase relative to today's systems. Achieving such high
rates requires the nodes to incorporate learning and interference mitigation
techniques, an optimum co-design of the MAC and PHY layers, and extensive
experimentation. The key contribution of this work will be to identify a highly
agile cognitive radio platform that can meet the demands of Gbps+ networking.
Such a radio platform must (a) accurately sniff, identify, and characterize both
friendly (inter network) or foreign (intra network) interference; (b) be quickly
reconfigurable to morph itself into the optimal radio for a given set of
environmental and user specified parameters; (c) learn interference conditions
and leverage the knowledge towards improved network and MAC layer protocols.
Development of such a platform requires a departure from traditional approaches
and hinges on successful integration of state of the art signal processing and
communication algorithms with the SDR framework. Additionally, comprehensive
RF/Baseband co-design and optimization is needed, plus efficient learning and
cataloguing techniques that are closely coupled to and under direct control of
the network layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although home data networking has pretty
much cut the umbilical cord that tethered all computers and peripherals, that
umbilical cord has not been fully severed in the enterprise due to the higher
demand on aggregate network throughput. Moreover, the desire to broadcast video
inside the home is also being hampered by the capabilities and robustness of
today's wireless LAN solutions. This work addresses these issues by leapfrogging
next generation WLAN activities and aggressively pursuing a high throughput
highly agile physical layer co-designed with an efficient MAC. The work will
help demonstrate the limits of WLAN capabilities and will help drive current and
future standards activities in this domain. Moreover, it will help demonstrate
the tremendous throughput improvements that are achievable when each node
actively senses, learns, and ultimately adapts to its channel and environmental
conditions.