* 0441327
* SBIR Phase I:     A Multilevel Method for Rapid Evaluation of Sound Fields
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Rajendra Gunda, ADVANCED NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,291.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to obtain
rapid solutions to the acoustic wave equation for periodic built-up structures
through development of advanced computational tools. The proposed novel
modification exploits the structural symmetry to dramatically speedup the Fast
Multilevel Multipole Algorithm (MLFMA). In addition several enhancements are
proposed to improve the computational efficiency of MLFMA. Techniques such as
FFT based interpolation and filtering, preconditioning, optimal selection of
iterative solvers, and parallel implementation will result in efficiency
improvements that benefit both periodic and non-periodic structures. Extension
to higher order shape functions is essential to reduce the number of unknowns
while maintaining solution accuracy. Half-space formulations allow modeling of
real life situations in under- water acoustics. Incorporating the new MLFMA
methodologies into a framework of direct and indirect formulations will finally
remove the high frequency limit of acoustic boundary element programs and
facilitate numerical simulation of extremely large sound structure interaction
problems that are currently not possible. Finally, the proposed solution will
use multipole methods as an underlying fundamental framework to unify many new
theories in numerical acoustics such as Source Simulation Technique.

MLFMA eliminates the high frequency restriction in boundary element acoustics
and makes extremely large-scale simulations possible. Successful execution of
this project will greatly impact a number of areas related to computational
acoustics. For instance, it can be used in traffic noise and community noise
simulations, in stealth and monitoring applications like sonar, for designing
better concert halls, in the automotive industry for computing sound radiated
from engines, tires, mufflers and to optimize audio equipment and musical
instruments. Inverse problems (identification of noise source location and
strength from near field measurements) could be solved in about the same time as
direct problems using MLFMA, leading to quieter tire designs and car window
seals. A computer program that contains easy model creation interfaces, an array
of accurate formulations, and automatic selection of appropriate solution
techniques based on problem size will be an invaluable asset to the acoustics
community with applications in Automotive, Defense And Aerospace industries.