* 0441207
* AGEP Post-Doctoral Engineering Education Researchers (AGEP PEERs)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Norman Fortenberry, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,419,482.00

AGEP Post-doctoral Engineering Education Researchers (AGEP PEERs)
&lt;br/&gt;Under the terms of Master Agreement No. 0239565 for unsolicited
proposals, the National&lt;br/&gt;Academy of Sciences requests funds to support
four (4) Alliances for Graduate Education&lt;br/&gt;and the Professoriate (AGEP)
alumni per year over a three-year period as post-doctoral&lt;br/&gt;fellows in
further preparation for their practice of engineering education research as
faculty&lt;br/&gt;members at the Nation.s leading universities. These AGEP
alumni will be referred to as&lt;br/&gt;AGEP Post-doctoral Engineering Education
Researchers (AGEP PEERs) and will contribute &lt;br/&gt;to the production of
faculty peers of unquestioned excellence in the multiple forms of
&lt;br/&gt;scholarship required for faculty for the 21st Century. The work will
be performed by the&lt;br/&gt;Center for the Advancement of Scholarship on
Engineering Education of the National&lt;br/&gt;Academy of Engineering. The
outcomes of this effort will be&lt;br/&gt;1. Identification and placement of 12
AGEP alumni at engineering education research&lt;br/&gt;centers for 12-month
post-doctoral research experiences focused on engineering&lt;br/&gt;education
with expectation of resulting publication.&lt;br/&gt;2. Attendance of an annual
Fellows meeting by current and former AGEP PEERs to build&lt;br/&gt;community
and leverage individual experiences.&lt;br/&gt;3. Attendance of up to 3
additional professional meetings by each AGEP PEER to establish&lt;br/&gt;a
presence in their professional community.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;This effort seeks to strengthen the human infrastructure and
diversity of the professoriate by&lt;br/&gt;linking AGEP alumni with premier
centers of engineering education research. This effort&lt;br/&gt;complements the
disciplinary expertise AGEP fellows have developed within their
doctoral&lt;br/&gt;program by building their skills in the scholarship of
teaching and learning. Thus, this project&lt;br/&gt;advances the integration of
research and education.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;Successful
completion of this project will contribute to the establishment of a cadre of
new&lt;br/&gt;minority faculty well prepared for excellence in both research and
education. Their skills will&lt;br/&gt;serve to inspire their peers as well as
new generations of scholars from all groups and&lt;br/&gt;populations.
Additionally, greater awareness of the rigor and applicability of education
research&lt;br/&gt;by engineering faculty will contribute to more inclusive
definitions of faculty scholarship and a&lt;br/&gt;beneficial modification of
engineering faculty tenure and promotion systems.