* 0441575
* ACT/SGER: Development of Nanoparticulate Coatings for Fe(VI) Ferrate Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Marc Anderson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 174,500.00

There is a need to develop advanced battery materials that provide higher
energies than are available at present. Salts of the ferrate anion (FeO4) could
serve this purpose because of the 3-electron transfer that occurs in these
materials. To date, however, applications of ferrates are limited by chemical
instability and incomplete utilization of the 3-electron transfer. In earlier
studies, we have developed standard procedures for ferrate synthesis and
determination of ferrate purity. Studies of ferrate instability in various
electrolytes have been initiated and will continue during this project. The
focus of this project is on improving the stability of various ferrate salts by
coating them with thin films of nanoparticulate oxides, using techniques that
have been successfully applied to improve the recharge characteristics of
lithium-based cathode materials in collaboration with Argonne National
Laboratory. Selected properties of coated ferrate salts used as cathodes will be
measured, and their electrochemical behavior versus zinc and lithium anodes will
be evaluated. Researchers at both Argonne National Laboratory and Rayovac Corp.
will assist with the required electrochemical
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently available batteries are limited
in terms of both the energy that they can store, and the power that they can
deliver to electronic devices. Highly oxidized iron materials, called ferrates,
offer the possibility of improving battery design and performance. Studies to
date, however, indicate that ferrates are not stable during long-term storage,
and the amount of energy that they deliver in practice is significantly less
than the theoretical limit. In this project we will attempt to improve the
stability of ferrate materials by applying extremely thin coatings of
nanoparticulate oxides to control the interaction with other battery materials
that compromise ferrate integrity and performance. Successful completion of this
project could lead to production of rechargeable batteries that deliver
significantly more energy and power than present battery designs. The Approaches
to Combat Terrorism Program in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical
Sciences supports new concepts in basic research and workforce development with
the potential to contribute to national security.&lt;br/&gt;