* 0441639
* STTR Phase I:Development of an Artifical Star Stimulation and Modeling Tool for Astronomy with Science and Teaching Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,04/30/2006
* Eric Rubenstein, Advanced Fuel Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 04/30/2006
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I research project's objectives
are to build and validate an artificial star simulation application for the
study of astronomical objects, and to assess its commercial potential for the
professional and serious amateur astronomer communities. The prevalence of
modern light detectors has ushered in a golden age for astronomy due to their
outstanding characteristics. However, their high-fidelity nature does not help
in disentangling the images of objects blended together in crowded fields. While
powerful techniques have been developed to solve this problem, they are
cumbersome to use, requiring substantial human and computational effort. What is
needed is an optimized automated software package that can be routinely used by
the astronomical community. This proposal focuses on furthering the development
of advanced artificial star tests, and making the resulting suite of tools
available to the wider community. In addition to this modeling and simulation
work the company will collect and analyze validation data and develop a
graphical user interface to increase the usability of the
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software developed during this
project will be comprised of largely public domain and/or open source scientific
routines with a proprietary graphical user interface. The company will assess
the economic opportunities for producing training materials for the increasingly
sophisticated amateur astronomical community. Placing powerful tools in the
hands of near-professional amateur astronomers will further raise the value of
their contributions to science. Additional related software products may also be
developed to both educate and guide amateur astronomers who already use high
quality digital CCD cameras in their home and club observatories. The company is
also investigating opportunities for using these techniques in satellite imagery
analysis for both commercial and military applications to terrestrial data. As
commercial satellite imaging expands to a multibillion dollar per year industry,
advanced analysis tools become increasingly valuable. Likewise, the military's
increasing dependence upon optical and hyper-spectral imagery suggests that the
ability to analyze images near their resolution limit will remain an essential
strategic and tactical requirement. Portions of this work may be applicable to
these Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) activities
&lt;br/&gt;