* 0441802
* Ethics in Changing Energy Markets Conference; October 28 - 29, 2004; Notre Dame, IN
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Frank Incropera, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 08/31/2006
* USD 24,000.00

Abstract

The Conference on Ethics and Changing Energy Markets will assemble leading
ethicists, economists, engineers and energy industry decision makers at the
University of Notre Dame on October 28 and 29, 2004. The program will address
the interplay of ethical, market and regulatory issues which arise in the shift
from regulated to competitive markets in the electric and gas utility
industries. Several crises in the industry which resulted at least in part from
ethical lapses of market participants have demonstrated the need for public
discussion of these issues, and improved education of members of the industry
from engineers to CEOs. Panel discussions at the conference will focus on
identification and resolution of ethical questions using specific case studies,
and will draw on the expertise of both energy industry members and business and
engineering ethicists. Participants will gain insight into the complexities and
subtleties of ethically balancing shareholder profit with public good in the
restructured market, and it is hoped they will share this enrichment in their
workplaces and educational institutions. The conference will be widely
advertised to the public, academic institutions and the industry, and
proceedings will be published shortly after the meeting. This award has been
funded by the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical
and Transport Systems Division and by the Office of the Assistant Director of
Engineering.