* 0441504
* CAREER: Influence of Geomorphic Complexity on Stream Ecosystem Function
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2012
* Martin Doyle, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2012
* USD 416,722.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;River ecosystems have been severely degraded over recent
decades by human activities such as the construction of dams, fertilizer
applications from agriculture, and urbanization, to name but a few. This
degradation includes both physical, i.e., geomorphic, and ecological changes.
Assessing the results of and potential solutions to these problems necessitates
understanding not only geomorphic, ecological, and biogeochemical processes, but
more importantly, how these processes interact. This project will use flume,
field, and numerical modeling experiments to develop a quantitative and
mechanistic understanding of how fluvial geomorphic forms and processes
influence ecosystem function, namely stream nutrient retention. Outdoor
experimental flumes will be constructed to examine the role of in-channel versus
hyporheic transient storage in nutrient retention, and how various geomorphic
parameters control these storage zones, as well as how fluvial geomorphic forms
influence the rates of biochemical retention of nutrients. The research will
then be extended to field-scale channel manipulations, which will include both
manipulations of flow conditions in natural river channels, as well as the more
substantial manipulation of river restoration projects. Using the insight gained
from the flume and experimental manipulation studies, the second phase of the
project will develop the initial components of a Stream Ecosystem Model,
coupling existing geomorphic and ecological models in order to examine how
geomorphic forms and processes and ecological processes interact across a range
of spatial and temporal scales. This model will be uniquely usable to explore
and develop theoretical questions. Beyond research, this project will develop a
series of educational programs to expose students, grades 7-12, to spatial and
quantitative aspects of environmental science, particularly river studies. The
education program will leverage off of an existing environmental field education
program and an existing general science education outreach program for middle
school students, thus providing a more holistic environmental educational
experience for middle school and high school students. The education program
will use pre-service teachers, providing an immediate source of future
environmental educators with substantial spatial environmental analysis
education experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is inspired by the
realities of widespread physical and ecological disturbance to rivers and
streams along with the increased research and application of river restoration.
This project will use a series of experimental stream manipulations and
numerical modeling to develop fundamental scientific knowledge of the way
physical and biological processes in streams are inter-twined. This knowledge is
critical to developing a holistic understanding of stream ecosystems as such
understanding is the basis for effective management and potential restoration of
freshwater resources. The research during this project will also serve as the
basis for a series of educational courses designed to teach students how
physical and biological processes in rivers are linked, and these courses will
span from graduate-level seminars to short courses for middle-school students.
&lt;br/&gt;