* 0441061
* SGER: Feasibility of Using Ground Penetrating Radar to Estimate Heart Rot Volumes in Living Tree Stems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Mark Harmon, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 08/31/2007
* USD 85,054.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;SGER: Feasibility of Using Ground Penetrating
Radar to Estimate Heart Rot Volumes in Living Tree Stems &lt;br/&gt;Michele
Pruyn, John Butnor, Mark Harmon, Michael Ryan and David
Shaw&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding to evaluate the
applicability of ground-penetrating radar to quantify heart rot volumes in
living trees (Pseudotsuga menziesii, Thuja plicata and Tsuga heterophylla).
Heart rot decomposition by saprophytic organisms of the central core of dead
wood (i.e. heartwood) within living tree stems accounts for a substantial
percentage of total disease loss in U.S. forests, causing destruction or
decreased value of usable timber and the depletion of heartwood carbon reserves
in living trees. Currently, precise methods for predicting the magnitude of
heart rot volume and the associated carbon losses are lacking. The objective of
this research is to apply the technique of ground penetrating radar (GPR) to
enable the exact determination of heart rot volumes (active and inactive zones)
in living trees. The proposed research will test the hypothesis that heart rot
losses are highest during the middle stages of succession (100-200 years), when
sound wood is being degraded, as opposed to in older stands where heartwood is
already extensively decayed and hence inactive, or in younger stands where heart
rot is not yet present in large volumes. GPR estimates of sapwood, sound
heartwood, decaying heartwood, and heart rot void volumes in downed and felled
tree stems will be compared to actual volume measurements from cross-sectional
pieces of the same logs, dissected with a chainsaw. To determine the extent and
range of heart rot activity within the active zones, respiration measurements of
intact and dissected stems will be taken using gas exchange techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this SGER award include the application
of ground-penetrating radar to quantify the extent of heart rot in living trees,
a novel approach. If successful, GPR will provide the first quantitative,
nondestructive approach to quantifying the extent of heart rot. The research
builds on ongoing research at the Wind River canopy crane site in Washington
state, focusing on mature and old-growth conifer forests.&lt;br/&gt;