* 0441492
* SBIR Phase I:    Tools for Information Retrieval and Document Classification Using Fast Phonetic Word-Spotting Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Robert Morris, NEXIDIA INC.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 0.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project will perform
the research and development necessary to greatly enhance the information
retrieval capability of a fast phonetic word-spotter. The completed research
will lead to new methods for spoken document retrieval and classification on low
quality telephony audio or multimedia digital sources. Spoken document retrieval
has been a well-researched problem in the domain of broadcast news. However,
many applications exist where users must retrieve and classify documents with
lower quality audio. The most commonly applied method involves converting an
audio stream or file into a hypothesized sequence of words (Speech-to-Text or
STT), and subsequently using text- based information retrieval. Although this
has been shown to be effective for broadcast news document retrieval, this has
drawbacks. For example, STT's explicit use of language models limits the
hypothesized word sequences to those within its lexicon. On the other hand,
phonetic matching is capable of identifying likely instances of keywords, such
as names, which are not in a lexicon. One advantage of the STT approach is the
applicability of text-based information retrieval methods, which work well on
high quality audio where the error rates are fairly small. However, better
solutions are necessary over a high volume telephony channel where the
computational burden and low accuracy make STT impractical. The goal of the
proposed project is to research and develop phonetic-based document retrieval
and classification algorithms. The applicability of retrieval systems based on
phonetic searches will be compared on large existing
corpora.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key innovation of the proposed research is to
adapt search techniques to function in environments where audio exists, but text
does not. Scientifically, algorithms must be made to work in a probabilistic
framework, since phonetic word spotting is always based on confidence measures.
Commercially, existing multimedia or audio archives will be available for data
mining. In addition, decisions of document type (e.g., was the phone call to the
call center a complaint?) open commercial applications in market intelligence,
security analysis, quality analysis, and any call segregation application.
&lt;br/&gt;