* 0441585
* SBIR Phase I: Micro/Nanofluidic Protein Profiler for Pathogen Detection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,08/31/2005
* Yan Li, CALIBRANT BIOSYSTEMS INC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
micro/nano fluidic proteomic platform for pathogen detection and identification.
The system is based on the use of high-resolution, two-dimensional (2-D) protein
separations in disposable microfluidic chips to generate protein expression maps
which may be used to identify biomarker patterns unique to specific pathogens.
Effective technologies for the early detection and identification of biological
warfare agents are of critical and growing importance. The novel miniaturized
detection platform will be capable of meeting key requirements for universal
pathogen detection with the ability to identify bacterial, viral, and protein
toxin agents in a single detection platform. The system will provide
identification within a short 15 minute cycle time, significantly faster than
comparable microarray technologies. Furthermore, it will not employ biologically
active reagents for its operation and will not require a priori knowledge of
which pathogens may be present in a sample. If successful, the proposed
technology will provide a unique solution for rapidly identifying environmental
pathogens, with benefits for a wide range of field-deployable applications.
Further miniaturization employing nanoscale detection channels with confocal
scanning microscopy will enable protein profiling at the single molecule level
for ultra-sensitive early pathogen detection. In addition to the need for
improved pathogen detection for antiterrorism applications, there are over two
million emergency response personnel located at over 90,000 public health and
safety facilities who are effectively on the front lines of homeland defense,
and who will directly benefit from cost-effective technologies to quickly detect
or dismiss potential biowarfare threats. It is particularly vital for these
personnel to have access to detection tools capable of broad spectrum pathogen
detection without the need for priori knowledge of which pathogens may be
present. In addition, rapid, accurate bacterial identification is critically
important in applications outside of biowarfare defense. Industries which will
benefit from these developments include disease diagnosis, prediction of
emerging health hazards, monitoring potential food contamination, and bioprocess
regulation. Furthermore, the technology in this effort will offer benefits to
the biopharmaceutical industry as a proteomics tool for biomarker identification
and drug discovery.