* 0441216
* Policy and Technical Dimensions of Large-Scale Government Use of Data Mining and Information Fusion
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 550,000.00

This grant will support a study by the Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board (CSTB) of the National Academy of Science (NAS) that will examine policy
and technical issues that arise with the large-scale government use of data
mining and information fusion technologies for various national purposes,
including, for example, counter-terrorism, law enforcement, public health, and
Federal statistics. Of particular interest will be an examination of alternative
approaches to both policy and technology that may help to ameliorate privacy
risks. Working in collaboration with the Committee on National Statistics of
NAS, CSTB will convene an interdisciplinary committee to blend technical and
non-technical expertise, engaging both critics and proponents of data mining and
information fusion technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One or more workshops
will be held early in the study process, both to inform the committee and to put
useful material on the public record through publication of workshop
proceedings. A final study report will be prepared featuring:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Alternative visions for how broad access to diverse
government and non-government databases might be realized, including how access,
privacy, and confidentiality could be achieved together; &lt;br/&gt;2. An
economic, legal, policy, social and technical issues roadmap; and &lt;br/&gt;3.
A set of recommendations. &lt;br/&gt;