* 0441935
* Constructing the Zoo: Science, Society, and Animal Life at the Paris Menagerie, 1793-1838
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2006
* Richard Burkhardt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2006
* USD 38,135.00

PROJECT SUMMARY The goal of this project is to complete the archival research
for a book on the purposes and practices of the first public zoo, the menagerie
of the Museum d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. Founded at the height of the French
Revolution, and situated at the world's premier institution for natural history,
the menagerie was conceived as having great scientific potential as well as
significant social, political, and moralpotential. The project focuses on the
first half-century of the menagerie's existence. The study will examine several
topics: (1.) the different functions and interests that the menagerie was
capable of serving; (2.)the circumstances under which these early expectations
were realized, revised, or reformulated in the course of practice; (3.) the
animals of the menagerie and the scientific and popular construction of animal
life; (4.) the problematic role that living animals played in the life of the
museum; (5.) the studies of animal behavior conducted at the menagerie by
Frederic Cuvier, warden of the menagerie; (6.) the multiple actors involved in
the menagerie's operations. The research will be conducted primarily in Paris at
the French National Archives. The PI will complete examination of an extensive
collection of manuscripts that historians of science have not exploited
previously: the official reports and other documents from the weekly meetings of
the professors of the Museum d'HistoireNaturelle. These materials permit a
detailed reconstruction of the life of the menagerie, within the broader context
of the operations of the museum .The intellectual importance of this research
for the history of science is suggested by the topics to be studied and the
methodologiesto be used. It is of direct importance for understanding zoology in
France in the age of Cuvier, Lamarck, and Geoffroy St. Hilaire, when French
zoology was second to none. It will be an important contribution to recent
historical on the scientific andsocial history of zoos, both because of the role
of the Paris menagerie as a model for the great wave of zoo construction that
occurred in the 19th century and because of the detail in which the Paris
Museum's archives allow one to examine this nineteenth century zoo. In terms of
broader impacts the work bears on the dual questions of the evolving purposes of
zoos and the scientific and popular understanding of animal nature.
Controversies over both ofthese topics in recent years need to be situated in
the broader perspective that historical study can afford. By understanding the
aims, accomplishments, and also the shortcomings of a key institution like the
menagerie of the Paris Museum, one can gain a deeper sense of the continuing
promises and problems of zoos today, both as social institutions and as sites
for scientific investigation, and how views of animal/human similarities,
differences, and interrelations have changed over time.