* 0441676
* SBIR Phase I:    Micronized Fluorescent Quantum-Dot Microresonators for Advanced Spectrally Barcoded Taggants
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Michael LoCascio, EVIDENT TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,600.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will develop the
next generation quantum dot-based security features that will have unique
visible and infrared fluorescent characteristics. The project combines recent
advances in semiconductor nanocrystals (quantum dots) and microresonant
structures to produce truly novel and spectrally tunable barcoded taggants for
advanced security applications that are nearly impossible to counterfeit,
duplicate or reverse-engineer. The proposed taggant will be designed to be
compatible with inks, UV curable epoxies, and polymers currently used on
currencies and other documents and laminates. In the project, it is proposed to
disperse fluorescent quantum dots within a resonant structure (thin film
interference structure), micromize the resultant resonator, and disperse the
micronized particles within the suitable ink and laminate matrices.

Commercially, successful completion of this project would have great impact in
the security market. Presently all conventional taggants have been compromised
to one degree or other. This technology will provide an added shield against
those who wish to do harm to this country and others through the counterfeiting
of currencies, passports, and other secure documents and identifications.
Knowledge gained on the fabrication of nanocrystal composite thin films with
controlled thicknesses and in particular nanocrystals films in resonant cavities
would have great impact on fields beyond security. In particular that technology
would have potential applications in a number of photonic applications including
lasers as well as optical switching and other nonlinear optical components.