* 0441389
* SBIR Phase I:    GFD-LAB:     Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory for Earth Science Teaching
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Jane Sadler, LEARNING TECHNOLOGIES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate the
feasibility of the design, manufacture, and marketing of an apparatus that will
demonstrate the phenomena of rotating fluid systems that parallel those in
weather and ocean systems. With such a device and supporting materials for
educators and students, underlying physical principles can be taught that help
to satisfy the NRC Standards and AAAS Benchmarks. When coupled with suitable
simulation software, such information-based technology can be used to encourage
interactive and inquiry-based activities. Such a system will help promote
interdisciplinary studies, use the latest space-based imagery, and aid in
teaching the content of the national standards, especially earth science at the
middle and high school level. The project seeks to take the results of
experimental techniques used to hone the physical intuitions of scientists and
their university students and make them accessible to lower academic levels and
to the general public. Without employing the sophisticated mathematical models
needed to understand the physics of rotating fluids, novices will be able to
comprehend the connection between global processes and the weather they observe
daily.

On a broader scale, the project will result in a deeper understanding among
school children and the general public of the global nature of weather systems
and the methods by which scientists come to understand their underlying driving
forces.