* 0441564
* SBIR Phase I:    Visualization of Massive Multivariate Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) Data
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Lisa Avila, KITWARE INC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
lack of visualization technology for hierarchical overlapping structured grids
created through a process known as Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR). Although the
AMR structure makes possible simulations that would have otherwise been too
computationally and memory expensive using a uniform grid approach, it leaves
the scientist with a lack of visualization tools to properly render the
resulting volumetric data. Therefore, there is a need for visualization tools
that are focused on volume rendering the large, multivariate, time-varying data
produced by simulations using the AMR technique. In this project, a volume
rendering approach is described that will enable scientists to effectively
visualize the results of their simulations. A ray casting algorithm will be
implement allowing for accurate visualization with the ability to trade quality
for speed, flexible compositing of multivariate data, and adaptability across a
variety of computational platforms from massively parallel to a desktop
computer. A prototype visualization system will be created which will
demonstrate interactivity through the use of level of detail techniques,
advanced transfer function editing for multivariate data, and intermixing of the
volume rendering solution with standard geometric
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early in the development cycle, the core AMR
visualization technology will be incorporated into the open source Visualization
Toolkit in order to gain valuable feedback and to gain recognition in this
field. This inclusion will provide researchers with early access to these
visualization techniques, freeing up valuable time currently spent implementing
custom solutions. The availability of these AMR visualization methods as source
code will enable future research in the area of AMR visualization to be based
upon the results obtained through this effort. The documentation (including a
commercially available textbook and users' guide) and the training classes for
the Visualization Toolkit will be updated to include AMR visualization,
providing educational opportunities for new researchers in the area. In addition
to the availability of this technology as part of an open-source toolkit, a
commercial application will be developed to provide AMR visualization in a turn-
key application. AMR visualization provided in an end-user application will
eliminate the need for most researchers to develop their own visualization
solutions, allowing more time to be focused on the core science.