* 0441985
* Interactive Video Assignments for In-Class Experimentation in Developmental Cognition:  A Virtual Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Gail Gottfried, LessonLab, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2008
* USD 317,786.00

Psychology - Social (72), Psychology - Cognitive (73)

New computer-based technologies have been developed that enable psychology
students to conduct experiments, potentially enhancing their critical thinking
skills as well their understanding of key psychological concepts. However,
resources for classroom experimentation with children are scare, largely because
of logistical and ethical difficulties. Building on a proof-of-concept study,
this project is developing 15 modules for developmental psychology that allow
students to conduct experiments in virtual laboratories. Each module includes
videos showing unedited experimental or observational data; transcripts of the
events, time-coded to match the videos; published empirical articles relating to
the lesson topic; links to relevant documents on the Internet; commentaries
time-coded to the video; and interactive tasks for guided student learning. The
modules are being tested and refined by faculty from a wide variety of community
colleges, large public universities, and private liberal arts colleges. In some
cases, the modules are integrated into lecture-based courses; in others, they
stand alone as an activity-based laboratory course. Student learning is being
evaluated by comparisons between courses with and without the laboratory
modules, and by within-class comparisons of video-based and other interactive
activities.