* 0441426
* Collaborative Project:  Developing a tutorial approach to enhance student learning of intermediate mechanics
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2007
* Bradley Ambrose, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Warren W. Hein
* 05/31/2007
* USD 19,387.00

There is a need among science students for increased conceptual and mathematical
understanding in courses beyond the introductory level. Future scientists,
future secondary science teachers, and future engineers who take these courses
must create an effective bridge between the mathematical reasoning emphasized in
most physics classes and the physical intuition that will guide their future
work. Using past success as a template, the collaborating PI's are developing
Intermediate Mechanics Tutorials, a set of at least 23 tutorials, including
pencil-and-paper conceptual tutorials (15), mathematical tutorials (4), and
computer-based tutorials (4), for the purpose of enhancing instruction in
intermediate mechanics. Each tutorial is accompanied by a pretest (ungraded
quiz), homework problems, and post-tests (exam questions). Tutorials are
designed to allow flexible implementation in lecture, studio, laboratory, or
seminar courses.

Intellectual Merit: Tutorial materials act as supplements to (rather than
replacements of) regular lecture instruction. Materials address specific
difficulties students have when learning the physics. Having the materials in
place allows for greater understanding of what student difficulties in
intermediate mechanics are, as well as providing data about the difficulties.
Physics education research (PER) data not only can enhance future versions of
these materials but also can help instructors using other similar materials in
their classes.

Broader impact: A coherent set of materials is being created for teaching
intermediate mechanics more effectively. These materials can reach future
scientists, teachers, and future university faculty. The research-based
development work can inform other ongoing PER investigations. Dissemination to
interested physics faculty members can help them learn about and utilize
innovative teaching methods.