* 0441208
* Conference: 2nd International Symposium on Rice Functional Genomics, Tucson, AZ, November 2004
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Carol Soderlund, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 09/30/2005
* USD 40,000.00

Rice is the most important food crop in the world and an important experimental
system for genomics research. The completion of the genome sequence of rice in
December 2004 will open a new and exciting chapter in the quest to functionally
characterize all of the approximately 50,000 genes in rice. A systematic
approach to characterizing these genes will allow dissection and understanding
of regulatory networks and evolutionary selection events controlling such
complex traits as yield, biotic and abiotic stresses, reproductive barriers,
epigenetics and flowering time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To celebrate the
completion of the rice genome and learn about the latest developments in
structural, functional and evolutionary genomics research, the Second Annual
Symposium on Rice Functional Genomics will be held in Tucson, Arizona, on
November 15 - 17, 2004. The international organizing committee includes 16 rice
scientists from 9 different countries. Themes to be covered include functional
genomics, comparative genomics, genome sequencing and annotation, genetics and
rice breeding, proteomics and metabolomics, biotic and abiotic stress, and
diseases of rice. After the meeting, up to 10 will be hosted for a week of
training on Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) library construction and
screening, physical mapping of genomes, sequencing, annotation, and microarray
analysis. Priority will be given to researchers from developing countries, young
investigators and scientists from small institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;