* 0441517
* SBIR Phase I:  Congruence-Based Encoding of Structured Information
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Allen Lin, Rich E Books Company
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,649.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
congruence-based encoding scheme for structured information, such as XML
documents. It employs a new labeling scheme that assigns numeric labels to
information components like XML document elements. The labels fully encode the
hierarchical structure of the information content. The labels alone can be used
to determine if one component is an "ancestor" of another in the hierarchy,
borrowing a term from genealogy. The encoding scheme is based on the concept of
congruence in number theory. The research objectives include (1) the design of
efficient algorithms that create optimized labels of small storage overhead and
fast processing speed, (2) the characterization of the encoding scheme in
relation to alternative methods, and (3) the exploration of its applications in
electronic publishing and digital preservation. The research consists of a
sequence of steps that include algorithm and software design, the analysis of
storage overhead and processing speed, the encoding of different media types,
and the design of an archival file format. It is expected that this congruence-
based encoding scheme offers an efficient and elegant solution to many problems
in information organization and management.

This encoding scheme has many important applications and commercial potential.
It can be used in backend services for XML documents, or as a substitute for XML
text encoding in places where storage and processing efficiency is critical. It
can be used for digital object packaging, such as packaging for electronic
books, as well as in the construction of media-independent archival formats for
digital preservation. In addition, the congruence-based encoding scheme
contributes to the understanding of information organization and enables further
discoveries in information-based technologies. For example, the encoding scheme
can be used to assign class code to classification systems, such as the Library
of Congress Classification System and the North American Industry Classification
System. Furthermore, the congruence-based encoding scheme can be used to design
identification numbers, such as credit card numbers and currency serial numbers,
that contain structured features for identification and security.