* 0441089
* ACT/SGER:  (ACT - PHY) Characterizing Community Evolution and Communication Patterns in Social Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Albert-Laszlo Barabasi, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 192,886.00

The goal of the present research is to develop an exploratory program addressing
the communication patterns of groups and communities in social networks. The
interplay between network topology and communication will be investigated
through extensive data collection efforts, capturing the detailed time dependent
communication activity of each individual. Building on these measurements, the
investigators will explore the basic mechanisms that govern community and group
formation and the associated communication patterns. Particular attention will
be paid to time dependent changes in the community structure and determining the
likelihood of a given community's emergence, thereby distinguishing common from
rare communities.

With interdependencies developing in most technological, informational and
social systems, networks are on everybody's mind these days. Previously
unconnected computers and devices are being linked up; formerly scattered
information is reorganized in consolidated databases; geographically isolated
people with common interests form new virtual communities. The benefits of
networks come with inevitable vulnerabilities, as local errors can propagate
along the links, turning into global failures. Examples range from the recent
Northeast blackout to computer and biological virus induced damages. Fighting
terrorism also raises a number of novel networking problems, ranging from the
discovery of terrorist cells to devising strategies to cripple an illegal
organization. To advance the understanding of complex interconnected systems,
the proposed research will develop a deep and quantitative description of the
laws that govern the formation and function of communities in social networks
and the standard communication patterns between individuals. The obtained
results could have a strong impact on national security, and could have long
range economic impact through the development of better tools to explore social
networks.

This award is supported jointly by the NSF and the Intelligence Community. The
Approaches to Terrorism program in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical
Sciences supports new concepts in basic research and workforce development with
the potential to contribute to national security.