* 0442398
* Development of an Inquiry-Based Biology Lab Manual for Pre-Service Elementary and Middle School Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* William Staddon, Eastern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 04/30/2009
* USD 72,851.00

This project is developing a lab manual for an introductory biology content
course designed to meet the needs of pre-service elementary and middle school
teachers (i.e., undergraduates in training to become K-8 teachers). The manual
is based on content standards and pedagogical approaches specified in the
"National Science Education Standards" (National Research Council, 1996) and
"Benchmarks for Scientific Literacy" (American Association for the Advancement
of Science, 1994). The intent is to instill in pre-service K-8 teachers, while
they are undergraduate biology students, the confidence and background necessary
to successfully teach science that is both standards- and inquiry-based when
they enter their classrooms. The completed manual is to be published so as to
reach a national audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
project creates an inquiry-based undergraduate biology lab manual that
specifically addresses the needs of future K-8 educators. The project takes
activities used nationally at the K-8 grade levels and scales them up to a level
appropriate for first-year undergraduate biology students. The lab course gives
pre-service teachers a rich experience with important concepts as well as
familiarity with materials relevant to their chosen profession.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Prototype versions of the lab manual are
used, tested and evaluated in a pre-existing undergraduate biology course
dedicated to pre-service teachers. The lab manual is developed with regional
input from in-service teachers and undergraduate faculty, both those who have
taught pre-service content courses before, and those who are new to the field.
McGraw-Hill has expressed an interest in publishing the lab manual. Development
of this manual facilitates the creation of undergraduate biology content courses
or lab sections specifically designed for pre-service teachers in other
institutions.