* 0442686
* Edutainment Distributed Virtual Reality To Enhance Engineering Scheduling Pedagogy
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2005,10/31/2008
* Tulio Sulbaran, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 10/31/2008
* USD 99,999.00

Engineering-Engineering Technology (58) &lt;br/&gt;This proof-of-concept project
is developing a scheduling edutainment prototype that engages students in both
educational and entertaining experience that uses a Distributed Virtual Reality
(DVR) environment. The process is coupling 4D CAD with interactive gaming
pedagogy. The DVR is developing students' ability to do effective time
sequencing (scheduling) in architecture, engineering and construction processes.
The approach is supported by a number of recent reports in the literature as
well as experiences of other institutions in the use of 4D CAD and DVR. The
curriculum is being structured to meet the needs of women and underrepresented
classes of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jones County Junior College is
engaging collaboratively in the project to coordinate the major meetings of the
multidisciplinary research team, help develop a detailed implementation plan,
prepare the set of drawings and specifications for the edutainment DVR
prototype, assist in the development of the 3D models, implement the initial
testing of the edutainment DVR at the JCJC campus and assess the effectiveness
of the prototype in their classrooms, and prepare strategies and methods to
disseminate the DVR prototype to high schools and other community colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessment strategies include using pre-post tests to
determine students' conceptual understanding of the material and development of
their higher order thinking skills. Results are being compared between students
taking the traditional class and those using the DVR edutainment curriculum.
Surveys are being used to assess student motivation and the usability of the DVR
edutainment. The material is being disseminated through papers and presentations
at a wide variety of professional conferences. &lt;br/&gt;