* 0442065
* ACT/SGER:  Algorithms for Large-Scale Approximate Nonnegative Matrix Factorization in Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Yin Zhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Hans G. Kaper
* 08/31/2006
* USD 85,000.00

In data analysis applications where physical data can only take nonnegative
values such as pixels in imagery data, it is desirable to obtain physically
meaningful ``nonnegative principal parts'', and then represent data as additive
combinations of these parts. This leads to the approximate nonnegative matrix
factorization (ANMF) problem, which is a constrained, nonconvex global
minimization problem. The existing algorithms for ANMF are relatively expensive
and not suitable for large-scale, real-time applications. The investigator
proposes to reformulate a normalized ANMF problem into a low-dimensional
optimization problem, thus reducing the problem size by a potentially very large
factor. With the help of geometric insights from the new formulation, the
project will focus on developing robust and efficient new algorithms suitable
for very large-scale and real-time applications. The goal is to advance the
fundamentals of ANMF and realize its full potential as a powerful data analysis
tool.

Can a computer identify a person, in a few seconds and with a high degree of
confidence, by comparing a snapshot of his to some, perhaps old and low-quality,
photos stored in a database? Approximate nonnegative matrix factorization (ANMF)
is an emerging technique that may help solve this face detection problem and
other real-time data analysis problems. In this project, the investigator will
study novel mathematical formulations and develop new computer algorithms for
solving the ANMF problems more quickly and more reliably.

This award is supported jointly by the NSF and the Intelligence Community. The
Approaches to Terrorism program in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical
Sciences supports new concepts in basic research and workforce development with
the potential to contribute to national security.