* 0442802
* Full Development of an Interactive Aerosol Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Pratim Biswas, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Matty
* 06/30/2009
* USD 351,505.00

Aerosol science and engineering is a multidisciplinary field with diverse
applications, and there is a great demand for trained individuals in this field.
A comprehensive web based program is being developed to enhance the abilities of
undergraduate students and instill in them an interest to understand its complex
principles. The program consists of seven modules: (1) Basics, (2) Transport,
(3) Instrumentation, (4) Collection Devices, (5) Nanoparticles, (6) Atmospheric
Aerosols and (7) Health Care. Each module contains two parts: (1) a narrative
for principles illustrated by dynamic animation with real-world contextual
materials; and (2) an interactive web calculator for design/assessment or a web
simulator for virtual operation. These modules can be used individually or as
integrated unit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several types of evaluation, from front-
end evaluation in the development phase to summative and pilot evaluations to
assess the level of knowledge delivered, are being carried out with the
participation of both faculty and student users. Test modules of this unique
program are being broadly disseminated through the Internet
(http://aerosol.ees.ufl.edu/ or
http://www.aerosols.wustl.edu/aaqrl/courses/cycopcresp/ ) to different types of
institutions with diverse student backgrounds. Dissemination is also facilitated
by national associations and through supplements to existing textbooks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is evident by the
strong support received from the aerosol community and diverse types of
institutions. This educational tool not only aids in the learning process, but
also increases awareness of Aerosol Science and Technology. The success of the
program brings about broad impacts to the nation as it helps provide the
necessary human resources to keep the nation technologically competitive and
economically strong. The multidisciplinary approach expands students' vision and
training to an open ended and creative one. The collaboration among diverse
institutions in the development and implementation phases will help in a broader
dissemination of scientific knowledge to diverse groups. &lt;br/&gt;