* 0442977
* BE MUSES:     Proposal for a Planning Grant:    Implementing a Natural-based Process for Removing Contaminants in Water
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,09/30/2005
* Babu Joseph, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 09/30/2005
* USD 114,982.00

&lt;br/&gt;BE / MUSES :Implementing a Natural-based Process for Removing
Contaminants in Water&lt;br/&gt;Norma A. Alcantar (Engineering-USF), Elena
Centeno (Geology-UNAM), Karla Davis-Salazar (Anthropology-USF), Rafael Huizar
(Geology-UNAM), Babu Joseph (Engineering-USF), Michel Picquart (Physics- UAM),
Mark Steward (Geology-USF), Tomas Viveros (Industrial Engineering-
UAM)&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this BE/ MUSES planning grant are to develop a
water purification system based on an economically viable "green technology",
investigate its applicability to a rural community in Mexico, and generate a
plan of action for a full MUSES proposal. The goals are to produce an
economically feasible method of water purification using cactus mucilage and
silicate arrays for low-income inhabitants of rural communities that are
sensitive to existing economic, social, and cultural patterns. This project
transcends national boundaries as it includes collaborations between
investigators at the University of South Florida (USF), two leading Mexican
public universities: the 'Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico' (UNAM) and
the 'Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana' (UAM), and the National Institute of
the Environment (INE) in Mexico. The proposed area of study is the rural
community of Temamatla in central Mexico. Its location (25mi/40 km southeast of
Mexico City) is critical for this study owing to its proximity to volcanic soils
where the concentration of heavy metals such as cobalt, mercury, nickel, copper,
zinc, iron, manganese, chromium, iodine, arsenic, molybdenum, and lead in local
water supplies may be higher than recommended values. The broader implications
of this project include the multidisciplinary participation of American and
Mexican researchers in issues that are relevant to both countries owing to their
proximity and preexisting ties. Such collaboration will promote mutual
opportunities and infrastructure for research, education, training, networking,
future partnerships, and most importantly, the proposed technology will improve
current water-related issues and problems in areas of extreme need. This award
will be managed by Tom Waite, BES / ENG and Robert Wellek, CTS / ENG.
&lt;br/&gt;