* 0442385
* U.S.-Czech Materials Research: Optimization of Magneto-Optical Nanostructures for High Frequency Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,09/30/2008
* Robert Camley, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 09/30/2008
* USD 29,522.00

This U.S.-Czech research project involves Radek Lopusnik, Zbigniew Celinski, and
Robert Camley of the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs and Stefan
Visnovsky of Charles University, Prague. Their goal is to optimize magnetic
multilayered structures for applications in high frequency magneto-optical
probing and sampling. The international collaboration benefits from the
expertise of the U.S. group in magnetization dynamics and quality sample
preparation and is complemented by the Czech partners' strengths in magneto-
optical spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together the U.S.-Czech team will
investigate a series of multilayered structures by means of magneto-optical (MO)
spectroscopy, ferromagnetic resonance, light scattering and time-resolved
magneto-optics. They intend to extract optical and magneto optical constants by
using a developed model for MO response to suggest structures with both a high
magneto-optical figure of merit and high presessional frequency. After studies
of the influences of multiple magnetic layers, theoretical calculations, and
attempts to grow promising nanostructures, the researchers hope proceed with
efforts to deposit the best structure on a cantilever and perform test
measurements. If successful, results may be applicable to detection of microwave
radiated fields which could lead to improved ability to identify hidden
electromagnetic interference sources on printed circuit boards and integrated
circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in condensed matter physics
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents
and share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
Broader impacts include the introduction of U.S. students to the international
materials research community through work at the Czech institution and direct
involvement in the project's magneto-optical methods.