* 0442234
* Using Inquiry-Based Activities to Promote Understanding of Critical Engineering Concepts
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Margot Vigeant, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 01/31/2008
* USD 74,704.00

This proof of concept project is developing inquiry-based educational materials
to promote understanding of critical engineering concepts. The effectiveness of
this approach has been extensively documented using thousands of undergraduate
physics students. As of yet, however, inquiry-based activities have not been
systematically developed for engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to fill that gap. In this proof of concept phase, the work is
targeting two student misconceptions related to heat transfer and
thermodynamics. The specific concepts being addressed are (1) the relationship
among temperature, heat and energy and (2) entropy. Educational materials to
address student misconceptions in these areas are being developed and will be
refined through two years of testing with chemical engineering students at
Bucknell University. The final educational materials will include an instruction
manual with inquiry based activities, supplementary instructional aids and
reliable assessment tools. The effectiveness of the prototype materials will be
assessed using concept inventories developed through previous NSF funding (DUE
0127806). If the prototype educational materials developed for the two targeted
engineering concepts prove effective, future work will expand the development,
assessment and dissemination of similar modules designed to address a broader
range of critical engineering concepts. &lt;br/&gt;