* 0442181
* ACT/SGER:      Improving the Lifetimes of Batteries:     NMR Studies of Structure and SEI Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Steven Greenbaum, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 02/28/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Two related exploratory projects will be performed, which will provide
information concerning the mechanisms of cell failure and will aid in the
development of new, improved electrode materials for use in lithium-ion
batteries: (i) The preparation and investigation of nano-sized LiCoO2 cathode
materials, and (ii) the development of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods
to study thin-film electrodes such as amorphous silicon. Through these projects,
we will explore correlations between size, morphology and structure, and the
effect of these parameters on electrochemical performance. Systems where the
solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) is a much higher fraction of the bulk will be
prepared allowing the SEI to be readily investigated by NMR spectroscopy, the
primary characterization method used in this research program. The SEI is the
film that forms on the electrode particles on battery assembly and grows on
cycling, and is a source of capacity loss (and eventually cell
failure).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Longer lasting, lighter and more compact
electrochemical power sources are required to power many of the devices used by
the intelligence community. Lithium-ion batteries represent one such power
source. In order to improve these batteries, both an increased understanding of
the battery failure mechanisms and the development of new, higher capacity
electrodes are required. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism Program in the
Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports new concepts in basic
research and workforce development with the potential to contribute to national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;