* 0442490
* Teaching Biodiversity Conservation: The  Network of Conservation Educators and Practitioners
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Malcolm Hunter, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 03/31/2009
* USD 446,069.00

To address the problem of a lack of resources that capture the potential of
Biodiversity conservation to serve as a base for interdisciplinary, inquiry-
based learning, The Network of Conservation Educators and Practitioners (NCEP-
US), a partnership among the Center for Biodiversity and Conservation at the
American Museum of Natural History, the State University of New York's College
of Environmental Science and Forestry, and the University of Maine linking
faculty, graduate students, and undergraduates with practicing conservation
professionals, is generating a set of classroom-tested, inquiry-based learning
materials to add to the 46 currently in preparation under a previous CCLI grant,
DUE-0127506. The current project continues and expands this collaboration by:
(1) developing and field-testing 25 additional modules in cooperation with a
diverse group of faculty and students. (2) developing a new module component of
"case studies," incorporating recent developments in research on active
learning; (3) promoting classroom use of the modules, along with active learning
and teaching techniques, through workshops at the meetings of professional
societies associated with conservation and ecology; and (4) expanding current
teacher-centered evaluation strategy to include student assessment of learning
gains (SALG). Materials are being developed in a workshop setting.

Intellectual merit: Biodiversity conservation is a globally significant issue,
and the accelerated loss of plant and animal species brought on by human
activities has heightened the need for well-trained environmental professionals.
This project addresses this need by providing up-to-date, flexible resources for
improving teaching in biodiversity conservation through inquiry-based exercises
for laboratory, field, or classroom use.

Broader impacts: While this project is directed primarily toward undergraduate
faculty and students, the material developed as part of this project is useful
to diverse audiences, including secondary school faculty and students, and
professionals and managers working with biodiversity issues. Efforts are being
made to include a significant number of faculty from minority-serving
institutions.

