* 0442412
* CRUI: Physiology and Fitness Consequences of Different Life History Phenotypes
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Steven Juliano, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2010
* USD 920,986.00

The phenotypes of organisms (i.e., their morphological, physiological, and
behavioral traits) vary enormously. A central goal of biology is to understand
how these different traits are produced (i.e., what physiological mechanisms
produce them) and why these traits exist (i.e., what is their adaptive
significance or why did they evolve). In this CRUI program, the investigators
will study two traits (adult body size and time to reach adulthood) in several
neighboring Florida populations of lubber grasshoppers (Romalea microptera) that
differ in mean body size. They will use laboratory studies to determine whether
these traits are determined by environmental effects, inherent genetic
differences between the populations, or the interaction of environment and
genetics. They will use field studies to determine the effects of these traits
on the survival and reproductive success of individuals in the local
environment. In short, these studies will enable scientists to understand both
how these traits are produced and why these traits are adaptive.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will require a cross-disciplinary approach
from the fields of evolutionary biology, ecology, physiology, chemistry and
mathematics. The project will integrate these fields using mathematical modeling
methods (e.g., Artificial Neural Networks, Life Table Models). These methods
will be used to develop predictive models for the effects of environmental and
genetic factors on adult body size and the time to adulthood and will help
evaluate the adaptive significance of these traits in the field. Thus, this
cross-disciplinary program will merge math, biochemistry, physiology, and
ecology to address issues of considerable biological importance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goal is to foster the scientific careers
of undergraduates through cross-disciplinary research. The investigators will
guide undergraduates through proposal preparation, data collection and analysis,
meeting presentations, and publication. This program will train students in
modeling and statistics, improving their understanding of quantitative methods.
The investigators will enhance opportunities for under-represented groups by
recruiting students from the ISU Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation and by providing research opportunities to students from
predominantly Native American colleges near the Florida field sites. More
details of this program can be found at: http://www.bio.ilstu.edu/juliano/CRUI
2005.htm. &lt;br/&gt;