* 0442718
* ACS Polymer Chemistry Division Symposium:    "The Polymer Science of Everyday Things";  August 21-22,  2004; Philadelphia, PA
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Kenneth Wynne, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2005
* USD 3,000.00

The goal of the "The Polymer Science of Everyday Things" symposium and workshop
is to explain how things that people encounter and use everyday depend on
polymer science for their ubiquity. Scientists and teachers hear and are excited
about inventions continually, but seldom stop to think about common things, such
as how musical instruments (e.g.,violins, guitars, and clarinets) are made, and
what is important in the construction of CDs, DVDs, and mobile phones. Seldom,
if ever, has there been asymposium and workshop that extends educational
outreach on those topics in polymer science to teachers and scientists, by
teachers and scientists, with substantial emphasis on three remote-site workshop
learning facilities. Thus, this symposium and workshop fulfill these needs while
enhancing education in the field of polymer science and enhancing teaching
professionalism. Intellectual Merit: The Workshop and symposium will have
scientists of the highest caliber, motication, and communcation skills dedicated
to inspiring future generations of scientists and communicating to the public
the impact of science "in everyday things". Examples of speakers include Nobel
Laureate Alan MacDiarmid, ACS Past President Elsa Reichmanis, and Joseph
Nagyvary whose life work has been the study of the relationship of materials
science to sound in the Stradivarius violin. Broader impacts include: "The
Polymer Science of Everyday Things" Interactive Tutorial Symposium and K-12 long
distance workshop augment: Inforation transfer between scientists, teachers, and
industry Education of members and K-12 teachers about timely scientific
developments that becam popularly-used products Examination of cross-disciplines
(polymer science, manufacturing processes, performance testing) from several
industris (consumer electronics, musical instruments, eletronic displays, and
high-fidelity audio reproduction).