* 0442096
* Forager-Farmer Encounters in the Balkans: Spatial Distribution of the Lepenski Vir Culture
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2005
* Dusan Boric, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2005
* USD 24,809.00

In the Fall of 2004, with the support provided by the National Science
Foundation, an international team of archaeologists, geologists and
speleologists under the supervision of Dr. Dusan Boric will conduct research in
the Danube Gorges region of the north-central Balkans, in present-day Serbia.
The project examines the nature of culture contact and exchange in the
transition to agriculture in south-eastern Europe, which remains one of the
central questions of European Prehistory. The exploratory research to be
conducted in this region focuses on an unexplored area between Mesolithic
foraging groups found along the Danube banks and more inland Early Neolithic
farming settlements in the surrounding regions of the Balkans.

After the initial discovery of a very rich archaeological sequence of Mesolithic
settlements along the Danube banks in the Iron Gates/Danube Gorges region in
1965 and their subsequent rescue excavations in the late 1960s and early 1970s,
no field-work has been conducted in this area. On the basis of the material
culture found at extensively excavated Mesolithic/foraging sites on the Danube,
there is evidence of significant diffusion of Early Neolithic pottery and other
portable items characterizing the Early Neolithic/farming communities with the
staring date of around 6300 BC. These data speak to the contact and exchange
between two different culture groups. However, very little is known about the
nature of this contact between foragers and farmers since the area of the Danube
Gorges hinterlands, away from the Danube banks and the region beyond the cliffs
of the gorges, remains archaeologically unexplored. Consequently, the current
project seeks to conduct an archaeological survey and explore the area between
foraging and farming settlements. The survey area encompasses the karstic
landscape of the Miroc Mountain Plateau in Serbia that is characterized by
numerous caves and rockshelters, which are the primary targets.

Research strategy is designed to proceed in three phases: 1) to survey the
existing caves and rockshelters in order to provide a 'short-list' of the most
promising among the existing sites for an archaeological exploration; 2) to core
sediments of six caves/rockshelters in order to determine their stratigraphies
and the nature of sedimentation in them; and 3) to excavate test pits in two
caves that provide the most promising stratigraphies of Mesolithic-Neolithic
periods.

The project has the potential to provide vital new data that would make a
significant impact on the current discussion with regard to the transition to
farming in southeastern Europe. On the theoretical level the project will
provide the possibility to examine some of the central questions of
archaeological and anthropological theory, namely the questions of culture
identity, contact and exchange between different populations and cultural
phenomena.

On a broader level this research project will bring together professors and
students from the host country (Serbia) and international researchers, and
provide the Serbian university students with the opportunity to learn and train
with archaeologists who were trained at USA and UK universities.