* 0442779
* Anatomy Revealed - Sensory Systems
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Mark Hankin, University of Toledo Health Science Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 03/31/2008
* USD 99,997.00

Human anatomy and physiology are complex and difficult subjects for students
when typically first encountered in college coursework. The complexity arises
from the functional interactions of multiple organ systems; the difficulty from
an extensive and unique terminology and intricate spatial relationships. One
limitation to learning stems from the mode of presentation, which typically
consists of static images of artists' two-dimensional illustrations or abstract
diagrams. Another is the limited, or complete lack of access to human cadavers
in college level anatomy and neuroscience classes. Combined with a shrinking
supply of qualified faculty (National Research Council, 1998), there is clearly
a need for alternative teaching and learning experiences. The long-term goal for
this project is to design, develop and evaluate interactive, multimedia
educational programs that help students efficiently learn and understand human
gross anatomy, neuroanatomy and physiology. When fully developed, the
educational material will explore the gross anatomy, histology and function of
the sensory portion of the nervous system. The specific aims of this proof-of-
concept proposal are to: a) Develop a prototype that focuses on one sensory
system, i.e., visual system, using interactive multimedia elements. b) Conduct a
pilot test to evaluate the usability of the prototype and its impact on student
learning with the intended audience of undergraduate students and instructors.
c) Report findings of the evaluation and communicate information about the
prototype to professional communities.

With Anatomy Revealed - Sensory Systems (and its prototype), students are able
to: (1) Explore interrelationships between nervous system structures using a
dynamic, interactive learning program, (2) appreciate how the material is
relevant to their personal life, as well as basic human biology and health, and
(3) test their knowledge and progress using both formative and summative
feedback. In addition, since college instructors of human anatomy and physiology
rarely have human anatomical material available, the software serves as a
"virtual cadaver" to help make these complex systems more easily understandable.
While these learning tools will be useful to many students, the highly visual
and interactive tutorial approach could meet the needs of a variety of learning
styles. The three evaluation sites, Kentucky State University (KSU), University
of Kentucky and Owens State Community College, have diverse student populations.