* 0442954
* Providing Breadth while Retaining Depth and Focus in an Introductory Computer Science Course
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Thomas Murtagh, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 12/31/2006
* USD 60,186.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most introductory computer science
courses focus on developing programming skills. Breadth-first courses include
material on programming, but de-emphasize it in favor of brief treatments of
many topics. The breadth-first approach assumes that a programming-only
introduction provides far too narrow an impression of our field. This project
supports this claim, but the intellectual incoherence introduced by
unnecessarily broad spectrum of topics has been a major factor in the failure of
breadth-first courses. It is not the differences between the parts of computer
science that should be emphasized, but the common elements that connect all the
parts of computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is creating an
introductory computer science course that focuses on one area of specialization
within computer science and is using this specialty as a vehicle to present a
broad overview of the techniques and principles underlying all work in the
field. The course is "depth-first" in examining a single subfield within
computer science, yet in another sense, the course will be "breadth-first" in
choosing material from the selected subfield that illustrate techniques and
principles of broad applicability within the field. Such a course is referred to
as a depth/breadth-first introductory course. The project is developing a set of
readings and projects to go with this course approach that will be shared with
the computer science community through a program of presentations and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This project includes
widespread support for the principles underlying the breadth-first approach,
still encouraged by the Computing Curriculum 2001 report. The novel contribution
in this project is in applying the adjective "breadth" to the set of fundamental
techniques and concepts explored rather than the set of distinct subfields
covered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The shift of attention from
programming to other topics and the integration of programming with the
discussion of a practical application area address issues identified as factors
in the gender imbalance in computer science. It is expected that the proposed
approach will attract and retain more female students.