* 0442987
* Active Learning for Programming in Information Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Keith Whittington, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2008
* USD 60,000.00

The emerging field of Information Technology is one of several fields that
require students to learn computer programming. However, traditional
instructional techniques -- primarily lecture-based -- have not been effective
for these and other students. This project provides, tests, and shares
alternative instructional techniques that support students in these fields and
enables them to continue past an instructional roadblock. Active learning
materials are under development for classroom testing and a subsequent series of
presentations and workshops for faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. The use of traditional teaching techniques in technical fields has not
succeeded with many under-represented groups, such as females, returning adults,
and less-abstract minded students. Although active learning techniques are based
on sound pedagogical principles, they have been slow to diffuse into the culture
of computer programming instruction. The materials that underlie this project
have been pilot tested for two years, and have shown evidence of success in
increasing student comprehension and satisfaction, which leads to higher course
completion rates. Developing and testing these materials in a more rigorous way
will create a validated, easy-to-use resource that can be distributed to faculty
in other academic institutions, and will provide the empirical evidence that is
necessary for others to adopt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Science and
technology loses many able and capable students because its culture is not
always supportive of a variety of learning styles amongst its students. Computer
programming is one of the most valuable skills in an information age, yet the
traditional programming culture has been reluctant to shift its mindset. By
developing and validating these materials, and providing associated workshops,
presentations, and published materials this project is helping to change the
culture of computer programming, and consequently increases the potential to
attract and retain beginning students in this critical field of science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;