* 0442182
* Controls on Variations in the Isotope Composition of Precipitation during Warm Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Karen Bice, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 03/31/2009
* USD 241,024.00

This award supports research using an isotope-capable general circulation model
to quantify geographic, global climatic, and orbital effects on the oxygen
isotopic composition of precipitation. The researcher will run a series of
sensitivity tests will be performed using the GENESIS general circulation model
(GCM) with water isotope tracers included in the hydrologic cycle. The
researcher and her colleagues will make comparisons among experiments performed
with boundary conditions appropriate for the modern and early Paleogene time
period with the aim of examining variability in the isotopic composition of
rainfall, continental runoff, and high latitude snowfall over a wide variety of
boundary conditions and time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
researcher will provide estimates of freshwater oxygen isotope based on first
principles of climate physics and water isotope fractionation. The research will
provide a definition of the nonlinear precipitation oxygen isotope-temperature
relationships seen at the warm temperatures typical of many pre-Neogene
climates. Quantification of plausible ranges in precipitation oxygen isotopes
for boundary conditions appropriate for warmer-than-modern climates will allow
greater confidence in estimates of paleotemperature, water vapor transport, and
seasonality from marine and continental proxy records that currently rely on
assumptions of isotope-temperature relationships, oxygen isotope freshwater
values, and freshwater flux estimates. The results of this research are likely
to have a broad impact on the wider science community through improvements in
the reliability of numerical simulations of water isotopes within a model that
can be easily applied to modern climate problems and any geologic time period.