* 0442991
* Develop a Smart Flexible Beam Experiment Using Piezoceramic Sensors and Actuators
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Gangbing Song, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 02/28/2009
* USD 109,000.00

Engineering-Mechanical (56) &lt;br/&gt;The proof-of-concept project is
developing a multi-purpose "smart" flexible beam experiment using state-of-the
art surface-bound piezoceramic sensors and actuators for in-class demonstration
and laboratory use. The sensors and actuators are being attached to a low-cost
cantilever beam to utilize their multi-functional capabilities, which includes
the ability to sense and to react to external stimuli. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
material is being developed for instruction in dynamics, controls, mechatronics,
and smart structures related courses in mechanical engineering, civil
engineering, and engineering technology programs. Experiments include (1) strain
or vibration measurements, (2) dynamics of a second order system, (3)
understanding Bode diagram representation of a higher order dynamics system, (4)
modal frequencies and shapes, (5) resonance of an under-damped dynamics system,
(6) active vibration control using classical linear, modern, and non-linear
control methods, and (7) finite element modeling of structures. The project is
being developed in a state-of-the-art Smart Materials and Structural Laboratory
where the research of emerging technologies are being integrated into
undergraduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to assess student
learning for different populations of students, the project is engaging
collaborators at Avlin Community College, Texas Southern University, a minority
serving institution, University of Southern Alabama and Rice University.
Assessment strategies include both formative and summative evaluations to
determine the impact that the smart beam has on recruiting minorities, improved
student learning in 15 different classes that are taught by 10 different
instructors, and the effect of the project on motivating students to pursue
graduate studies. Industrial support is assessing the technical aspects of the
smart vibration platform as an effective, low-cost commercially available
educational product that can be manufactured and operated as planned. The
program is developing a CD and web access for use at other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;