* 0442836
* Collaborative Research: Developing a National Model for a College-level Introductory Sociology Course
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Caroline Persell, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2011
* USD 191,889.00

This project is completing the development started by the American Sociological
Association (ASA) national task force to create a modern introductory sociology
curriculum. It is engaged in refining the ASA college-level curriculum and
further developing innovative pedagogical materials for a college-level
introductory sociology course. A second goal is also being pursued,
identification of conditions leading to successful student learning, especially
among women and members of racial/ethnic minorities who are underrepresented in
social science fields. Particular attention is being paid to developing their
abilities to integrate, synthesize, and interpret information and enhancing
their literacy and quantitative skills. The intellectual merit of the project
derives from the fact that the new course will result in deeper and more lasting
student learning by all types of students. It will increase our knowledge of how
underrepresented groups can more successfully learn social science concepts and
methods. Significant broader impacts will be realized ultimately from the
widespread adoption of this new national model for a college-level introductory
sociology course. The following course features are contributing to the broader
impacts: a greatly strengthened curricular content, increased reliance on
inquiry-based teaching resources, significant student experience in using major
national datasets and tools, and formative feedback from companion assessment
materials. Further, as an outgrowth of this projects' linking of practicing
sociologists, junior college, college, and university faculty (and high school
teachers), the project is developing new networks to enhance teacher training
and student involvement in research.

The project evaluation is employing field observations of classes, videotapes of
classes, interviews of teachers and students, analysis of the content of student
assessment materials, and students' performances on the new assessments.
Assessment of these collected data is providing the basis for a further round of
modifications of the curriculum, teaching resources, and assessment tools. The
project website and discussion board is permitting sociology instructors to
share questions, problems, strategies, and materials. By project completion
there will be a well-refined curriculum, a set of teaching materials that are
aligned with it, and systematic assessment of how they work. These will be
shared at professional associations of sociologists, educational researchers,
and high school teachers, in professional and general public publications, and
made available through the American Sociological Association.

