* 0442509
* RUI: Gamma-Butyrolactone Autoregulatory Signaling In Thaxtomin- And Naphthoquinone Polyketide-Producing Streptomyces
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Frank Healy, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/28/2009
* USD 165,383.00

Gram-positive filamentous streptomycetes produce ?-butyrolactone (GBL) molecules
in a growth rate- and cell density-dependent manner that regulate expression of
genes involved in secondary metabolism and morphogenesis. GBL signaling involves
the GBL autoregulator, required for GBL biosynthesis, and the GBL binding
protein (GBLBP), a TetR-type transcriptional regulator with a GBL binding
domain. Several streptomycetes produce secondary metabolite phytotoxins,
thaxtomins, which are required for efficient host colonization and infection of
plants. The elaboration of host-microbe interaction activities by many gram-
negative prokaryotes relies on N-acylhomoserine lactone (AHSL) derivatives,
which bear an appreciable structural similarity to GBLs. Since thaxtomins are
potent secondary metabolite phytotoxins required for host-microbe interaction, a
role for GBL compounds in the regulation of thaxtomin gene expression by gram-
positive streptomycetes analogous to that of AHSLs in regulating gene expression
in gram-negative organisms is envisioned. This project will employ genetic,
physiological and biochemical methods to elucidate the role(s) played by GBL
signaling in the biology of thaxtomin-producing organisms. GBL autoregulator and
GBLBP mutants will be generated using disruption and replacement techniques and
analyzed using physiological studies of growth and morphological development.
Quantitative assays of production of thaxtomins and other metabolites will be
carried out. Transcript mapping and growth-rate dependent transcriptional
analysis of autoregulator and thaxtomin structural genes in wild type and mutant
derivatives will be performed. Biochemical analysis of GBLBP will include
electrophoretic mobility shift and DNase footprinting assays with DNA regulatory
elements. With extensive undergraduate student involvement, the research is
expected to advance the limited understanding of streptomycete GBL
autoregulator-mediated quorum-sensing activities, particularly with regard to
thaxtomin-dependent host-microbe interactions.