* 0442056
* ACT/SGER:     Fuel Cell Electrocatalysts and Membraneless Fuel Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Hector Abruna, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 02/28/2007
* USD 150,000.00

We will focus our efforts in order to: (i) expand our ongoing work on the
development of electrocatalytic materials for fuel cell applications based on
ordered intermetallic phases, and (ii) employ these materials in both
conventional fuel cells and in a new planar membraneless microchannel fuel cell
design that we have recently developed. In the first part, the intent is to take
advantage of the broad parameter-space available within the wide-range of
ordered intermetallic phases with emphasis on binary and ternary phases, thereby
asserting predictable control over structural, geometric and electronic effects
in order to tailor materials for specific fuel cell applications with initial
emphasis on anodes for direct fuel cells employing small organic molecules
(including formic acid, methanol, and ethanol among others) as fuels. The use of
ordered intermetallic phases as electrode materials is truly novel, and our work
to date indicates that they could potentially represent an enabling technology
for employing complex and high energy density fuels in high efficiency fuel cell
applications. In the second part, we will employ nanoparticles of the materials
described above and test them as fuel cell electrodes both in conventional fuel
cells and in a new planar membraneless microchannel fuel cell design that we
recently developed around the concept of laminar flow established through the
use of a tapered flow boundary. The development of membraneless microchannel
fuel cells represents an advance that could serve as a general energy platform
for intelligence applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is
intended to develop superior electrode materials for fuel cell applications
through the use of the general class of materials known as "ordered
intermetallics". The most promising candidates will be tested as very small
particles (nanoparticles) using a flow fuel cell which will help in the rapid
screening of materials under more realistic conditions. The Approaches to Combat
Terrorism Program in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences
supports new concepts in basic research and workforce development with the
potential to contribute to national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;