* 0442531
* National Dissemination of Multimedia Case Studies that Bring Real-World Issues into Engineering Classrooms
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2011
* P. Raju, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 06/30/2011
* USD 239,990.00

&lt;br/&gt;Engineering students are increasingly being asked by potential
employers to demonstrate "soft" skills (such as problem solving and business
skills) in addition to their "hard" technical skills. Reflecting these
expectations, the Accreditation Board for Engineering Education (ABET) has
defined a set of accreditation criteria (3a-k) which identify 11 outcomes
expected of engineering graduates. The Laboratory for Innovative Technology and
Engineering Education (LITEE) team at Auburn University obtained funding from
the NSF and, working with industrial partners, has developed multimedia case
studies to address these expectations. These case studies make it possible for
students to visualize the problem posed in the case study and work in teams as
they play the roles of concerned engineers and managers. In class presentations,
students present solutions to the problem and defend them. Evaluation data shows
that implementing LITEE case studies in classrooms improves the higher-level
cognitive skills of students, stimulates teamwork, and satisfies the majority of
the ABET 3a-k criteria. Experience gained from disseminating the case studies
through the earlier NSF CCLI grants, as well as reports from others, shows that
there are many significant challenges in introducing multimedia case studies
into engineering classrooms. Some of the challenges are: changes in the role of
the instructor, apprehension about using innovative materials, difficulties in
evaluating and testing students, and training students to engage in effective
team work. The goals of this project will be to provide faculty members with
hands-on experience of working in teams, explain case study teaching strategies,
connect STEM theories to the real-world problems discussed in the case studies,
and demonstrate how the LITEE case studies can help meet the ABET accreditation
criteria. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A partnership with a group of 17
engineering/technology faculty members and 1 high school teacher, 2 experts in
engineering education, and a few industry engineers/managers has been formed.
These partners will play a key role in validating the concept and value of
disseminating LITEE case studies to students and training other faculty members.
In this project, the partners will work with LITEE through a national conference
and two regional workshops. One outcome of the project is that about 25 of the
faculty members will adapt and implement LITEE case studies in their classrooms.
The second outcome of the project will be to bring real-world problems to
classrooms and thus stimulate interest to pursue engineering education for over
750 students. This project will improve the way students learn important STEM
principles by integrating soft and hard skills, provide students with real-life,
comprehensive experiences in engineering, make the curriculum more interesting,
and enable engineering educators to successfully meet many of the ABET
accreditation criteria. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;