* 0442319
* Preparing Prospective Mathematics Teachers to Teach with Technology: An Integrated Approach
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2005,11/30/2007
* Karen Hollebrands, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 11/30/2007
* USD 74,787.00

Preparing prospective mathematics teachers for technology-equipped classrooms in
the 21st century is a complex task. The National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics (2000) and the Conference Board of Mathematical Sciences (CBMS,
2002) advocate the use of technology in learning K-16 mathematics. Given the
changing nature of technology, it is important that prospective teachers (PSTs)
develop a model of teaching and learning that goes beyond the specifics of a
technology tool so that they are able to make informed decisions about the
appropriate use of technology (CBMS, 2002). Many teacher preparation programs
include a focus on the use of technology for teaching school mathematics. At
North Carolina State University (NCSU), all middle and secondary mathematics
education majors take a required Teaching Mathematics with Technology course.
The goal of the full-scale project is to develop curriculum materials in the
form of modules for this type of course. The modules provide opportunities for
middle and secondary PSTs to develop: 1) deeper conceptual understanding of
school mathematics topics 2) proficiency in using technology tools, 3) effective
pedagogical techniques, and 4) abilities to analyze students' thinking when
using technology tools to solve mathematical tasks. The specific objective for
this proof-of-concept project is to create one prototype module for Data
Analysis and Probability. Although simulation and data analysis tools (e.g.,
graphing calculators, spreadsheets, Fathom, Probability Explorer) may be
available, there is a need for high quality teacher education materials to help
mathematics education faculty become comfortable with and incorporate materials
for teaching PSTs how to teach probability and data analysis with technology.
The development and testing of the module include drafting plans, discussions
among advisory board members and PIs about plans, completing the draft module,
field testing and evaluating at NCSU, revising materials, and disseminating
revised materials online for further field testing at NCSU and several other
institutions. Through the use of an advisory board and mathematics consultant,
diverse universities and organizations in North Carolina are represented,
including two universities with large teacher preparation programs, a private
university, a technology-intensive secondary school, and an organization
specializing in educational evaluation. Because of the modular design and
electronic format used, the materials have a broader impact across settings as
they are used in a methods course focusing on the use of technology in the
teaching of mathematics, as a unit within a mathematics methods course (for
grades 6-8, 9-12, or 6-12), or as part of a professional development for
inservice teachers. By preparing teachers to effectively use technology in
mathematics, our broader impact also includes improving grade 6-12 students'
mathematical and technological literacy.

