* 0442845
* SGER:     Inviscid Models of Two-Dimensional Vortex Wakes with Continuous Vorticity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Mark Stremler, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 60,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0442845&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATORS: MARK STREMLER&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: VANDERBILT
UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INVISCID MODELS OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL VORTEX WAKES
WITH CONTINUOUS VORTICITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of novel analysis
methodology of periodic vortex wakes is supported under this grant. While this
entails a mathematical exercise in finding solutions to the non-linear governing
equation, the interest is primarily in the physical understanding of vortex
wakes that can be gained from such a solution. Such vortex wakes are relevant to
a number of engineering applications. While there is evidence supporting the
existence of such a solution for the staggered vortex street, there is a strong
possibility that it does not exist or that it cannot be expressed in closed form
as proposed. This work can be considered the application of a new approach to an
established research topic on two fronts. First, inviscid analysis of the
staggered vortex street has focused on either point vortices or constant
vorticity patches. The proposed work appears to be the first attempt to model
the vortex street with a continuous vorticity field. Secondly, the analogy
between solitons and vortex dynamics has led recently to several new exact
solutions of the Euler equations but the approach that was used is applicable
only for stationary vortex configurations. The proposed work will examine the
extension of this approach to relative vortex equilibria that translate
uniformly. The intellectual merit of this work will be its contributions to the
fundamental understanding of basic fluid mechanics. The staggered vortex street
is a classical problem in fluid mechanics and a commonly occurring physical
phenomenon, and the determination of an exact solution will significantly
advance the ability to investigate its intriguing behavior. In particular, the
proposed work will investigate the reason for the apparent stability of the
staggered street, which is still an open question. This work will also provide a
framework for finding other exact solutions to the Euler equations. One
anticipated outgrowth of the proposed work is a collaborative investigation of
exotic vortex wakes that contain three or more vortices per period. The broader
impacts of this work will include advancing discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching and learning, broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups, and broad dissemination of results for the enhancement
of scientific and technical understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;