* 0442702
* CCLI-EMD: Topic Maps-based Courseware to Support Undergraduate Computer Science Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2005,07/31/2007
* Darina Dicheva, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 07/31/2007
* USD 60,995.00

Computer Science (31)

This project uses the new ISO standard for organizing, retrieving, and
interchanging semantic information on the Web, Topic Maps, for developing
e-learning courseware in computer science. Specifically, the project is
developing subject ontologies for four modules of undergraduate Computer Science
courses, using them to create comprehensive Topic Maps-based learning materials,
and utilizing the developed materials in Web-assisted courses to assess their
impact on student learning. The project is proving that a concept-based
organization is an efficient form of structuring digital learning content in
STEM disciplines and especially in Computer Science, as well as proving that
Topic Maps technology is suitable for developing efficiently searchable and
reusable educational materials on the Web. The topic map editor and viewer are
available through the NSDL and the project is developing workshops for persons
who want to develop their own topic-map based software.

The project's intellectual merit lies in concept-based organization of
educational materials, providing grounds for improving students' learning in
STEM disciplines by supporting topic-aware content browsing and context-based
information retrieval. The developed Topic Maps-based Computer Science modules
will serve as a model of ontology-driven courseware.

The project's broader impacts on courseware developers comes from promoting the
application of ontologies for e-learning and using the new Topic Maps standard,
and on learners, by developing courseware that provides guidance in self-
exploration and task-related information search, especially for students with
difficulties in conceptual understanding and reasoning.