* 0442989
* Remote Educational Antenna Laboratory for Enhanced Undergraduate Electrical Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2009
* Madhu Gupta, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 09/30/2009
* USD 400,001.00

This project is constructing an Internet-accessible antenna range in an anechoic
chamber that is large enough to characterize the types of antennas that are
suitable for personal electronic devices in the frequency bands between 1 and 18
GHz. With this facility and readily available software packages, students can
design, simulate, and test antennas. The investigators have students construct
their antenna using simple techniques such as elements printed on circuit boards
and cutting and assembling metal and dielectric parts with hand tools. In
addition, they are making an antenna construction kit available that will allow
students at other sites to build simple wire and printed antennas. This web-
based facility when coupled with the implementation techniques being developed
will allow students across the country to design and test antennas without
duplicating this costly facility. Formative and summative assessments, using
both quantitative and qualitative methods are being employed to evaluate and
improve the effectiveness of the remote user experience and its impact on
student learning and interest in electromagnetics. The availability of the
facility will be widely advertised through presentation at conferences, lab
tours, targeted letters, and a workshop. They also plan to publish the results
of their study in engineering education conferences proceedings and in archived
journals. The laboratory is being developed in collaboration with San Diego
State University, and beta tested at San Diego State, the University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, and the University of Washington.