* 0442488
* Bringing Relevance to Earth Science Introductory Curricula through Images Showing Human/Landscape Interaction
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2007
* Paul Bierman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 04/30/2007
* USD 75,000.00

To increase student interest in Earth Science, this project is developing four
learning modules that teach fundamental concepts in Geology by demonstrating
their relevance to society. The catalyst for this work is a 10,000+ image
collection of current and historical photographs contained in the NSF-supported
Landscape Change Program digital archive. The project objective is to
demonstrate that student interest and learning increase when Earth Science is
taught and learned visually in the context of the human experience. The outcome
of this work will be students who recognize the relevance of Earth Science as a
discipline and its ability to inform debate on a variety of pertinent societal
issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the
developing, testing, and evaluating of four instructional modules, each focused
on different ways in which the Earth and people interact. Each module includes
image-rich interactive web-based introductory learning tools as well as a
PowerPoint template and accompanying active learning exercises for use in the
classroom. This project targets the Earth Science (Geology and Geography)
student population at the advanced high school and introductory college level in
order to make the broadest possible impact. Collaborations with other
institutions and with the University of Vermont Center for Teaching and Learning
assure that the materials we develop are tested using a cross-section of the
student population.&lt;br/&gt;