* 0442582
* What Happened? A Vertically Integrated Engineering Case Study Based on Wind Turbines
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2008
* Charles Dolan, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 06/30/2008
* USD 92,459.00

A modular vertically integrated (longitudinal through the four year program)
multidisciplinary (seen in classes in different departments) case study is being
developed based on a single project that includes problems that are easily
incorporated into lower and upper division engineering courses. The case study
problems increase in complexity with the student's engineering skill set
allowing students to develop synthesis skills as their education advances. The
modules provide an opportunity for students to address larger problems than
encountered in typical textbooks and to see the project multiple times from
multiple perspectives.

The goals of this case study program are: increase interest (and retention) in
engineering studies, advance the student's ability to work at higher cognitive
domains and integrate the case study as a way to introduce students to the
multidisciplinary aspect of design development. The project is developed around
the design and operation of wind turbines. The project approach consists of
three elements. First, case study modules are developed. Second, the case
studies are piloted simultaneously at the University of Wyoming, Laramie County
Community College and Western Wyoming Community College. Third, extensive
assessments are conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the case studies to
meet the project goals.

The project includes a significant project assessment activity to assist faculty
and other engineering programs to adopt the integrated concept. The assessment
component constitutes approximately 40% of the sponsored faculty time
commitment. The assessment is to be conducted in five steps: problem learning
objectives, class evaluations, focus groups, centralized tracking, and
electronic portfolios. The broader implication of this research is two fold.
First, the modular program structure allows adoption to be incremental rather
than curricula wide. Thus, trials at other schools become easier to implement.
Second, the evaluation program provides instructors with the best practices for
adoption of the case studies in their own classes. Complementing the technology,
a MS student in History develops the historical model of wind turbine
development, thus creating a cross over between the Arts and Science College and
the College of Engineering. Undergraduate engineering students are helping to
develop the engineering master module and are involved in proof testing problems
prior to sending them to the classroom.