* 0442853
* Maintaining and Strengthening Prerequisite Skills in an Introductory Electrical Engineering Course
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2008
* Ashok Iyer, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 03/31/2008
* USD 74,926.00

The project is attempting to enhance electrical engineering education by
improving the students' transition from fundamental courses to the first
discipline-specific courses. The investigators are developing course material
for an introductory electrical engineering course that reviews several topics in
mathematics and physics in the context of electrical engineering applications.
The material consists of six two-week modules that include a prerequisites
review, a technical description of the engineering topic, and associated
homework and laboratory assignments. Class notes, examples and demonstrations,
homework assignments, and laboratory notes are being developed and organized in
a web-based format. The main challenge is identifying the specific prerequisite
skills that need to be reinforced and the corresponding electrical engineering
topics that will engage and motivate the students without overwhelming them.
These modules are particularly suited for transfer and back-to-school students,
and they provide an ideal articulation link between junior colleges and four-
year programs. The investigators are evaluating the material using both
quantitative and qualitative techniques, including written surveys and personal
interviews. Dissemination plans include conference papers, journal articles, a
web posting, and a possible textbook.