* 0442188
* Developing New Terahertz Devices for Populating Spectral Databases
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Timothy Korter, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 02/28/2006
* USD 86,075.00

Terahertz (THz) spectroscopy and imaging methods have strong potential to non-
invasively and non-destructively detect explosives and chemical/biological
warfare agents. This goal will be realized by two objectives. In the first,
layered gallium phosphide (GaP) nonlinear crystals will be developed and
characterized to increase the useable spectral bandwidth of THz time-domain
spectrometers by a factor of two. The GaP devices will provide pulsed THz
radiation generation and detection from 0.1 to =7 THz (3 to =233 cm-1) with no
absence of spectral content and with no degradation in spectral resolution. This
objective will yield sensors and detectors with unprecedented ability to obtain
THz spectra with simultaneous high spectral resolution and wide spectral
bandwidth. These new devices will enhance accessibility to valuable chemical
information, particularly the hydrogen-bonding interactions ubiquitous in
biological systems. In the second objective, the devices will be used to
investigate the THz spectra of condensed-phase biologically relevant materials,
focusing on hydrogen-bond stretching and bending vibrations observable above 3
THz. This underutilized spectral region will yield THz signatures for molecules
and ultimately aid in the rational construction of spectral libraries for use in
the rapid detection and identification of compounds of interest to the
intelligence community.