* 0442600
* Digital Signal Processing with Field Programmable Gate Arrays -- An Undergraduate Prototype Course with Companion Lab
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Reginald Perry, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 05/31/2008
* USD 74,980.00

The project is developing an undergraduate course on Digital Signal Processing
(DSP) with Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) that includes laboratory
experiments. The course presents the most important DSP algorithms appropriate
for an undergraduate course and requires no extensive Hardware Description
Language (HDL) or DSP knowledge as a prerequisite. Students are learning to
develop DSP systems in real world settings with real world problems and state-
of-the-art equipment and tools. The investigators are making all material,
including online quizzes and tests, available through the Blackboard learning
system. This web-based access enables a continuous information flow between
students and the material developers, and it facilitates the use and evaluation
of the material by other instructors and industrial advisors. By providing
students with a relevant "hands-on" design experience using state-of-the-art
equipment in this very important emerging field, the investigators hope to
enhance the retention of the large number students from underrepresented
populations in their program. Outside evaluators from academia and from industry
are ensuring that the appropriate topic, tools, and procedures are being
covered. Students are evaluating the material using the University's course
evaluation process and student learning is being evaluated using student exit
surveys, focus group evaluations, and alumni surveys. The investigators are
planning to disseminate their work via journal publications and major
conferences presentations. In addition, faculty members from four other
institutions are committed to use the material in courses at their institutions.