* 0442699
* Second Annual Interstate Network of Science Programs Integrating Research and Education (INSPIRE) Undergraduate Research Conference; October 16-18, 2004; Hattiesburg, MS
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Lon Mathias, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2005
* USD 3,000.00

October 16-18, 2004, marks the second annual conference of the Interstate
Network of Science Programs Integrating Research and Education (INSPIRE) on the
University of Southern Mississippi Hattiesburg campus. This regional conference
offers opportunities for the best and brightest undergraduate students in
polymers, materials science, and biomaterials science to present their research
and their learning experiences with other students and faculty members. The
INSPIRE conference spotlights the most creative and disciplined science students
by providing a forum for them to share their research. Students will be
motivated to continue their scientific endeavors by being exposed to research
that their peers are performing, and will compete for awards that recognize
academic excellence. Interactions among students and faculty with similar
research interests will lead to long-term networking
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the activity include
providing an avenue for undergraduates throughout the United States to present
their research to their peers. In addition, the conference offers opportunities
for peer interaction, increased self-esteem, refinement of presentation and
interpersonal communications skills, and, having the option of participating in
professional development workshops. Intellectual merit components include the
sharing and distribution of scientific research among students and faculty from
different academic institutions nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;