* 0442394
* CCLI-EMD: Integrating Enterprise Decision-Making Modules into Undergraduate Industrial Engineering and Management Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Sharon Johnson, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 04/30/2010
* USD 74,742.00

Organizations today have become process-focused, linking product development and
order fulfillment across functions and across the globe. Integrated Enterprise
Systems (ES) support this process orientation through cross-functional software
applications built upon a common database. Companies need graduates who
understand the process-wide benefits and risks of their decisions and who can
use ES data effectively to make these decisions. In response, universities need
to create process-oriented and data-rich educational
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are developing five ES-based decision-
making modules, a case linking these modules across courses, and a supporting
database. For each module, students use the ES software and data to make
decisions in a traditional course and to explore their decision's impact on
product development and supply chain processes. Since each module is designed
around a traditional decision, such as product design, taught in a traditional
course, our approach introduces a flexible view of integration into engineering
and management curricula without curriculum re-design, increasing the likelihood
of adoption and further development at other institutions. We are testing these
modules in two engineering and two management courses at WPI. Our evaluation
measures whether these ES-based, active-learning modules increase students'
comprehension of enterprise-wide decision-making and their ability to apply ES
data to make decisions. &lt;br/&gt;