* 0442748
* Neurons in Action Version 2: Understanding the Behavior of Normal and Abnormal Neurons
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Ann Stuart, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 04/30/2009
* USD 379,561.00

The key to the function of neurons is the voltage across their membranes:
changes in the value of this voltage not only control basic neuronal processes
but constitute the signals that underlie perception, movement, and thought. An
understanding of how these signals are generated and how they travel in neurons
is fundamental to any understanding of the nervous system. Yet this area, rooted
in concepts of electricity, can be perplexing to students, the more so because
the voltages move in the neuron but texts can present the material only as
static figures. Two educational improvements are needed to make this subject
accessible: first, a new way of visualizing the activity of neurons and, second,
an interactive learning tool that allows students to predict what a neuron will
do as their understanding grows, with immediate feedback to let them know if
their insight is correct or incorrect. &lt;br/&gt;John Moore and Ann Stuart
developed the prototype for this project, a CD-ROM-based set of interactive
tutorials called Neurons in Action (NIA1), to encourage students to learn how
neurons function by experimentation. The student does experiments on the
computer, asking "What if?" by choosing parameter values such as the neuron's
geometry, its channel types and densities, the degree of myelination of its
axon, its synaptic inputs, the ionic environment and temperature. A
sophisticated, professional simulator, NEURON, carries out the computations and
graphs the resulting voltages, currents, and underlying conductances. The
software is unique in having moving graphs that show how voltages spread within
the neuron; this feature quickly dispels misconceptions that arise from the
static figures of textbooks. Hyperlinks in the tutorials lead the student to a
wealth of supporting information: explanations of results, answers to questions
asked in the tutorial, background text material, and PDFs of original papers.
&lt;br/&gt;The current project, Neurons in Action Version 2 (NIA2), undertakes
an improvement in the prototype tutorials (NIA1), based on user feedback, as
well as new tutorials and an emphasis on understanding how diseases, toxins, and
drugs can affect the neuron. The particular new tutorials are now made possible
by advances in the sophistication of NEURON and in the speed and memory of
computers. Colleagues who are currently using NEURON or NIA1 are providing
assistance for new tutorials developed in their areas of expertise and/or help
with evaluation. As in the prototype, the tutorials are written in HTML and
hyperlinked to supporting material. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The NIA
tutorials exploit the power of a professional simulator widely used as a
research tool. The experiments suggested for students to carry out reflect
accurately the knowledge gained over the past half century. This project is
unique in using a browser to launch NEURON from HTML tutorials hyperlinked to a
wealth of scholarly information; no equivalent program exists.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The NIA2 tutorials have been planned with a wide
scope to be used at several levels. At the most introductory level, they are
appropriate for undergraduates with no previous knowledge of neuroscience. At
the same time, they are intended to lure the student more deeply into the
material by providing intriguing subjects for the naive student whose knowledge
is just beginning to expand or for the more sophisticated student to explore.
While promoting understanding of neurophysiology broadly among undergraduate
students (and often faculty), NIA also can acquaint and intrigue them with the
research field of computational neuroscience. Further, the NIA web site provides
a forum where contributions from faculty for the extension of these tutorials
and problem sets can be posted. The wide range of these tutorials makes them
appropriate for students in undergraduate biology, neuroscience, psychology, or
physiology courses, or for students with career aspirations not only in
neuroscience but also in biomedical engineering, medical, or other health-
related fields. The fact that NIA1 has already sold over 3000 copies to a wide
assortment of institutions in the US and other countries bodes well for the
broad impact of the final product.