* 0442944
* Integrating Systematic Creativity into the Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2007
* Gul Kremer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 07/31/2007
* USD 75,000.00

Industrial leaders have long expressed a mounting concern about the impact of
traditional engineering education on the creative potential of future engineers.
A lack of creativity is problematic in a rapidly changing technology-oriented
world where generating new ideas is essential to survival. One of the industrial
perceptions of weaknesses in new BS engineering graduates is a lack of design
capability or creativity, and a lack of appreciation of considering
alternatives. Further, a 1995 ASME report ranked creative thinking as 5th of 56
top desired "best practices" for new BS-level engineers as seen by industry and
academe. In the past few years, universities have responded to this challenge by
adding more design content and introducing more open-ended design problems into
the engineering curriculum. The most common approach to idea generation or
creativity, however, has been the use of brainstorming that calls upon the
designer to look inward for inspiration on creative solutions to the problem at
hand. This can be a daunting task, which may or may not be fruitful. Systematic
creativity methods such as the theory of inventive principles (TRIZ), guide the
concept generation process using solution patterns derived from problems similar
to the one being solved. These methods are typically introduced in senior or
graduate elective courses, if at all. An EMD proof-of-concept grant from NSF
would allow the faculty of the Engineering Design Program working with faculty
in the Electrical, Industrial and Mechanical Engineering Departments at Penn
State to develop materials that would facilitate teaching systematic creativity
methods in four core undergraduate design courses: the first-year Introduction
to Engineering Design course and the capstone design courses in the three
participating departments. Specifically, we propose (1) to develop systematic
creativity modules and materials, based on the Theory of Inventive Principles
(TRIZ), for the first-year introductory course and the three capstone courses,
(2) to promote amongst the faculty an awareness and understanding of the TRIZ
method, (3) to develop assessment and research strategies that would allow Penn
State to contribute to the research knowledge on the teaching and learning of
creativity using systematic creativity methods. It is expected that the outcome
of this work will result in materials widely applicable by other engineering
departments and institutions looking to address the national need to increase
the creative potential of future engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods will
be developed to address two pedagogical issues currently lacking solutions: (1)
effective models and materials for introducing systematic creativity in core
engineering courses; (2) a comprehensive research plan to study the effects of
the introduction of systematic creativity methods on the creative potential of
engineering graduates. Key questions to be answered include: Can the
introduction of systematic creativity result in a person learning to be more
creative? To what extent does systematic creativity correlate with different
learning styles or personality traits, both of which have been shown to
contribute to a person's creative potential. What are the best instruments to
measure the effects of the intervention on a person's creative potential? What
effect would the intervention have on retention rates? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
materials developed will have impacts beyond the four targeted undergraduate
courses. An interactive on-line tool, based on one of the key TRIZ concepts,
technical contradictions, is being developed as part of the proposal. The tool
will be publicly available and populated with a large number of real-world
examples, categorized by discipline. This will go far beyond what is currently
available and provide a valuable resource to other institutions and companies
wishing to adopt the TRIZ approach. In addition, the developed materials
incorporate the language and analysis models common in engineering design (TRIZ
has a large number of unique analysis models) thereby removing one of the
barriers to wider adoption of the approach. The materials will also be suitable
for use in short courses in industry. Finally, the outcomes of the research
strategies and assessments will advance discovery and understanding of the
teaching of creativity and the learning of creativity using systematic methods
such as TRIZ.&lt;br/&gt;