* 0442015
* ACT/SGER: Intelligent Extraction of Information from Graphs and High Dimensional Data
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Stanley Osher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2005
* USD 199,735.00

AST-0442015&lt;br/&gt;Green&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of powerful new
mathematical techniques motivates the need for training a new generation in the
many challenges relevant to national security. This award supports a three-week
summer school to be held in 2005 at the Institute for Pure and Applied
Mathematics (IPAM) at the University of California-Los Angeles. Leading experts
will lecture on the techniques of interpreting data from images, high
dimensional geometric structures, and graphs, and approximately half of the
program will be devoted to high dimensional data analysis. Main themes will
include graph mining, relational data mining, and social networks analysis.
IPAM, a national institute with an intrinsically interdisciplinary mission to
connect mathematicians, scientists, and engineers, is well suited to run such a
program, designed to integrate cutting-edge research with workforce development.
With roughly 200 participants each week, including students, postdocs, faculty,
industry, and intelligence community staff, there will be a broad range of
impacts, including training in the mathematical challenges facing the
intelligence community, and the acquisition of important professional
contacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by the NSF and
the Intelligence Community. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism Program in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences supports new concepts in
basic research and workforce development with the potential to contribute to
national security.