* 0442882
* Photon Quantum Mechanics for Undergraduates
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Charles Holbrow, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* John F. Mateja
* 05/31/2009
* USD 176,163.00

This is the second stage of a project to develop tabletop laboratories with
single photons for undergraduates. The aim is to enhance the teaching of quantum
mechanics by exposing students to laboratory experiences that illustrate topics
of quantum mechanics that are otherwise theoretical and abstract. In a previous
NSF-funded program, the investigators demonstrated that experiments with single
photons provide a means to understand fundamental quantum mechanical concepts.
They also found that the experiments go well beyond these objectives because the
experimental results underscore very fundamental issues about quantum mechanics,
such as complementarity, entanglement and nonlocality. They are expanding the
set of experiments that were originally planned to include experiments with
entangled states. Students are developing these experiments as part of either
curricular research projects (juniors and seniors) or summer research (all
undergraduate levels). These experiments with single photons have the potential
of becoming part of every physics department's upper-level undergraduate
laboratory. The Investigators are increasing efforts to disseminate their
knowledge and experience by building a prototype that can be transported to
remote locations for demonstration and dissemination and by organizing
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second component of the program involves
creation of a set of laboratories for an upper-level undergraduate course on
quantum mechanics and testing it at Colgate University. The set of laboratory
experiences illustrates topics such as the difference between probability and
probability amplitude, state-vector algebra, basis change, state projection,
superposition of states, and quantum interference. They are evaluating and
analyzing the impact of such an experience on the learning of quantum mechanics.
They are inserting a chapter on this topic, with a corresponding laboratory
component, into a course on Modern Introductory Physics taught mainly to first-
year students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program is providing new tools to
teach quantum mechanics through both independent upper-level research projects
or as part of a formal course. The new set of experiments is expected to: 1)
motivate a revision in the way quantum mechanics is taught and inspire other
physics program to consider introducing photon experiments into their
curriculum, 2) lead to further development and enhancement of this educational
tool through the generation of new experiments and their adaptation to
institutional environments where affordability and simplicity are primary
concerns, and 3) expose students to the principles of quantum mechanics
providing better understanding of new advances in quantum
information.&lt;br/&gt;