* 0442087
* Interactive Video Tutorials for Enhancing Problem Solving, Reasoning and Meta-cognitive Skills of Introductory Physics Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2008
* Chandralekha Singh, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/2008
* USD 149,602.00

Intellectual Merit: The project is developing and assessing a set of twenty
interactive video tutorial-based problems to help introductory physics students
in calculus- and algebra-based courses learn effective problem-solving
techniques. Effective problem solving begins with a qualitative analysis,
followed by decision making, implementation, assessment, and reflection phases.
Most introductory students do not acquire these techniques automatically and
need help with them. Students are learning problem solving skills using concrete
examples in an interactive environment. They are required to solve sub-problems
(research-guided multiple-choice questions) to show their level of understanding
at every stage of problem solving. The alternative choices in the multiple-
choice questions elicit difficulties students commonly have with relevant
concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The self-paced nature of the
web-accessible tutorials and the problem-solving approach illustrated in them
are flexible and adaptable enough to meet the needs of a diverse variety of
students including those who are at risk and need extra help. Underrepresented
minorities, students with learning disabilities and women who are typically more
hesitant or intimidated about asking for help from instructors particularly may
benefit from these tutorials. The tutorials can be used both as aids to problem
solving in homework assignments and as a self-study tool by students. They can
be an asset to the graduate teaching assistants and faculty as well as high-
school teachers and students. A longer term goal is to integrate the videos with
an introductory physics sequence and textbook. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessment
of the project comes from in-class and out-of-class control studies, which
complement each other. The out-of-class study compares the performance of
"matched" students using tutorials with the video, audio and text options with
each other and against those who receive identical content from non-tutorial
means. Evidence for the development of the meta-cognitive ability can be tracked
by analyzing students' think-aloud protocol during the interviews. The in-class
study compares the performance of students who use tutorials with those who do
not use them in similar classes in the natural classroom setting. The evaluation
of the project is useful for educators who are interested in developing distance
education tools.