* 0442049
* C-RUI: Linking Ecology, Leaf Chemistry, and Plant Genetics to Assess Abiotic and Biotic Determinants of Herbivory
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,10/31/2010
* Richard Niesenbaum, Muhlenberg College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 10/31/2010
* USD 1,069,471.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature, the degree to which insects eat plants
(herbivory) can be quite variable from location to location. Scientists have
traditionally hypothesized that the physical environment can influence a plant,
which in turn affects the ability of that plant to defend itself against
herbivory. Thus, variation in local conditions is what drives the degree to
which certain plants get eaten. More recently, the focus on herbivory has
shifted from these environmental influences to biological influences. This has
included studies of how predators and parasites of insect herbivores can be
signaled chemically by plants being eaten by those insects. In other words,
plants are using aromatic or volatile chemicals to attract enemies to their
enemies. This type of interaction is referred to as a tritrophic interaction
because it involves three feeding or trophic levels: the plant, the herbivore
insect, and the predators or parasites of the herbivore. Other biological
factors that can influence levels of herbivory include interactions with other
plants, and variation in the genetic make-up of the
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on herbivory has typically taken an
either-or approach. Many studies have focused on how the physical environment,
particularly light, influences plant-insect interactions, but have not
considered biological factors such as tritrophic interactions. Conversely,
studies of biological factors have been done without considering variation in
the physical environment. By not considering both the local environmental
conditions and the biological factors simultaneously, the complete picture of
how herbivory varies in nature or in agricultural systems has not been fully
understood. In this study, a plant ecologist, analytical chemist, insect
molecular biologist, and a statistician will take an integrative approach to
examine how light interacts with biotic factors in determining levels of
herbivory in a natural system. Our study will focus on the caterpillar, Tulip
Tree Beauty or Epimecis hortaria, and its primary food source Spicebush or
Lindera benzoin. These native insects and plants are abundant in Northeastern
forests. The plant, Spicebush, is easily recognizable by its aromatic condition
or volatile chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary and
collaborative aspect of this work and its occurrence at Muhlenberg College, an
undergraduate institution dedicated to broad scientific training and community
outreach, will provide the opportunity for achieving significant, broader
impacts. With the guidance of the investigators and as part of an already
vibrant summer research program in the sciences, undergraduate students will
develop independent research projects that will support the overall goals of
this work. Participating students will have the opportunity to engage fully in
science including project conception, experimental design, field and laboratory
research, data analysis, presenting in-house and at national meetings, and
writing for professional journals. In our work we will integrate a diversity of
approaches to studying biological systems. The investigators will model this for
students that participate in this research, the other faculty and student
researchers in all of sciences and the broader Muhlenberg College community, and
local high school students and their teachers who the project interacts with
through the existing outreach programming. A Post-Doctoral Research Associate
will receive scientific training and experience and preparation for a
teaching/research career at a primarily undergraduate institution. The
investigators will also design and teach an interdisciplinary research/seminar
course on plant-insect interactions that is based on this collaborative research
project. This model of research will serve to help remove the barriers of
specific, discipline-based research, and show that collaboration is vital for
fully understanding biological systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For more
information please visit the project web page at:
http://www.muhlenberg.edu/depts/biology/faculty/niesenbaum/nsf-
crui.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;