* 0442887
* Autonomous Robots as a Generic Teaching Tool
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2007
* Eileen Way, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 04/30/2007
* USD 99,358.00

Engineering-Mechanical (56) &lt;br/&gt;The project is developing undergraduate
bioengineering laboratory modules that use small, inexpensive, easy-to-build and
programmable autonomous robots. The robots function in a real-world environment,
which provides students with an opportunity to develop self-organizational
skills while observing emergent behaviors, and experiencing the effects of
unexpected environmental factors. Interaction with the robots is reinforcing
students' understanding of the complexity of living systems, the importance of
interacting with the environment to provide feedback in the face of inherent
instability, and the emergence of complex patterns of behavior from simple
rules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the robots are bring developed as a general
educational tool rather than focusing on the mechanics of the robots, the
modules and methodologies are transferable and can be used in other STEM
courses. The modules are being integrated into introductory mathematics courses
at Broome Community College to reinforce students' conceptual understanding of
linear motion in introductory mathematics courses. It is also being used as a
tool to examine concepts used in describing self-organizing systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The robots are being used in a summer science outreach
program with middle school students to attract girls to engineering and science.
To meet girls' needs the methodologies are being developed from recommendations
in the AAUW Report (2000), which indicates that girls prefer group-oriented
strategies with an emphasis on helping others and working collaboratively,
rather than engaging in activities that are based on violence and
conflict.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is being disseminated through
professional publications and conferences, a website maintained through the
Autonomous Robot Lab, and through a local Tech Prep Consortium. &lt;br/&gt;