* 0442943
* MEMS Experiments With Web-Based Material for Solid Mechanics Courseware and Labs Nationally
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2007
* Kurt Gramoll, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 04/30/2007
* USD 75,000.00

Engineering-Mechanical (56) &lt;br/&gt;This proof-of-concept project is
developing a hands-on and virtual mechanics of materials laboratory module that
uses MEMS optical switching to detect flexural and torsional modes in a micro-
size cantilever beam. In addition, the project is developing web-based
curriculum to support the laboratory. The laboratory experiment is being
developed two ways. One method uses minimum facilities and equipment so that the
equipment can be easily transported for use in outreach programs to recruit pre-
college students. The other uses electronic measuring and data acquisition
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The on-line web-based virtual laboratory includes
a series of steps that must be followed to complete the lab. At each step the
students are asked rhetorical and analytical questions about the experiment in
order to reinforce a particular concept about mechanics of materials. The online
material is being designed so that it can measure the growth of students'
reasoning and problem solving skills through a pre-post assessment process.
Students are being divided into sets of control groups to determine the effect
that each of the methods has on students' conceptual development of mechanics of
materials and its applications to MEMS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The MEMS experiments project is advancing the knowledge and
understanding about MEMS, semiconductor materials and properties, and how they
can be used in developing micro sensing devices to study fundamental concepts in
solid mechanics, electrostatics and introductory physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Sandia National Laboratories is
collaborating with the PIs to help develop the material. The web-based materials
permits global access to the experiments and are being disseminated through
conferences and publications. &lt;br/&gt;