* 0442450
* Integrating Sonification into Calculus Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Steven Hetzler, Salisbury University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Davenport
* 01/31/2010
* USD 74,998.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)

Sonification is use of non-speech audio to convey information. One widely known
and successful application of sonification is the Geiger counter, which
represents the intensity of radiation by the tempo of the audible clicks.
Sonification is finding new applications across several disciplines and offers
another way to communicate, demonstrate, and discover mathematics. Sonifications
are not limited to pitch, but include other properties of sound including
volume, timbre, and tempo.

The primary goal of this proof-of-concept project is to integrate sonification
into a one-semester calculus class. It builds on calculus reform efforts that
emphasize multiple representations of mathematics including numerical,
graphical, analytical, and oral or written representations. Thus the Rule of
Four is being expanded to the Rule of Five. Secondary goals of the project
include teaching students how to interpret sonifications, identifying design
principles for mathematical sonifications, and engaging mathematics, mathematics
education, and computer science students in undergraduate research in
sonification.

Intellectual Merit: Sonification offers an important new method for engaging
students who grew up in a multimedia environment. Many students have difficulty
completing calculus successfully, and using sonification with the Rule of Four
enhances conceptual understanding. The project is developing resources for use
in teaching interpretation of sonifications in a laboratory setting and then
testing them in classrooms.

Broader Impacts: This project is exposing the mathematics community to the use
of sonifications in the teaching of calculus. Because properties of functions
are central to mathematics, the instructional materials are useful across the
mathematics curriculum (e.g., precalculus, algebra, statistics, mathematics for
liberal arts majors, and mathematics for preservice teachers.) The project also
offers mathematics and computer science majors accessible problems for
undergraduate research, and provides students who cannot use graphics because
they are not visual learners or are visually impaired a new channel for
mathematics communications and discovery. The manuals and accompanying sound
files and software are available on the Web and CD.

