* 0442537
* Applications of Field Theory to Condensed Matter Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Eduardo Fradkin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2009
* USD 420,000.00

This grant provides support for research into the theory of condensed matter.
The objective is to understand condensed matter systems involving strongly
coupled degrees of freedom, and in particular the phase diagram and quantum
critical behavior of topological phases and electronic liquid crystal phases.
Topological phases are states of matter that do not have an order parameter, and
are therefore not the product of spontaneous symmetry breaking, but posses a
kind of "quantum order" in which the ground state degeneracy is determined by
the topology of the space in which they live. Electronic liquid crystal phases
are states of matter in which strongly correlated electronic organize themselves
in inhomogeneous and anisotropic patterns, and are closely related with
mechanisms of high temperature superconductivity. Related topics that will be
investigated include quantum coherence and interference phenomena in quantum
Hall systems and strongly coupled junctions, and the relation between electronic
liquid crystal phases and high temperature
superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of the problems to be studied
requires the methods and ideas of quantum field theory. This is the best tool
with which to attack problems involving the statistical and quantum physics of
strongly interacting systems. It enables this research to exploit the continuing
and mutually enriching cross-fertilization of ideas between condensed matter
systems and high energy physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
research addresses a range of important and difficult problems in currently
fertile, and therefore very active, areas of fundamental physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The grant makes possible the continued
training of talented researchers. The principal investigator has an excellent
record training students and postdoctoral associates, and his work with Hispanic
and female scientists is particularly noted.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant
supports research that is at the core of modern condensed matter physics. In
particular, the principal investigator will apply advanced theoretical
techniques to the study of exotic phases of electrons that interact strongly
with each other. Besides the fundamental interest in these phases and associated
phenomena, e.g., high temperature superconductivity, these studies may lead to
the discovery of new materials and devices. The research provides an excellent
training ground for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;