* 0442024
* ACT/SGER:  Thermally Stabilized Electrolytes:  Extension of the Calendar and Cycle Life for Lithium-Ion Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Brett Lucht, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2007
* USD 150,000.00

The mechanism of thermal decomposition of lithium-ion battery electrolytes and
the related reactions of the electrolyte with the electrode materials will be
investigated. The thermal decomposition of electrolytes at 60 - 100 oC can be
inhibited by the addition of Lewis basic or donor solvent additives or the
presence of electrode materials. While the decomposition of bulk electrolyte is
slow in lithium-ion batteries, due to the thermal stabilizing properties of the
electrode materials, the reaction of the electrolyte with the electrode
materials at elevated temperature (&gt; 60 oC) results in decreased charge
capacity and increased internal resistance. Electrolytes containing thermal
stabilizing additives impede the formation of surface films on cathode
materials. A thorough investigation of thermal stabilizing additives including
the effect of the additive on the stability of pure electrolyte, surface film
formation on cathode particles, and stability of solid electrolyte interface
(SEI) on the anode will be conducted. The development of thermally stable
electrolytes that do not react with electrode materials at elevated temperature
(&gt; 60 oC) will lead to lithium-ion batteries with improved high temperature
performance and better calendar and cycle life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lithium-
ion batteries have the potential for power and cycle life required for many
electric vehicle (EV), military, aircraft, and intelligence community (IC)
applications. However, for several of these applications the high temperature
stability, cycle life, and calendar life need to be improved. The investigation
of novel electrolytes with improved thermal stability will lead to the
development of lithium-ion batteries with improved calendar and cycle life. The
Approaches to Combat Terrorism Program in the Directorate for Mathematics and
Physical Sciences supports new concepts in basic research and workforce
development with the potential to contribute to national security.&lt;br/&gt;