* 0442374
* Design and Development of an Internet Based Physical Laboratory Course within an Undergraduate Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2007
* Abul Azad, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 03/31/2007
* USD 75,000.00

Engineering-Engineering Technology (58) &lt;br/&gt;The project is designing and
developing an Internet based introductory digital electronics laboratory for
engineering technology students. The project is using an Internet based facility
where laboratory experiments, manufacturing processes, and industrial equipment
are available for operation and control. The "hands-on" laboratory for distance
learning provides students with an experience that is more like a traditional
laboratory and is superior to simulation techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is identifying essential introductory electronics digital laboratory
experiments that are being reconfigured into five independent modules for an on-
line delivery that is remotely controlled. Modules that are being developed
include logic circuits and gates; design and development of half-adder, full-
adder, counter, and shift register; and design of digital circuits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple experiments can be simultaneously accessed. To
accomplish this goal, the project team is creating a suitable electronic
platform that will hold electronic laboratory components, an interfacing system
between the switching mechanism and a PC, a graphical user interface (GUI), and
a Java-based software module that interacts between the GUI and the Internet.
This approach is providing other investigators with a methodology that they can
adapt to create remote Internet laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessment
of student learning is being conducted by comparing students who take the
traditional laboratory and the students who take this remote laboratory. The
nature of the software interface of the system is making it feasible to access
existing commercially available course offering systems through URL links. The
material is being disseminated through a website that is being maintained
throughout the project. &lt;br/&gt;