* 0442080
* ACT/SGER: Optimizing the Structure of Polymeric Composites for Enhanced Electrical and Mechanical Performance
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

Using theory and simulation, our overall goal is to design lightweight
composites that exhibit optimal electrical conductivity and mechanical
integrity. These characteristics are vital in the fabrication of portable and
durable electronic devices. The materials to be examined consist of organic
polymers and inorganic nanoparticles. The resulting nanocomposites integrate the
flexibility and processability of the polymers and the electromagnetic
properties of the particles. We specifically focus on mixtures that involve
blends of different polymers, as well as the nanoparticles. In these systems, we
can exploit the polymer-polymer, polymer-particle and particle-particle
interactions to manipulate the structure of the material. In particular, our aim
is to harness these interactions to drive the nanoparticles to form percolating
structures at very low volume fractions. Such percolating networks not only
allow current to flow through the material, but also reinforce the polymeric
matrix. A reduction in the percolation threshold results in both weight and cost
reductions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that the findings will allow
us to establish fundamental correlations between the nanoscopic structures of
the components, the mesoscopic morphology of the mixture, and the macroscopic
electrical/mechanical properties of the material. The studies will also
elucidate how processing affects both the morphology and macroscopic properties.
By engaging in these research activities, the students and post-doctoral fellows
involved in the project will obtain a background and training in nanotechnology.
This expertise will make them better qualified to meet the demand within
industry, national labs and academics. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism
Program in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports new
concepts in basic research and workforce development with the potential to
contribute to national security. In particular, the findings will facilitate the
development of flexible, lightweight and high energy density nanocomposites,
which can be utilized in fabricating portable electronic and photonic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;