* 0442322
* A Collaborative Effort between the United States and Colombia on the Research with Linearly-Polarized Photons
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Philip Cole, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Evan M. Notman
* 05/31/2007
* USD 20,470.00

0101815&lt;br/&gt;Cole&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas award will support a
collaborative effort between Dr. Philip L. Cole, University of Texas at El Paso,
Dr. Franz J. Klein, Florida International University, and Dr. Juan Carlos
Sanabria, Universidad de los Andes, Colombia, with the purpose of completing a
series of experiments, which will make use of the unique probe of a beam of
linearly-polarized photons. These experiments will measure the polarization
observable for reactions involving meson photoproduction. The objective is to
improve the understanding of the underlying symmetry of the quark degrees of
freedom in the nucleon; the nature of the parity exchange between the incident
photon and the target nucleon, and the mechanism of associated strangeness
production in electromagnetic reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first phase
of the experiments, investigation of the nature of the underlying structure of
protons and neutrons, will be performed at the Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Lab) in Newport, Virginia, where powerful
computers will allow for the rapid acquisition and thorough analysis of the
data. This will enable the researchers to measure high-multiplicity events over
most of the phase space at high rates with an unprecedented high quality beam of
continuous-wave electrons. The collaboration will make possible the search of
previously unmeasurable baryon resonances and will shed considerable light on
the internal symmetries and dynamics of an assembly of three quarks, further
aiding in understanding the nature of the strong
force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;**** .&lt;br/&gt;