* 0442605
* Cloud Modeling and Probability Density Functions
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Vincent Larson, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2007
* USD 284,568.00

Large-scale numerical models of the atmosphere include parameterizations of
microphysical and radiative processes. Such parameterizations require accurate
input in the form of grid-resolved fields such as liquid water content, ice
water content, and droplet number concentration. These fields are produced by
host model equations. Some mesoscale models prognose liquid water using the
assumption that there is no thermodynamic variability on scales smaller than the
grid box size. This assumption is incompatible with cloud schemes that predict
subgrid-scale cloud fraction or any other thermodynamic subgrid
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the Principal Investigator
seeks to improve the formulation and accuracy of host model equations for
liquid, ice, and droplet number that drive microphysics and radiative
parameterizations. To improve them, he will investigate the effects of subgrid
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A principal object of study is the probability
density function (PDF) of relevant quantities, such as total water content.
Specifically, the PI will (1) use mathematical properties of the relevant PDF to
rigorously derive large-scale equations for liquid water content, ice water
content, and droplet number concentration; (2) analyze aircraft data to
ascertain the shapes of joint PDFs of liquid and ice, and then use the PDFs to
close the host model equations; and (3) implement the host model equations in an
idealized one-dimensional cloud parameterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit is twofold: (1) to improve understanding of mixed-phase
clouds; and (2) to improve representation of clouds in atmospheric numerical
models. If successful, the research may ultimately have implications for cloud
parameterizations ranging from simple bulk microphysics schemes to bin
microphysics schemes, and for models ranging from general circulation models to
cloud resolving models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have two broader
impacts: it will help train a postdoctoral research associate, and its results
will be made widely available to the scientific community through journal
publications and the internet.