* 0442393
* A Proof-of-Concept Project for the Development of Laboratory Exercises and an Accompanying Electronic Laboratory Manual for a Course in Fire Behavior and Combustion
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Jeffrey Kimble, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 02/28/2009
* USD 74,999.00

Engineering-Engineering Technology (58) &lt;br/&gt;The project is developing
laboratory exercises and an accompanying electronic laboratory manual for a
course in fire behavior and combustion for both associate and baccalaureate
degree programs. The project is providing an opportunity to introduce students
to scientific inquiry and is being developed in a constructivist fashion, which
provides students to arrive at their own conclusions from conducting the
experiments. The curriculum material is being developed from the existing
knowledge base at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and
other research institutes such as the Southwest Research Institute (SwRI).
Formative and summative assessments that include pre-testing and post-testing of
student learning are being incorporated throughout the project to provide
feedback to improve the process and create more effective curricular material.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institution's Engineering Technology Program is
engaging in a multi-year project to increase the participation of
underrepresented students in the fire safety and other technology programs.
Community and technical colleges are being engaged in this collaborative effort
in order to develop a unified educational structure and to beta-test the
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of a CD and web access is
providing a method through which institutions can access fire safety curriculum.
The curriculum is being disseminated through conferences and is being made
available through the Fire and Emergency Services Higher Education contortion,
which includes about 250 institutions that offer fire related degrees.
&lt;br/&gt;