* 0442590
* Mathematics for Elementary Teachers: Project MET
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* George Johnson, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 12/31/2008
* USD 74,921.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics content courses for
prospective elementary teachers are often taught in traditional lecture format
by mathematics faculty members with little knowledge of state and national
curriculum standards or of effective pedagogy at the elementary level. In recent
years, collaboration with area elementary teachers has led to significant reform
of that coursework. Collaborative learning, manipulatives, math games and math
lessons through children's literature have put the mathematics in context and
made the content course more meaningful for the prospective teachers. A
particular success is the Pen Pal program, which pairs prospective teachers with
elementary students for a weekly exchange on the mathematics each group is
studying. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Building on this success, Project MET is
creating and testing a model for collaboration between mathematics faculty,
education faculty and public school teachers in developing and teaching
mathematics content courses required for elementary school teacher preparation.
Major objectives of the project include increased participation by mathematics
research faculty and more effective instruction in the content courses. In
addition to the development of an additional course in the sequence, and the
cooperative teaching of selected topics, Project MET is creating summer
workshops for new instructors, a Faculty Resource Kit, a Peer Leader program, an
expansion of the Pen Pal program, an Education Laboratory Classroom and joint
research projects. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: As a multi-
faceted, proof-of-concept initiative, Project MET is conducting a scientific
assessment of the effectiveness of the various program activities. The impact on
the prospective teachers who come through the content courses is being measured
on both a short-term and long-term basis. The effect on the attitudes and
mathematical understanding of the children who participate in the Pen Pal
program are also being evaluated. The assessment results are presented in the
form of publishable research in mathematics education. In addition, the
intellectual contributions of Project MET will be presented in a very tangible
way in the Faculty Resource Kit. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
propagation of the new two mathematics course sequence begins with the eight
campuses of the University of South Carolina, through system-wide meetings of
mathematics faculty. The next stage of dissemination involves workshops at state
and national conferences. In addition, a Website is being developed, making the
Faculty Resource Kit and other information available online. The Faculty
Resource Kit is being distributed in print form at conferences and upon request.
As a model for collaboration, the Project MET is being extended to the
mathematics coursework for the new middle school program, and provided to other
departments charged with developing courses for prospective middle school
teachers. Beyond dissemination to the college system and to departments of
mathematics and others in higher education involved in teacher preparation,
Project MET has an impact on school renewal in South Carolina. The greater
impact of Project MET is increased mathematical enthusiasm, understanding and
competence of generations of children taught by graduates of the university's
teacher preparation program. &lt;br/&gt;