* 0442771
* Using Transgenic Plants that Express Green Fluorescent Protein in Teaching Quantitative Experimental Skills to First Year Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Stokes Baker, University of Detroit Mercy
* Standard Grant
* Linnea A. Fletcher
* 12/31/2009
* USD 74,968.00

This project develops and field-tests materials and technology that allow first-
year undergraduates to perform open-ended quantitative experiments on an
environmentally regulated gene expressed in model plant systems. This is
accomplished by creating transgenic plants that express a mutant form of
jellyfish Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP). GFP gene expression is detected by
illuminating whole plants with visible blue light. The value of this gene for
the undergraduate laboratory is that students can now detect gene expression in
real time and quantify the level of expression.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: To circumvent the problems associated
with older laboratory techniques such as slow histochemical assays that produce
only qualitative data, or quantitative assays that require an expensive
fluorometer, this project develops a model plant system that reports the
regulation of the cor15a promoter via GFP. The GFP fluorescence is measured
using inexpensive digital cameras fitted with appropriate filters and cost-free
image analysis software. Undergraduate students using the new techniques are
expected to become knowledgeable in molecular techniques, statistical analysis
of data and interpretation of results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
pedagogy used advances the goals of the National Research Council's "Biology
2010" concept by teaching "the process of science" with quantitative
investigation. The materials and procedures developed can be used on a national
basis. One barrier for resource-challenged undergraduate institutions, such as
community colleges, is the expense of research-quality image analysis equipment.
This barrier is overcome through the building and testing of prototype
instruments constructed from off-the-shelf digital imaging devices (e.g., SLR-
style digital cameras) with color barrier filters and blue light-emitting diode
(LED) arrays. The students quantify the level of GFP gene expression by
analyzing the resulting imaging files using "ImageJ," a Java image analysis
program provided free of charge over the Internet by the National Institutes of
Health. National dissemination is accomplished by conducting two workshops at
professional meetings, making instructional materials available on the Internet,
and providing transgenic seeds to instructors. The project is piloted at the
home institution, with a rich diversity of declared biology majors (75% female,
17% African American, 10% of Middle Eastern descent, and 4% Hispanic).