* 0442666
* 2005 Microbial Population Biology and Evolution Gordon Conference, New Hampshire, July 2005
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2006
* Margaret Riley, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2006
* USD 13,176.00

Microbial population biology is an interdisciplinary field that attracts
researchers from the evolutionary biology, ecology, computational biology,
molecular biology, microbial physiology, medical microbiology and epidemiology,
bacterial genetics, and population genetics. Research at the cutting edge of
this rapidly growing field is consistently collaborative, cross-disciplinary and
integrative in nature. The Gordon Research Conference on Microbial Population
Biology is the only conference specifically designed to bring the leading
researchers in the relevant fields (microbial population genetics, molecular
evolution, ecology, epidemiology, molecular biology and genetics) to share in an
intensive, discussion oriented meeting aimed at identifying the leading areas of
current and future research. Due to the rapid accumulation of complete microbial
genome sequence data it is now more important than ever to continue with the
primary objective of this Conference of promoting and establishing connections
between diverse disciplines and researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is now
clear that developing a more robust view of microbial diversity, ecology and
evolution is required if we hope to make progress in our understanding of the
evolution of infectious disease, planning for biodefense and for developing
novel approaches to microbial disease therapies. This conference is designed to
bring together the breadth of researchers required to enable such progress.
&lt;br/&gt;