* 0442857
* Collaborative Research: The Chemical Ecology of Shallow-water Marine Macroalgae and Invertebrates on the Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2010
* Bill Baker, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 06/30/2010
* USD 405,166.00

Mesoherbivores, and specifically amphipods, are a conspicuous and dominant
component of the macroalgal community in Antarctica. Despite their high
abundance, the functional ecology, and particularly the trophic relationships of
Antarctic amphipods are poorly understood. This project will evaluate the
importance of mesograzers (small invertebrate predators approximately 1 to 25 mm
in body length) in western Antarctic Peninsula marine communities. This will be
accomplished by examining the role of mesoherbivores in structuring macroalgal
communities and by elucidating the ecological interactions of mesograzers with a
dominant group of benthic macroinvertebrates, the marine sponges. Moreover,
chemical studies will be conducted to gain a more thorough understanding of the
chemical defenses that Antarctic Peninsula sponges direct towards crustacean
mesograzers. Three sets of questions will be addressed concerning the importance
of mesograzers, and amphipods in particular, in nearshore habitats of the
western Antarctic Peninsula. First, the hypothesis that mesoherbivory is
particularly heavy in western Antarctic Peninsula marine communities and has an
important influence on algal community structure will be addressed. Initial
studies will document which species of amphipods feed in whole or part on
microalgae and macroalgae, the incidence and distribution of filamentous
endophytes in dominant macroalgae, comparative night time patterns of amphipod
abundances on macrophytes, and the role of chemical mediation in these
relationships. Second, the broad hypothesis that mesograzers in general, and
amphipods in particular, interact with and prey upon sponges to a greater extent
than heretofore recognized in Antarctic communities will be tested. The
functional basis of these associations will be considered by examining whether
the sponges are used as prey, and if so, whether there is evidence that some
sponges produce secondary metabolites that show efficacy against mesograzers
such as amphipods. Third, the researchers will test the hypotheses that: 1)
Antarctic algae and invertebrates biosynthesize secondary metabolites that deter
feeding by amphipod predators; and 2) pigments found in three Antarctic sponges
are tryptophan catabolites produced as defenses against crustacean predators
that impact molting. Evaluation of these hypotheses will be based on isolation
and characterization of the specific anti-feeding metabolites, on biosynthetic
studies to establish the metabolic origin of the pigments, and on bioassays to
establish the chemical defense roles of both groups of compounds. A variety of
educational activities will be a major component of this project. Opportunities
will be made to support graduate and undergraduate research, both through NSF
programs as well as home university-based programs including a number of funded
programs that enhance the representation of minorities in the sciences. Through
their proven and highly successful interactive web program, the investigators
will continue to involve a large numbers of teachers, K-12 students, and other
members of the community at large in their scientific endeavors in Antarctica.
Moreover, they will actively participate in outreach efforts by presenting
numerous talks on their research to school and community groups.