* 0442081
* Characterization of SAR-Independent Pathogen Induced Defense in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/12/2004,08/31/2009
* Terrence Delaney, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2009
* USD 454,986.00

Plants employ an array of distinct inducible defense responses to prevent
infection and to recover from disease. While a few of the pathways that regulate
these defenses are known, such as systemic acquired resistance (SAR), other
critically important systems have eluded discovery. The proposed research is
aimed at elucidating a novel form of SAR-independent resistance (SIR) expressed
in Arabidopsis son1 (suppressor of nim1-1) mutants, and at defining and testing
genes whose expression is associated with SIR. Two of the three objectives are
focused on study of the son1 mutant phenotype and on the SON1 gene product,
which was recently described (Kim and Delaney, 2002a). Because son1 plants
express a novel form of resistance, it is essential that the resistance
phenotype be fully described. Therefore, the defense signal transduction pathway
requirements for son1-mediated resistance will be determined using double mutant
analysis, the range of pathogen types susceptible to this resistance assessed,
and the interactions between SAR and son1-mediated resistance evaluated
(Objective 1). Investigations under Objective 2 will examine the SON1 protein
itself, whose structure suggests it may be a component of an ubiquitin ligase
complex that targets proteins for destruction. To assess whether SON1 plays this
role, tests will be performed to determine whether SON1 interacts with core
components of the ubiquitin ligase complex. Other work will seek to identify
proteins targeted by SON1 that are hypothesized to act as positive regulators of
SIR. The third objective of the project is to identify genes whose expression is
altered in two genotypes of plants that express SIR; -son1 mutants and
transgenic plants that were developed to overexpress the TGA5 transcription
factor that interacts with the SAR-regulator NIM1 (Kim and Delaney, 2002b). The
transcriptional profiles of son1 and TGA5-accumulating plants will be analyzed
using oligonucleotide-based microarrays that include nearly all the Arabidopsis
genes. By comparing gene expression in the two independently derived SIR-
activated plants, the genes common to each will be evident. Some SIR-associated
genes will be subjected to functional analysis to determine their role in SIR.
The research described will yield important information on SIR expressed in son1
plants, provide insight into the regulation of SIR by SON1, provide molecular
markers associated with SAR-independent resistance, and provide information that
may lead to development of novel forms of disease control in crop plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research described has a number of broader impacts
outside of its biological aspects. These include: thorough training of
undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral fellow, broadening
participation in research of underrepresented groups, enhancing the
infrastructure for research through the sharing of transcriptional profile data
generated by this project; and the broad dissemination of knowledge through
presentations at conferences by undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
personnel. The research can also be of general benefit to society by providing
understanding of novel pathways that will enable creation of highly disease
resistant crops, thus improving the economics of food production, and reducing
the environmental impact and health consequences of currently used chemical
disease control agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;