* 0442536
* DEVELOPMENT OF QUANTITATIVE GEOGRAPHY CURRICULUM BASED ON  NUMERIC VISUALIZATION
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Joseph Poracsky, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2008
* USD 74,956.00

This project is developing a geography curriculum using visualization to
overcome students' fear of quantitative methods. It presents numerical concepts
in a concrete, visual format rather than a more abstract equation-based format
that is difficult for many students to comprehend. The project emphasizes
graphic representation and student-based learning. By focusing on graphically-
based examples and illustrations in lectures, and requiring heavy use of
graphics in student exercises, students can gain a firm conceptual understanding
of quantitative procedures. Student-based learning is fostered by using an open-
classroom environment equipped with high-end-graphics computers and software to
facilitate students' engagement and interactions. The project is developing a
two-term quantitative methods course sequence. The first course focuses on
fundamental numeric data concepts (scales of measurement, sampling,
probability), descriptive statistical methodologies, and principles of sound
graphic design, construction, and communication. The second course deals
entirely with inferential statistical analysis techniques. The curricular
materials are being developed at Portland State University (PSU), a large,
diverse urban campus. The proposed research has potentially broad impacts
outside of PSU, and we will achieve national dissemination through paper
presentations, published articles, workshops, and web-based distribution.
&lt;br/&gt;