* 0442029
* ACT/SGER: Block Copolymer Self-Assembled Nanoarchitectures For Flexible High Energy Density Supercapacitors
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Peter Kofinas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2006
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of the proposed exploratory research is to investigate novel polymeric
nanoscale pulsed&lt;br/&gt;power capacitor flexible thin films based on the
self-assembly of block copolymers. The flexible&lt;br/&gt;pulsed power capacitor
system would exhibit a lamellar or cylindrical microphase separation,
with&lt;br/&gt;electrode, and polymeric electrolyte as the A and B blocks. The A
block (redox cobalt oxide&lt;br/&gt;or p-doped conductive polymer) forms the
high surface area electrode material, and the B block&lt;br/&gt;(sulfonated
polynorbornene or sulfonated polystyrene) is the electrolyte. Casting of the
synthesized&lt;br/&gt;block copolymer from a solvent results in a self-assembled
A/B nanostructure, which is equivalent to&lt;br/&gt;many nanoscale capacitor
cells in parallel, thus providing the maximum possible power. A
variety&lt;br/&gt;of microstructure and electrical properties characterization
tools will be employed to evaluate the&lt;br/&gt;flexible pulsed power capacitor
system's performance. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed exploratory
research relate to a block copolymer nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;capacitor device system
which would be flexible because it is made out of a polymer, and
transparent&lt;br/&gt;to visible light due to the nanoscale dimensions of its
morphology. The ease of processing a&lt;br/&gt;polymer electrolyte would allow
the production of thin film nanoscale self-assembled flexible
pulsed&lt;br/&gt;power capacitors that could be wound into coils or processed as
coatings and sheets. A pulsed&lt;br/&gt;power capacitor based on the nanoscale
self-assembly of block copolymers will provide devices with&lt;br/&gt;integrated
electronics, yet distributed over a large area substrate as freestanding
flexible films or&lt;br/&gt;coatings. The active circuit components would be
directly integrated on the flexible substrate.&lt;br/&gt;Such supercapacitor
system could be applied in power conditioning for directed energy
weapon&lt;br/&gt;components. The proposed nanoscale pulsed power capacitor
system thus promises to open new&lt;br/&gt;avenues for autonomous power of the
all electric ships or airplanes and thus helping enhance&lt;br/&gt;homeland
security capabilities. The education activities to be undertaken in this work
include&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate teaching, middle school teacher
training, graduate student advising,&lt;br/&gt;and various opportunities in
undergraduate research involvement and mentoring.