* 0442614
* EMD Full-Scale Development: An Active Learning Approach to Mechanics of Materials Using Hands-On Activities, Written Content, and Multi-Media Courseware
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2008
* Kristin Wood, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 06/30/2008
* USD 277,114.00

Engineering-Mechanical (56) &lt;br/&gt;The project is developing active learning
products (ALP) for Mechanics of Materials courses to create an effective
teaching/learning environment for students with different learning styles and
needs. ALP products include: (1) active learning aids for the classroom (for
example hands-on activities), (2) web/CD content (for example interactive
multimedia) and (3) written content in the form of ALP modules for a textbook.
The project is unifying, assessing, and disseminating these materials for direct
and efficient implementation by educators. Active learning methodologies and
procedures are based on the Kolbe Cycle of learning that includes (1) active
experimentation, (2) concrete experience, (3) reflective observation and (4)
abstract hypothesis and conceptualization. Assessment of student learning is
based on their development of critical thinking skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is building upon prior, award-winning work
that was developed collaboratively by the PI and CoPI at their home
institutions, the University of Texas and the United States Air Force Academy.
Faculty members from Austin Community College are determining how the material
can be adapted and transferred to a community college environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts from the project include direct
collaboration with the University of Missouri-Rolla, which is developing CD
interactive curriculum for the same course. Materials from each project are
being created so that they can be integrated into a coherent package. The
approach is providing a model for developing teaching aids in Mechanics of
Materials as well as other engineering subject matter. National dissemination of
the materials is through commercial publishing, commercial web sites, and links
to MSC finite element software. Workshops to train faculty to use these
techniques are being developed and are being implemented as the project matures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;