* 0442446
* Enhancing Engineering Mechanics Instruction with Interactive 3D Virtual Models
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Kurt Gramoll, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 04/30/2008
* USD 398,135.00

Engineering-Mechanical (56) &lt;br/&gt;This project is developing computer-based
instructional modules for Statics and Mechanics of Materials, two core
engineering courses that traditionally serve large numbers of students and
disciplines. The work seeks to improve engineering education by addressing
fundamental topics that are consistently difficult for instructors to teach and
for students to learn - topics involving 3D geometry. The project uses 3D
rendering and animation software to produce instructional modules in which the
user manipulates virtual 3D objects in much the same manner as they would
physical objects. To assist instructors, classroom teaching modules and a 3D
modeling tool are being developed that enable instructors to realistically
depict three-dimensional engineering objects, including the external forces
acting on them and the internal responses to those external forces, as these
topics are being explained during lectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For students,
the courseware provides meaningful exercises using the same 3D virtual models
that the instructor uses in class. Further, an online 3D modeling tool with
real-time voice and text collaboration provides students with a means to
communicate on-line with peers or instructors in seeking answers to their
questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational evaluation and research constitutes
a major component of this project. This research includes the detailed
exploration of learning and instructional design variables and the utilization
of multiple methodologies and measurement tools. The research will produce
important insights into basic cognitive and educational issues that underlie
learning by means of innovative software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
engaging a wide variety of institutions in the development and testing of the
material. A CoPI is located at the University of Oklahoma Norman Campus,
instructors at Pellissippi Community College will assess the effectiveness of
the material at the community college level, and ten additional instructors at
different institutions will be engaged to beta-test the curriculum and provide
feedback. The computer-based instructional modules developed in this project are
integrated with in-class demonstration activities that are being developed
through another NSF funded project by Kris Wood at the University of Texas
Austin and Dan Jensen at The Air Force Academy.&lt;br/&gt;