* 0442323
* Collaborative: Improving Conceptual Understanding and Preparing Students to use CAE Tools with a Simplified Web-Based FEA Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Indranil Goswami, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 03/31/2006
* USD 20,435.00

Engineering-Mechanical (56) &lt;br/&gt;This collaborative proof of concept
project between Carnegie-Mellon University and Morgan State University, a HBCU,
is developing finite element analysis methods in a mechanics of materials course
to expose students early in their academic careers to the practice of
engineering by using modern computer-aided engineering (CAE) tools. The project
is developing highly simplified finite element methodology that provides
conceptual insight into deformed states with a focus on developing students
understanding of displacements, forces, stresses and strains at individual
points. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The finite element program can be run over the web
in a format that students can use with little or no previous training in finite
element analysis methods. The program serves as a transition to commercial FEA
software by highlighting the key steps taken in any commercial program:
specification of domain, material, element type, mesh, and boundary conditions,
followed by solution and viewing of results. In addition, the program emphasizes
viewing of the deformed shape of the mesh together with the values of quantities
at node points. This helps students visualize quantities such as displacements
and deformations that are central to the mechanics of materials
course.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on devising and refining
assignments, both for use alone and coupled with traditional homework problems.
The program is also a valuable tool for use in lectures with a set of pre-
defined problems that enables professors to rapidly illustrate important
physical concepts. Learning gains associated with various uses of the program
are being assessed for students of diverse backgrounds, which include assessing
the impact of learning for visual learners. In addition to disseminating the
materials through papers and conferences, the materials are being registered
with various web-based repositories for educational material.&lt;br/&gt;