* 0442011
* Lightning Detection And Ranging (LDAR II) Operation, Evaluation, and Analyses in the Houston Environmental Aerosol Thunderstorm (HEAT) Project
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Richard Orville, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 12/31/2009
* USD 843,371.00

Data from the National Lightning Detection Network (NLDN) indicate that there
are about 50% more cloud-to-ground lightning strikes in and around Houston than
over the surrounding rural areas. Several explanations of this Houston Lightning
Anomaly (HLA) have been suggested. One is that the higher daytime surface
temperature over the city (the "urban heat island") may account for increased
convection, storm development, and hence lightning. Another is that the sea
breeze circulation in the Texas coastal region may tend to organize low-level
convergence in a way to favor convection over the city. Still another is that
the increased loading of pollution aerosols over the city may affect cloud
microphysical processes in a way that modifies the generation and distribution
of electrical charge within clouds, promoting the occurrence of lightning
discharges. This award supports field observations in and around Houston that
will help to explain the HLA by providing new and more complete information on
the characteristics of the lightning. A network of twelve VHF receiving stations
called the Lightning Detection and Ranging system (LDAR) will be operated during
the storm seasons of 2005, 06, and 07 to measure the time and location of
lightning flashes. Whereas the NLDN provides only the approximate locations of
cloud-to-ground flashes, the LDAR system detects essentially all flashes - those
within cloud as well as those to the ground - with great accuracy and precision.
Moreover, the LDAR provides information on the location of lightning initiation,
the configuration of lightning discharge channels, the altitude from which
electrical charge is lowered, the polarity of cloud-to-ground strokes, estimates
of peak currents, and other lightning characteristics. The observations will be
carried out in parallel with an extensive study of air quality and the
dispersion of pollution in the Houston area under the auspices of the Texas
Commission on Air Quality, called the Texas Air Quality Field Study. That study
includes the operation of a pair of Doppler radars for measuring air motions and
storm structure as well as surface and airborne measurements of aerosols and
trace gases. Together the LDAR observations and the supporting data from the Air
Quality Field Study will provide new insight on the relations between pollution,
air motions, storm structure, and lightning, which will help to explain the
Houston Lightning Anomaly. Broader impacts of the study include the potential
for improved forecasts of severe weather using LDAR data and progress towards
resolving long-standing questions about the microphysical and electrical
structure of thunderstorms.