* 0442269
* CRUI: Biomimetic Evolutionary Analysis: the Origin of Vertebrae via Computational and Robotic Simulations of Fish
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Thomas Koob, Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2011
* USD 956,639.00

In spite of their name, the first vertebrates evolved without vertebrae, which
are the bones in the backs of most living species. Vertebrae have evolved
independently at least five different times, in five different groups of ancient
fishes, from a non-bony skeleton. Biologists have sought for years to understand
these critical events in vertebrate evolution. The trouble with reconstructing
the evolution of vertebrae is that since events occurred nearly 400 million
years ago scientists are unable to directly observe and test natural selection
in action. To understand how selection may have operated, the investigators plan
to build, swim, compete, and reproduce artificial fish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the computerized and robotic fish, investigators predict that vertebrae will
evolve repeatedly in response to selection for increased swimming speed,
acceleration, and maneuverability. To add other realistic effects, successful
individuals from one population (computerized or robotic) will be transferred to
the other, a process of immigration thought to be a key factor driving large-
scale evolutionary change in real biological systems. If the evolution of these
artificial fish does not produce vertebrae, it is unlikely that the vertebrae of
real fish evolved in response to selection for enhanced swimming performance and
navigation. Thus, the investigators plan to use artificial vertebrates,
constructed to mimic real vertebrates, and to examine the feasibility of
different evolutionary scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout the four
years of this program, the project offers 28 undergraduates a two-year combined
apprenticeship-mentorship experience in research. Beginning with a summer
research apprenticeship, cohorts of students work as teams, under the mentorship
of a returning student and one of the principal investigators, to master
technique, conduct and analyze experiments, and interpret and present results.
By their second year in the program, each student has developed into an
independent investigator, conducting a project of their own design for a senior
research thesis and returning as a peer mentor for incoming research
apprentices. The project places particular emphasis on involving students from
underrepresented groups, having students present their results at professional
scientific meetings and in peer-reviewed scientific papers, and providing
support for students to continue in research science at the graduate school
level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional information about this research and
training program may be found
at:&lt;br/&gt;http://faculty.vassar.edu/jolong/vertebrae.html.&lt;br/&gt;