* 0442586
* Brain Process Model of Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Antoine Bechara, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 04/30/2007
* USD 479,000.00

This proposal focuses the neural systems involved in emotions and biases and
their role in human decision-making. Neural systems that subserve human biases
and emotions have evolved for survival purposes. The automatic biases and
emotions triggered by a given situation help the normal decision-making process
by narrowing down the options for action, either by discarding those that are
dangerous or endorsing those that are advantageous. Biases and emotions serve an
adaptive role speeding up the decision-making process. However, there are
circumstances in which a naturally occurring bias or emotional response must be
inhibited, so that a deliberate and potentially wiser decision can be made.
Although recent research in neuroscience and psychology has highlighted the
positive roles played by biases and emotions in decision-making, there are many
instances where there is a negative side to biases and emotions in decision-
making. Depending on the circumstances, biases, moods, and emotions can play
useful as well as disruptive roles in the process of making advantageous
decisions. Thus it is not a simple issue of trusting biases and emotions as the
necessary arbiter of good and bad decisions. It is a matter of discovering the
circumstances in which biases and emotions can be useful or disruptive, and
using the reasoned coupling of circumstances and biases and emotions as a guide
to human behavior. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will: &lt;br/&gt; (1)
Explore some of the circumstances in which biases and emotions influence
decisions one way or another, and examine whether there are some personality
and/or cognitive characteristics that render an individual more or less
susceptible to a specific form of bias. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Examine the functional
organization of the CEO of the brain, the prefrontal cortex, and understand how
this structure manages complex information, assign values to information, and
ultimately execute decisions. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Test a model of human intelligence
that is based on how the CEO of the brain is functionally organized. The idea is
that one individual will assume the function of one group of cells or sub-region
of the prefrontal cortex, instead of the whole region. A group of individuals,
with each one processing a separate stream of information in parallel, will then
merge together, thus simulating the function of the prefrontal cortex of a human
brain. &lt;br/&gt;