* 0442222
* C-RUI:  Calcium Depletion in Adirondack Forests Affected by Acid Deposition and its Effect on Aquatic and Terrestrial Food Chains
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Richard April, Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2011
* USD 981,289.00

Acid deposition has changed the structure and function of aquatic and
terrestrial environments around the world, including notably the Adirondack
Mountain Region (Adirondacks) of New York State. The loss of certain nutrients,
particularly calcium, is an important mechanism by which acid deposition changes
ecosystems. This project will study how calcium availability in soils and
surface waters affects organisms in areas impacted by acid deposition.
Concurrently, the project will estimate changes in the chemical parameters of
soils at sites in the Adirondacks for which historical data has been
obtained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on trophic interactions, the project
will examine ambient conditions within watersheds with different sensitivities
to acid deposition and manipulate the availability of calcium in soils and
streams. The study will focus on litter decomposition, soil invertebrates, and
mammalian insectivores in forests and bacteria, algae, and invertebrates in
streams. This project will further focus on the role of episodic pulses of
acidic water as disturbances affecting community structure and function. By
studying both the short- and long-term effects of acid deposition in the
Adirondacks, this work will be able to provide information critical to
understanding the sustainability, degradation and recovery potential of this
complex ecosystem. More broadly, results from this study will aid researchers in
the U.S., and other areas around the world impacted by acid deposition, to
estimate the potential for chemical and biological recovery of forested
ecosystems as pollutant loadings from fossil fuel emissions ameliorate over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students in the biology, geology, and
environmental science programs at Colgate and Alfred universities will be
involved in this work, contributing to the project in substantial ways and
presenting results to the scientific community and the public. The planned
outreach programs will provide opportunities for local science teachers to learn
more about acid deposition and its ecological consequences, by actively engaging
in scientific research themselves and involving their own students in the
process. Thus, the project will hopefully instill a greater understanding of
acid deposition, its ecological consequences, and the nature of scientific
research in young adults, some of whom may be future scientists. For more
information, visit http://crui.colgate.edu.&lt;br/&gt;