* 0442861
* Interactive Mobile Aqua Probing & Surveillance
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2005,08/31/2007
* Patricia Mosto, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 08/31/2007
* USD 72,692.00

In biology and ecology education and research, traditional methods of field
sampling require collecting samples at predetermined, discrete locations (e.g.
points on a grid) and bringing them back into the laboratory for analysis.
Although some current technologies, such as distributed sensors, provide a basic
way to continuously observe fixed nodal positions, their lack of crucial
mobility and flexibility calls for a cost-efficient robotic Interactive Mobile
Aqua Probing & Surveillance (IMAPS) device to monitor water pollution and study
ecological conditions in microcosms. The objective of this project is to address
this need by developing an inexpensive robotic IMAPS device. An integrated
effort by the College of Engineering and the College of Liberal Arts and
Sciences at Rowan University is creating a learning network where students from
anywhere can retrieve data collected by the fleet of IMAPS deployed in varying
locations. In this project we are: 1. Designing, building, and testing a robotic
surveillance and testing device to remotely test a water body and communicate
with its users in real-time. 2. Constructing and implementing hands-on
experiments throughout the Biology and Engineering curricula that emphasize an
integrated and multidisciplinary approach. 3. Designing, developing and
disseminating experiments and algorithms that employ our new device to explore
nature and monitor pollution. 4. Developing students' high-level thinking skills
by requiring them to apply engineering in terms of environmental impact and vice
versa. 5. Creating a learning community where students and faculty from both
Engineering and Biology departments are teaching and learning from each other
while working together. 6. Providing a low-cost device and algorithms to enhance
biology and ecology education and networking among K-12 schools, especially
financially disadvantaged public schools.

This project builds upon existing collaborations between the Rowan engineering
programs and the Department of Biological Sciences, both of which emphasize
experimental design and hands-on learning. Throughout the project, we are
promoting mutual teaching and learning among faculty and students from the two
different intellectual backgrounds.

We anticipate the project will have an impact that extends well beyond Rowan
University. The aim is that those in the fields of both biology and engineering
will be able to sample and study water bodies with minimal damage or disturbance
to the sampling environment. With the low cost of the system (and even lower
cost if widely adopted and commercialized), many students, especially those at
financially disadvantaged schools, can have unprecedented access to both
research equipment and technology as well as the expanded connection to external
expertise within the network we propose to create. This could enable more
students to explore the wild or test water quality either in the field or on a
virtual field trip where they can operate the sampling device remotely via the
Internet. Finally, by providing a convenient tool to local communities, a
greater number of people should be able to easily monitor water pollution and
pinpoint a polluting source, hence helping to both monitor and maintain water
quality.

