* 0442335
* Collaborative Research:    Direction-Finding Measurements of LF/MF/HF Auroral Radio Emissions at South Pole
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Allan Weatherwax, Siena College
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 12/31/2008
* USD 34,788.00

The proposed project is focused on improving the experimental technique
currently used at South Pole for better directional detection and understanding
of the sources and propagation of observed low, medium, and high frequency (50 -
5000 kHz) emissions (and specifically medium-frequency bursts) generated in the
auroral ionosphere by the solar and geomagnetic activity. The studies of near-
Earth electromagnetic environment is important because ionospheric plasma waves
and instabilities play a direct role in mediating exchange of the energy between
charged particle populations, provide effective means of remote sensing of the
ionospheric and magnetospheric plasma processes and boundaries, and represent a
"local laboratory" for studying emissions mechanisms which also occur in remote
planetary or astrophysical plasmas. The low-noise electromagnetic environment of
the South Pole Station in the above-mentioned frequency band allows to study
statistically two auroral radio emissions: (a) auroral roars, a narrowband
emission near the electron cyclotron harmonics; and (2) auroral MF bursts, a
broadband emission associated with geomagnetic substorm onsets. A versatile
waveform receiver (deployed at South Pole since 2002) captured scores of auroral
roar emissions at full resolution, and numerous examples of fully resolved low-
frequency auroral hiss events are now available for the study. It is proposed to
complete the analysis of the high-resolution "auroral roar" and "hiss" data, but
then focus on the auroral medium-frequency (MF) bursts - an outstanding mystery
of the aurora because its generation mechanism is still unknown. The project
plans to deploy a new digital direction-finding receiver at South Pole and use
it to perform a few significant observational experiments: (1) identify features
of the substorm expansion correlated with the MF bursts by tracking the azimuth
of bursts' arrival as a function of time as the substorm evolves; (2) compare
and validate different methods of determining substorm onsets by comparing the
timing from ultra-low-frequency and optical data and MF bursts; (3) analyze
multi-wavelength optical and imaging riometer data to determine characteristics
of the auroral electron spectra that cause the MF burst; and (4) determine the
detailed relationship between MF burst and auroral hiss emissions using digital
data from perpendicular crossed antennas and the handedness of polarization
(indicative of the propagation mode) of MF burst events extending below 1500
kHz. The first two experiments will help discovering new experimental methods
for the substorm studies, and the rest - to focus on determining the source
mechanism of the MF bursts and its relation to other radio emissions. These
experiments will provide significant experimental materials for theorists to
markedly advance our knowledge of the auroral radio emissions and their relation
to macrophysics of various auroral phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;