* 0442273
* RUI:  Solid/Liquid Phase Diagrams of Aqueous Inorganic and Organic Substances of Upper Tropospheric Importance
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Keith Beyer, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Continuing Grant
* Eric J. Hintsa
* 12/31/2008
* USD 248,977.00

This Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project extends upon
successful past laboratory studies conducted by the P.I. investigating
thermodynamic properties of aqueous and mixed-solute systems that emulate
aerosol particles resident in the upper troposphere. Laboratory experiments will
expand the range of thermochemical data - including equilibrium phase diagrams
and solution heat capacities as a function of temperature and chemical
composition - on a number of tropospherically relevant aqueous systems, using
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and infrared (IR) spectroscopy. The P.I.
will also verify theoretical model thermodynamics at low temperature by
measuring enthalpies of fusion and solid-solid phase transitions of these
systems, enabling identification of unknown solids in mixtures of several
components at cold temperatures in the future. Undergraduate students will be
extensively involved in laboratory experimental work and data analysis. With
respect to broader impacts, this project will make a substantive contribution to
current understanding of some important aerosol systems present in the global
troposphere that influence radiative balance and cloud nucleation, while
enhancing the education, professional training and research experience of a
number of undergraduate students at a relatively small tertiary institution. The
project results will provide the atmospheric science community with new data
that may lead to more realistic and representative constraints on existing
aerosol thermodynamic models.