* 0442066
* Studies in Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2008
* Joel Lebowitz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 480,000.00

This grant is supported jointly by the Divisions of Materials Research, Physics
and Mathematical Sciences. The aim of this research is a better understanding of
the properties of macroscopic systems originating in the collective behavior of
their microscopic constituents. The emphasis is on non-equilibrium systems and
the methods used range from rigorous mathematical analysis to computer
simulations. We are particularly interested in bridging the gap between rigorous
results and applications.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit includes: 1) An extension
of Boltzmann's entropy and H-theorem to systems not in local thermal
equilibrium. It is proposed to generalize recent work for dense fluids to more
complex systems, including nano and biological ones, where entropic
considerations play an important role. This will require an appropriate
generalization of Boltzmann's entropy to non-equilibrium quantum
systems.&lt;br/&gt;2) Recently-obtained exact large deviation functions,
describing fluctuations in stationary&lt;br/&gt;non-equilibrium states of model
systems are of an unexpected form. Their most striking feature, non-locality on
the macroscopic scale, can be traced to the long-range correlations, measurable
experimentally by neutron scattering, which exist in such systems. Extension and
application of these results to more realistic systems is planned.&lt;br/&gt;3)
For open quantum systems, such as current-carrying nano-wires, the classical
modeling of the reservoirs by stochastic interactions is problematic. The usual
approach is to use free fields, or ideal gases, as reservoirs. This is
unsatisfactory in many cases and we plan to continue our investigation of
alternative approaches such as the use of strongly coupled systems, represented
by random matrices, as reservoirs.&lt;br/&gt;4) Techniques we developed for
dealing with the response of quantum systems to strong time dependent external
fields have yielded rigorous results about simple model systems. Applications to
the optimal control of quantum transitions in molecules and to external fields
in solids are planned. 5) We have obtained novel results about the structure of
systems with reduced particle number fluctuations. These have applications to
cosmology and to queuing theory, which will be explored further. 6) An important
question in developing approximation schemes for fluids is the possibility of
constructing particle distributions having specified densities and pair
correlations. This can be achieved in some cases by the explicit construction of
point processes via determinants and renewals. General existence criteria are
being investigated. 7) We have applied statistical mechanical methods to the
mathematical study of epidemics taking into account correlations as well as
saturation effects on networks. New macroscopic equations for the description of
the evolution and prevalence of an endemic infected state improve agreement with
more detailed microscopic models. Extension of these techniques to models of
population dynamics and ecology is planned.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
proposed research is highly interdisciplinary, bringing together physicists,
mathematicians, chemists and those working in theoretical areas of the
biological and social sciences. The expected applications are in material
science, complex fluids and biological and social systems. Our program also
includes the organization of two conferences every year in which both core
subjects and new&lt;br/&gt;developments in statistical mechanics are discussed
in a collegial atmosphere. Graduate students, postdocs and minority scientists
are encouraged to present talks on their work and interact with leaders in the
field. The conferences also serve as a clearing house for positions and often
lead to new collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;