* 0442160
* Developing a Mathematics Curriculum to Serve the Biosciences:  The First Step
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Linda Sabatino, SUNY College of Technology Farmingdale
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2009
* USD 105,000.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Long Island economy is
rapidly being transformed into one that is dominated by a &lt;br/&gt;large
number of high-tech corporations, particularly in the biosciences. These
companies need employees with a high degree of quantitative skills, though not
traditional algebra skills. For the biosciences, it is no longer enough to
produce students who know mathematics, but little biology, or who know biology,
but little mathematics. This presents two simultaneous challenges: providing
mathematics courses that serve the specific needs of the biological sciences and
increasing the mathematics used in biology courses. This project is being
conducted in collaboration with Suffolk Community College.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The first math course taken by biology
students at both schools is typically a precalculus course; it is also the
course taken by most students who have not yet decided on a major. To meet the
mathematical needs of the biosciences, this project is developing an alternative
version of precalculus that focuses on the mathematical topics that are
essential for biology with a strong emphasis on mathematical models in biology.
Simultaneously, a one-hour lab taught by biology faculty to accompany the
precalculus course is being created where students conduct experiments that are
directly related to the mathematical topics taught in the main course. This
combination (1) provides a solid connection between the mathematics and its use
in biology in the students' minds; (2) provides a strong mathematical foundation
for the students in terms of subsequent quantitative developments in biology
courses; (3) prepares students for the quantitative demands of today's jobs; and
(4) provides the biology departments with the ability to expand the level of
quantitative emphasis in courses. In addition, a significant level of
professional development activities for both the math and biology faculty is
being supported.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: There are currently many
calls nationally to increase significantly the interface between biology and
mathematics education, and this project serves as an innovative and valuable
model for many other institutions to answer this challenge. It is also part of a
broader effort at the two institutions to create a new mathematics curriculum
that supports the biological sciences. Simultaneously, the project provides the
biology department the ability to increase the level of mathematics used in its
courses. The project plans to expand this project to encompass courses below
precalculus (introductory statistics and college algebra) and above precalculus
(the calculus course taken by biology students, differential equations courses
with biological models, and biological and physical projects in the senior
projects course for applied mathematics majors). &lt;br/&gt;