* 0442156
* A Comprehensive Threat Management Framework for a Crop Biosecurity National Architecture
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Charles Hill, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2006
* USD 958,000.00

Soybean rust, caused by the pathogen Phakopsora pachyrhizi and often referred to
as Australasian or Asian rust, is a serious disease of soybean that causes crop
losses in many parts of the world, including Asia, India, Africa, Australia, and
most recently South America. Much concern has arisen because of the rapid spread
of soybean rust around the world within the past ten years. Yield losses from
Asian soybean rust can range from 10 to 90% depending on environmental
conditions and treatment strategies. There is a critical need to understand the
current condition of the crop biosecurity system, baseline the various
components, and seek ways to enhance the responsiveness of the overall system.
The work builds on the observation that it is possible to detect pre-visual
stress in soybeans two weeks prior to visible symptoms appearing on the plant.
&lt;br/&gt;This is due to the fact that a plant's cellular structure is the
dominant factor in controlling leaf reflectance in the near infrared range.
Remote sensing can then be used to assess the condition of crops. An assessment
of current capabilities will be provided by a remote sensing and geospatial
technology baseline, which will provide a historical perspective on the
progression of soybean rust in South America (environmental, meteorological,
cultural, temporal), define the current state-of-the-art for direct and indirect
measurements of soybean rust, define the full spectrum (optical, thermal, radar
backscatter) characteristics of the disease progression, inventory and assess
disease vector models, and provide a conceptual demonstration of the components
of the system in an integrated form, including the interplay between social and
organizational responses to crop safety threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
from this project will lead to new strategies to detect this pathogen early and
monitor subsequent disease progression that are likely to be critical components
to limiting the economic impact of this disease on U.S. soybean production. The
architecture of the system can be adapted to other agents as well. This
interdisciplinary research engages not only faculty and technicians, but also un
dergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;