* 0442076
* SGER:     Sensors:    Piezoelectric Paint Sensor for Real-Time Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Yunfeng Zhang, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 01/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 0442076&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yunfeng
Zhang&lt;br/&gt;Lehigh University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural health
monitoring generally leads to a prolonged life and enhanced reliability of civil
and mechanical systems, particularly with regard to aging structures. Sensors
comprise a core component in any viable structural health monitoring system. To
overcome the problems associated with widely used piezoelectric ceramic
materials, this project sets forth to develop a polymer-based piezoelectric
paint sensor that can be deployed on existing or new structures for real-time
monitoring the onset and progression of structural damages. The proposed
research encompasses the study of the basic material aspects of piezoelectric
paint, sensor deployment on structural components with complex geometry, crack
detection strategies, a novel in situ fabrication technique for piezoelectric
paint, as well as a detailed understanding of the underlying principles and
limitations of piezoelectric paint sensors. This exploratory research will
significantly advance the scientific knowledge in sensor technology and smart
materials. The successful completion of the proposed research will offer a novel
sensor technology potentially addressing the needs of low-cost, low-power-
consumption sensors for real-time structural health monitoring of civil and
mechanical systems. Education and outreach activities are planned to target a
diverse group of students at all levels. A dedicated project website will be
established to provide key project information, interactive training activities
for interested researchers, practicing engineers and students. Additionally, the
proposed work will bring new modules into existing outreach programs at Lehigh
University.&lt;br/&gt;