* 0442691
* Producing Interactive Web-Based Animations for an Introductory Biology Course
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2010
* Richard Cyr, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 01/31/2010
* USD 75,000.00

This project provides high quality interactive web-based tutorials for students
to use outside of class in order to learn basic concepts in general biology. The
tutorials use animations that dynamically illustrate important principles of
biology. Success in this endeavor allows an instructor to use class time in more
innovative and interactive ways. Additionally, these interactive animations are
sometimes used by the instructor during class time to help draw the students'
attention to important aspects of the illustrated phenomena, and to challenge
students to think critically about the processes, since they require the
students to synthesize ideas and formulate questions that reinforce important
concepts. The animations are embedded within the tutorial framework so
instructors can take advantage of available reporting features.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: These animations help students
investigate the nature of feedback loops in biological regulation at multiple
levels of biological organization. Additional animations investigate the
consequences of metabolic poisons in cellular respiration. Assessments of the
animations include documentation of gains in student learning (as measured by
test performance) and a study of HOW students are using the animations. An
important aspect of the tutorials is reporting features that provide students
and instructors with information on student progress and behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The animations and tutorials are
distributed nationally through BioCoop, a cooperative to recognize authors
appropriately as well as disseminate the materials nationally. McGraw-Hill
Higher Education is interested in developing licensing arrangements with
BioCoop.