* 0442690
* Producing Interactive Web-Based Animations for Introductory Cell and Molecular Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2005,06/30/2007
* Richard Cyr, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 06/30/2007
* USD 75,000.00

This project involves the design of a prototype interactive animation to be used
in the on-line tutorials for introductory cell and molecular biology classes.
The prototype being developed simulates oxidative phosphorylation, a process
that involves many molecular mechanisms and that can be manipulated
experimentally at the cellular level. The animation promotes independent
exploration and experimentation through a built-in feature that allows a student
to manipulate cellular conditions, or add a pharmacological agent, and observe
the changes to the simulated process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed interactive animation is the inclusion of three features
not commonly found in other animations. First, the animation is interactive and
allows the student to manipulate many of the parameters of the simulation
through a virtual experimentation feature. Second, the animation includes review
and challenge questions, for which a student receives immediate feedback,
designed to monitor his or her understanding and to reveal any misconceptions.
Third, the instructor is able to track the student's use of the animation and
therefore, its utility in deepening the student's understanding. Furthermore,
the interactive animation is flexible in design so that the content can be
modified to accommodate a range of students with different backgrounds,
including both biology majors and non-biology majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interactive animation on oxidative phosphorylation has broad impacts because it
is available through a cooperative entity for use by instructors at other
locations around the country. Importantly, the system is scalable; although
initially centered at the developer's institution, the programming architecture
allows it to be expanded, in future years, into a distributed network of
unlimited size, with interconnected nodes spanning the country. The ability of
the system to capture and process data about the learning progress of students
(coupled with the ability to provide constant feedback to both the student and
instructor) has the potential to effect a fundamental change in how courses are
taught, and how students approach learning.