* 0443733
* 2005 Liquid Crystals Gordon Conference, Colby-Sawyer College, New London, New Hampshire, June 19-24, 2005
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Oleg Lavrentovich, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/2006
* USD 8,000.00

Interest in liquid crystal research and education in recent years is strong
internationally due to a broadly based recognition of the technological
importance and scientific challenges involved in the discovery and study of new
materials. There is a steady influx of scientists from other disciplines who see
the opportunities for performing exciting research in this area. The2005 Liquid
Crystals Gordon Conference will provide the venue for a major international
meeting to be held June 19-24, 2005 at Colby-Sawyer College, New London, New
Hampshire. The goal of the conference is to facilitate international
collaborations and information exchange across a broad spectrum of researchers
with interests in liquid crystal materials and applications. Areas to be
discussed include new concepts for design and synthesis of novel functional
liquid crystal materials, fundamental studies in structure, theory and modeling,
and related areas of applications to displays, sensors and other devices. The
NSF funds will be used primarily to support the participation of students, post-
doctoral scholars, and early career faculty, as well as senior U.S. session
chairs and invited speakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The liquid crystal community
has a significant impact on technological advances of high significance to
society through the development of new materials for electronics and photonics,
including the design and construction of novel display devices and sensor
materials. &lt;br/&gt;