* 0443118
* Development of On-line Laboratories for Networks, Probability Theory, Signals and Systems, and Multimedia Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Michael Stiber, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 03/31/2009
* USD 27,389.00

This full-scale EMD collaborative effort involves five universities, namely,
Arizona State University (ASU), the University of Washington Bothell (UWB), the
University of Texas at Dallas (UTD), the University of Rhode Island (URI), and
the University of Central Florida (UCF). The project involves significant
educational technology innovations and software extensions that enable the ASU
online prototype software Java-DSP (J-DSP; http://jdsp.asu.edu) to be used in
undergraduate courses across the five participating universities. Problems that
are being addressed include the delivery of technology-enhanced laboratory
experiences to undergraduate students using novel Java tools, and the broad
assessment of these practices across the participating universities. The project
tasks and objectives include: a) software development towards producing a new
delivery technology, b) considerable mathematical functionality extensions of
J-DSP, c) development of laboratory exercises by all the Co-PIs at the different
universities, d) a geographically-diverse assessment that involves the faculty
specialists at all five universities, e) a comprehensive pilot test of a new
revolutionary multi-site laboratory concept that allows students in the five
universities to concurrently run real-time integrated online simulations using
the planned connectivity upgrades on J-DSP, and f) dissemination and publication
of all results. The educational innovation is enabling distance learners to
conduct laboratories over the Internet. The concepts developed in this project
are serving as a model for developing and conducting online labs in other
science disciplines.