* 0443152
* CAREER: Transforming the Politics of Place: GIS, Knowledge Production, and Community-Based Organizations in Urban Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Sarah Elwood, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2006
* USD 313,609.00

The role of community-based organizations in the governance of U.S. cities has
changed in recent decades. These changes have been most evident in their growing
responsibilities for planning, problem solving, and service delivery tasks that
directly affect neighborhood space and structures. In concert with these
changes, these groups increasingly have used geographic information system (GIS)
technology for mapping, analyzing, and demonstrating neighborhood needs and
conditions. This Faculty Early-Career Development (CAREER) award is motivated by
the need for greater theoretical and practical understanding of these closely
related developments. This project will examine the priorities, strategies, and
goals for urban change and neighborhood revitalization advanced through such
GIS-based spatial knowledge production by community-based organizations. It will
consider how the production and application of GIS-based spatial knowledge
alters the role and power of community organizations, neighborhoods, and their
residents within the decision-making processes through which urban spatial
change is negotiated, planned, and implemented. It also will explore the
implications of these changes for the relationship between the state and
institutions of civil society in urban governance, particularly the construction
of the authority and knowledge of these actors. The project has three integrated
research, educational, and community development objectives. First, it aims to
advance knowledge in urban geography and societal studies of technology by
developing stronger theories regarding the urban spatial and political impacts
of GIS technologies and GIS-based knowledge production by community-based
organizations. Second, the project aims to develop effective experiential and
service learning pedagogies in geography education that will enhance the
capacities of students to connect conceptual and applied geographical knowledge
and to critically reflect upon the societal significance of their active
learning efforts. Finally, it aims to establish a model for fostering sustained
and effective GIS-based spatial knowledge production capacities in community
organizations, a key challenge given the financial and technological constraints
such organizations typically face. These objectives will be accomplished through
participatory research and educational activities carried out in collaboration
with two community-development organizations in Chicago. Working with staff and
residents from these organizations, the investigator and her colleagues will
create a spatial data library for use in their neighborhood revitalization
activities. As part of experiential learning activities in two geography courses
taught by the principal investigator at DePaul University, undergraduate
students will work with these organizations to plan and implement GIS-based
spatial analysis projects using these data, and community organization staff
will receive GIS training. The project's research questions will be answered
through qualitative analysis of data gathered using several techniques:
participant observation of student-community interaction during the spatial
analysis project activities; ethnographic interviewing of participating
organization staff, neighborhood residents, local government officials with whom
the organization works; and content analysis of maps and reports produced for
the community-based project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential significance of
this project is multi-faceted. It should develop important urban geographic
knowledge about the changing activities of grassroots citizen organizations in
urban governance processes that shape neighborhood needs and conditions, by
showing how their role and power in this context is affected by use of GIS and
other computer mapping and analysis technologies. Through the educational
activities, university students' skills for and commitments to public service
and active citizenship will be enhanced, as will their critical reflection upon
the social and political implications of their conceptual and applied learning.
Two community organizations in an impoverished Chicago neighborhood will enhance
their technological and knowledge infrastructures through the project's
investment of hardware, software, training, and data needed for long-term
sustained GIS capabilities. In its broader societal contributions, the project
will develop knowledge and practices intended to help to answer fundamental
questions about how to improve quality of life in American inner city
neighborhoods, and create strategies that encourage robust democratic practices
that involve neighborhood residents in the very decisions that affect them and
their neighborhoods. The project also will provide an excellent opportunity for
a productive young researcher to undertake a long-term project that integrates
high-quality research and education.&lt;br/&gt;