* 0443342
* Backlash for Atypicality and Cultural Stereotype Maintenance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Laurie Rudman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 08/31/2009
* USD 377,422.00

When perceivers meet actors, they are likely to categorize them on the basis of
physical features, such as gender, age, or race, and then to form a
stereotypical impression, unless actors behave in a manner that contradicts the
stereotypes. Thus, a powerful way to thwart stereotypes is to act atypically for
your group. For example, women who strive to be leaders might simply "act like
men" (e.g., be self-confident and ambitious) to avoid being judged as weak or
incapable. However, people who counteract stereotypes risk being socially
rejected. For example, masterful women are judged to be highly competent, but
they are disliked for being insufficiently feminine. Similarly, academically
gifted minority group members are judged to be highly intelligent, but they risk
being disliked for acting "too White." Acting atypically can indeed thwart
stereotypes, but it can also lead to serious reprisals, including being
sabotaged and passed over for a job or promotion. Reprisals for
counterstereotypical behavior have been termed backlash effects. Across nine
experiments, the present research will investigate the causes and consequences
of backlash effects, using a wide range of social groups (based on gender,
ethnicity, religion, and politics). The research program will also show that
backlash influences perceivers and actors differently, but that both groups play
a role in cultural stereotype maintenance. First, perceivers who reject atypical
actors (e.g., by failing to hire them) curb atypical actors' ability to stand
out as role models, which in turn allows stereotypes to persist, unchallenged.
Second, actors who fear backlash tend to hide their atypical behaviors
(including counterstereotypical talents) from others. They also engage in other
strategies that maintain stereotypes (e.g., increased norm conformity) in order
to avoid backlash. In sum, when perceivers punish atypical actors or when actors
closet their own atypical behaviors, stereotypes are allowed to thrive in the
culture-at-large. To counter this process, the research will examine the
effectiveness of an intervention strategy. Because atypical actors are critical
for reducing perceivers' use of stereotypes, it is important to develop
strategies that might reduce the threat of backlash for atypical actors. Doing
so should encourage the visibility of counterstereotypical achievement and
thereby afford actors greater opportunity to challenge cultural stereotypes. An
increased understanding of the motives underlying backlash should also lead to
stereotype reduction by promoting conditions under which stereotyped group
members can maximize their potential without fear of reprisals. In concert, the
research should inform policies for educational and workplace settings,
including how to structure environments so that people can perform to their
highest level without the encumbrance of stereotypes, or the need to hide their
accomplishments under threat of backlash.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;