* 0443616
* Acquisition of an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Nanoscience and Biotechnology Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Don Heiman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 02/29/2008
* USD 131,870.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
-Multiuser Instrument Acquisition (CRIF-MU) Program, the Department of Chemistry
at Northeastern University will acquire an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR)
Spectrometer. Faculty will use this instrument to carry out research in several
areas as follows: a) electrostatic mapping of proteins by high field EPR spin
labeling; b) mechanism of AP endonuclease interaction with abasic DNA; c)
structural changes in the estrogen receptor with drug binding; d) dynamics of
drug interactions with bulge-forming DNA; e) characterization of novel materials
for spintronic devices; f) measurements of interfacial interactions in
nanocomposite fuel cell and catalytic membranes; g) characterization of
conducting polymers synthesized by green chemistry; and h) EPR of novel magnetic
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectrometer yields information on the molecular and electronic structure of
molecules. It may also be used to obtain information about the lifetimes of free
radicals, short-lived species that are often essential for the initiation of
tumor growth and/or a variety of chemical reactions. These studies will have an
impact in a number of areas, from nanoscience to materials chemistry and
biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;