* 0443899
* X-ray Determination of Proteins and Viruses
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2005,09/30/2010
* Michael Rossmann, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,400,492.00

In this project, X-ray diffraction and cryo-electron microscopy (cryoEM)
techniques, in conjunction with molecular biology and protein chemistry, will be
the primary tools used to analyze the life cycle of various bacterial viruses.
The emphasis will be on the small and simple double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) tailed
bacteriophage phi29, on the large and complex dsDNA bacteriophages T4 and even
larger phiKZ, as well as on the tailless icosahedral ssDNA bacteriophage
phiX174. The objectives will be to determine not only the structures, but also
the molecular mechanisms by which the assembly intermediates are stabilized, how
the DNA is packaged into the empty pre-assembled proheads, how each step
triggers the next during viral morphogenesis, and to study the huge
conformational changes that occur when the virus infects a host cell. Comparison
of bacterial and animal viral systems is likely to recognize common strategies
and evolutionary origins that are not as easily determined by the study of
animal viruses alone. Many bacterial viruses are too awkwardly shaped to achieve
a packing organization that is compact enough, with sufficient interparticle
contacts, to make crystallization feasible. In addition, these viruses have
numerous fibrous sensor attachments that are flexible and variable in
orientation that would make crystallization impossible. Although cryoEM
investigations of viruses seldom extend beyond 10-angstrom resolution at this
time, these studies can be augmented by separately studying the crystal
structures of the viral components expressed in suitable prokaryotic or
eukaryotic systems. A pseudo-atomic resolution structure can then be obtained by
fitting the individual crystal structures into the cryoEM images of the virion,
assembly intermediates, or larger fragments of the native virus.

Broader Impacts: The project will involve undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral fellows. The PI has been active in mentoring women as well as
underrepresented minority researchers. In addition, the research will be
integrated in the teaching activities, including a course on crystallography. As
in the past, the project will involve development of new techniques, such as
combining electron microscopy and crystallography. Such techniques will be
useful to the scientific community working on the structural biology of large
complexes.