* 0443128
* Next Generation Green Chemistry Educational Materials for the Undergraduate Organic Chemistry Laboratory Curriculum Designed to Promote Large-scale Adoption
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2011
* James Hutchison, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 03/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

With heightened environmental awareness, modern chemical research and
development have increasingly focused on the discovery of methods for
environmentally benign chemical synthesis and processing ("Green Chemistry").
This project continues the development of "Green Chemistry" educational
materials featuring protocols for environmentally benign experiments that are
being integrated into the large-enrollment undergraduate organic chemistry
curriculum. The text, "Green Organic Chemistry: Strategies, Tools, and
Laboratory Experiments," resulting from prior NSF support, features 19
experiments with discussions of health and environmental issues and a series of
papers in international journals promote wide adoption of green chemistry. With
extensive involvement of undergraduate and graduate students, twenty additional
experiments incorporating the essentials of practical organic chemistry are
being devised and tested and will be incorporated into the next edition of the
text. These and other complementary materials are being disseminated
internationally through multiple vehicles, such as at Green Chemistry in
Education Workshops (GCEW) that are continuing to be offered for teachers from
all levels of educational institutions (K-12, community college, four-year
college, and university), presentations at meetings, and a Web-centered
database. In addition, existing networks are being utilized, including the
University of California/Berkeley's Multi-Initiative Dissemination (MID+)
project and the Center for Workshops in the Chemical Sciences (CWCS) groups. To
target faculty at R-1 institutions, presentations are being made at regional
and/or national meetings of chemistry department heads. The experiments do not
require expensive laboratory infrastructure and thus are accessible to a wide
variety of situations, including high schools and under-equipped colleges. An
advisory panel of experts is in place and the evaluation of materials is being
assisted through collaborative arrangements with other institutions. The project
is funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education within the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources.

