* 0443384
* CAREER:  Empirical Studies of Dynamics in Industrial Organization
* SBE,SES
* 05/23/2004,06/30/2007
* Aviv Nevo, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 171,854.00

&lt;br/&gt; This proposal outlines an empirical research and teaching agenda
for analyzing the economics of &lt;br/&gt;several dynamic phenomena, relevant to
the study of Industrial Organization. The three research &lt;br/&gt;projects and
educational activities studies are intended to improve our understanding of the
specific &lt;br/&gt;industries involved and, more broadly, to help assess the
relevance of a number of economic theories. &lt;br/&gt;The first two projects
construct and estimate a dynamic model of consumer choice in order to study the
&lt;br/&gt;effects of temporary prices reductions ("sales") and coupons,
respectively. The third model studies &lt;br/&gt;brand introduction using a
multi-agent model of industry dynamics. The educational component of this
&lt;br/&gt;project proposes several activities that connect to the research
projects. &lt;br/&gt; The first project focuses on temporal price reductions, so
called "sales", which are a common &lt;br/&gt;practice in many industries. There
are several potential explanations of sales, but here the focus is on
&lt;br/&gt;intertemporal price discrimination. More specifically, the PI models
the consumer's dynamic problem &lt;br/&gt;when she has an expected stream of
future demands, is able to store a consumption good, at a cost, &lt;br/&gt;and
faces price movements. In this model, the consumer will purchase the product
either because she &lt;br/&gt;wants to consume in the current period or because
she believes the difference between the current price &lt;br/&gt;and the
expected future price is lower than the cost of storing the inventory. To the
extent that the latter &lt;br/&gt;effect is important, it has implications for
the use of demand elasticities, computed from a static demand &lt;br/&gt;model,
in merger analysis, valuation of new goods, as well as other policy relevant
issues. The PI uses &lt;br/&gt;data on the purchases of 1,000 households of 24
products over 104 weeks, in order to examine &lt;br/&gt;correlations implied by
the model and to estimate the model directly. &lt;br/&gt; The focus of the
second project is coupons, which economists generally consider as a textbook
&lt;br/&gt;example of a price discrimination tool. In a recent paper Nevo and
Wolfram (1999) suggest that in &lt;br/&gt;order to fully understand the
economics of coupons, a model richer than the standard static monopoly
&lt;br/&gt;theory is needed. They also find some evidence that the patterns of
couponing are consistent with: (1) &lt;br/&gt;models of price discrimination in
oligopoly settings, which suggest that coupons are mainly used to
&lt;br/&gt;induce switching from competing brands, and (2) the use of coupons to
promote repurchase. In order &lt;br/&gt;to examine these issues further, the PI
constructs a dynamic model of consumer choice allowing for &lt;br/&gt;brand
loyalty. The model is estimated using a combination of the coupon data used in
Nevo and &lt;br/&gt;Wolfram (1999) and the household purchase data described in
the first project. &lt;br/&gt; The third project focuses on firm dynamics. In
previous work the PI studied price competition &lt;br/&gt;and mergers in the
ready-to-eat cereal industry (Nevo, 2000a, b) using static models of
competition, &lt;br/&gt;taking as given the brands offered by the firms.
However, brand introduction is an important dimension &lt;br/&gt;in this
industry, as well as in other industries. In this project the PI analyzes a
multi-agent dynamic &lt;br/&gt;model, in which firms can introduce new brands,
discontinue old brands and impact the perceived &lt;br/&gt;quality of their
existing brands by investing. The investment, which can be thought of as
advertising, &lt;br/&gt;yields a random outcome. The PI examines the Markov
Perfect equilibrium of the model. The &lt;br/&gt;predictions of the model, under
different assumptions, can be compared to actual brand introduction in
&lt;br/&gt;order to better understand the brand introduction process.
Furthermore, the model can be used to &lt;br/&gt;simulate the industry structure
under different scenarios. The latter is particularly important to anti-trust
&lt;br/&gt;policy in an era when innovation, rather than price fixing, seems to
be the focus. &lt;br/&gt; In terms of education, the PI develops a graduate
curriculum and student workshop, both of &lt;br/&gt;which will train students in
the above methods, and more broadly assist them in writing a thesis in
&lt;br/&gt;industrial organization. Finally, the proposal demonstrates how the
proposed research can also feed into &lt;br/&gt;teaching and advising at the
undergraduate level.