* 0443291
* 2005 Glial Biology Gordon Conference, to be held March 13-18, 2005, Ventura, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2006
* Wilma Friedman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 01/31/2006
* USD 15,000.00

The "Glial Biology: Functional Interactions Among Glia &amp; Neurons Gordon
Conference will be held March 13-18, 2005, Ventura, California. This GRC
conference will focus on the multidisciplinary complexity of glial biology in
terms of glial-neuron and glia-glia interactions. This conference will bring
together a limited number (maximum of 135) of leading investigators plus
students and postdoctoral fellows working on glial biology and cell-cell
interactions from a variety of perspectives. Informal interactions in the
tradition of the Gordon Research Conferences will emphasize incisive discussions
among senior and junior conferees with the overall goal of broadening the direct
knowledge and collaborative interactions of specialized researchers working in
emerging, cutting-edge areas of glial-glial and neuronal-glial interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three major objectives of this conference; the
first two are related to its intellectual merit, whereas the third addresses its
anticipated broad impact on neuroscience research and science education. (1)
Initiation of a continuing interactive dialogue among scientists in different
fields of glial biology, glia-neuron, and glia-glia interactions by providing a
long-term forum for presentation and discussion of cutting-edge work in selected
fields to a diverse group of leading researchers. (2) Suggest new integrative
approaches to solve timely problems, identify controversial issues that need new
approaches to be resolved, and foster collaborative projects in multi-
disciplinary research. (3) Bring to the attention of the neuroscience community
the importance of the glial cells and their interactions with other cell types
in normal brain functions, and in modeling interactions of these cell types in
functional systems of neuronal activity. Regular, incisive discussions of
cutting-edge research in glial biology involving glial-glial and glial-neuronal
interactions will impact on both research and education by enhancing knowledge
and by broadening the direct interactions of researchers in this field. Because
many sub-fields are currently sequestered in larger meetings of national
societies, this Gordon Conference can be expected to help construct a new
network among researchers who currently do not regularly (if at all) communicate
and serve to enhance their infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;