* 0443101
* Visual Tools for Demonstrating Engineering Concepts in a Quasi-Realistic Simulation Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 02/29/2008
* USD 74,888.00

This project addresses a major teaching/learning problem for undergraduate
engineering students who are highly visual learners - the need to develop a
sound understanding of how engineering problems can be formulated and solved,
and the ability to transcend disciplinary boundaries, in areas where abstract
concepts are involved. Specifically, a generic framework and several prototypes
of a new teaching tool, named 'Case Study Interactive', are currently being
developed and tested in a variety of learning settings. This innovative
instructional tool combines the delivery of technical knowledge and
humor/entertainment within a highly visual and interactive computer simulation
environment to present complex, multidisciplinary problems that evolve over
time. The proposed concept harnesses the same motivators used in computer games,
namely the desires to "beat the computer" and to maximize one's score, enticing
the student to maximize his/her understanding of the laws that govern the
response of the system (e.g., scientific principles, management practices).
Interactive case studies also enable exposure of elementary and high school
students to real-world engineering problems at a technical level that they can
comprehend. By varying the relative amounts of technical knowledge and
entertainment ("game") features, interactive cases can be developed for a wide
range of ages and learning capacities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;