* 0443037
* Continued Development of the Interactive Prototype Plume Busters Software, an Educational Tool for Undergraduate Ground-water Science
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Geoffrey Bohling, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 06/30/2007
* USD 74,530.00

The prototype Plume Busters software is an innovative, "hands-on" tool in which
students take on the role of an environmental consultant and apply ground-water
principles to solve a simulated contamination problem. The goal of this project
is to expand the capabilities and increase the educational value of the
prototype software that was developed with funding from a previous NSF
Geoscience Education program project. The current project is developing new
interactive tools for self-assessment and additional contamination scenarios
that shall offer students the option of employing several different remediation
technologies to solve simulated environmental problems. Students working with
the prototype software are progressively challenged to apply previously learned
and new concepts to solve problems of increasing complexity. Ground-water
scientists and educators from the Kansas Geological Survey (KGS), the University
of Kansas Department of Geology, and the Fort Scott Community College Department
of Environmental Technologies form the project team. Specifically, the project
is: (1) working with stakeholders to design the next generation software
prototype and the process used to evaluate it, (2) field-testing the prototype
to evaluate student learning with undergraduates from local community and four-
year colleges, and (3) formulating a plan to carry the prototype forward to full
development. The prototype software will be platform independent and broadly
available to anyone on CD-ROM from the KGS or over the Internet from the KGS
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, Plume Busters
enables students to actively engage in scientific inquiry and problem solving in
the context of realistic contamination scenarios. The project is also providing
two undergraduate computer science students with practical training in software
development. With respect to broader impact, the project is creating high
quality, research-based educational materials that stress integrating
geoscience, engineering, and mathematics concepts in undergraduate education.
&lt;br/&gt;