* 0443465
* Understanding Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Daron Acemoglu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 01/31/2009
* USD 226,356.00

ABSTRACT Prop ID: SES-0443465 P I: Acemoglu, Daron Organization: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology Title: Understanding Institutions There is now a broad
consensus that cross-country differences in institutions are important for long-
run economic performance. Work on understanding why institutions differ across
countries, which specific dimensions of institutions matter more, and how
institutions function in practice is just starting. This proposal outlines a
number of ongoing and future projects on these topics. Ongoing projects: The
first ongoing project explores historical variation in different dimensions of
institutions among the former European colonies to identify the causal effect of
different components of economic institutions. The second ongoing project
attempts to open the black box of "property rights". It investigates the costs
and benefits of different distributions of political power in society, which
translate into creating better property rights (better incentives) for different
groups in society. It shows the presence of a dynamic trade-off between
oligarchic structures that give good investment incentives to established
producers, while also creating a non-level playing field, versus democratic
societies, which check the power of incumbent producers, but also may pursue
distortionary (populist) redistributive policies. Future projects: The proposal
also outlines three new projects. The first constructs a model to evaluate the
costs and benefits of weak versus strong states. Although much of the recent
political economy literature emphasizes the costs of unchecked power by the
state, many political scientists and sociologists view "weak states," which are
unable to raise taxes and provide public goods, as a major reason for
underdevelopment. This project outlines a model in which the government, run by
a self-interested ruler, must undertake productive investments in infrastructure
or public goods. In this setup, both strong and weak states are parameterized by
their ability to raise taxes, create costs. Strong states discourage investment
by citizens, but weak states do not give enough future rents to rulers to
encourage their investments. This framework enables the development of potential
positive and normative theories of the organization of government. Second, the
project will study the consequences of institutional reform replacing an
established oligarchy by new power-holders, exploiting the spread of the French
Revolution to Belgium, the Netherlands, Switzerland, western Germany and
northern Italy. The final project is on new work towards developing a theory of
leadership to understand how institutions function in practice, and how they can
achieve coordination among agents with decentralized information.

Intellectual Merit: The projects outlined in this proposal are central to the
development of an understanding of why institutions vary across countries and
how this impacts on the potential for economic growth. This work, though very
much in its infancy, has had a major effect on many branches of economics,
including development economics, macroeconomics, public finance, labor
economics, contract theory and industrial organization.

Broader impacts: An understanding of the institutional roots of economic
prosperity can contribute to better policymaking, and results from recent
research have featured in various policy debates. The empirical part of the work
involves construction of new datasets, which can then be used by other
researchers. Previous work by the PI has led to the development of new datasets
that have been used by a large number of researchers and graduate students, and
have been utilized for teaching in undergraduate and graduate classes.