* 0443233
* Acquisition of a Single-Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer with a CCD Area Detector and a High-Quality Optical Microscope
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2008
* Thomas Fehlner, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2008
* USD 211,139.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities -
Multiuser Instrument Acquisition (CRIF-MU) Program, the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Notre Dame will purchase a single-crystal X-ray
diffractometer with CCD detection and an optical microscope. This acquisition
would enable a number of research projects, including studies on a) main-group
metals and semimetals in negative oxidation states; b) hypoelectronic
metallaboranes; c) s-block metal aggregates as synthons in supramolecular
synthesis; d) the synthesis and characterization of metalloporphyrin complexes;
e) supramolecular chemistry; and f) comformation-activity relationships in
polyketide natural products. A trained crystallographer will be responsible for
training new users and that the equipment will be used in a graduate level
course. In addition, there is a very strong effort to recruit and retain
minority students and the McNair program brings roughly 30 minority
undergraduates to campus each summer.

The X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full
three dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles,
and it provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of the
molecule relative to the neighboring molecules. These studies will have a strong
impact in materials chemistry.

