* 0443257
* SGER:  Algorithm Design for Reconfiguration Problem in Optical Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Eun Park, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 12/31/2006
* USD 106,000.00

The optical network is a promising high-speed backbone or transportation
network that requires&lt;br/&gt;an extremely caution in operations. The
reconfiguration is one of the indispensable operations if a&lt;br/&gt;virtual
topology no longer serves a traffic demand which is changed over
time.&lt;br/&gt; We propose to develop an algorithm and a complete
reconfiguration model for wavelengthrouted&lt;br/&gt;optical networks which
includes the reconfiguration process and the policy. The
reconfiguration&lt;br/&gt;process provides the choices of the reconfiguration
operations (e.g., add, delete or re-route&lt;br/&gt;lightpaths) to maintain the
high performance of the network in any traffic demand volumes
and&lt;br/&gt;patterns while minimally disturbs the current virtual topology.
The reconfiguration policy defines&lt;br/&gt;which choice to be selected that
returns the optimal expected outcome based on the cost of
operation&lt;br/&gt;and the performance reward. We have preliminary experimental
results that show that selecting&lt;br/&gt;the choice with the highest immediate
outcome does not return the optimal expected outcome in&lt;br/&gt;the long
term.&lt;br/&gt; Although the reconfiguration problem is an NP-hard problem and
is a trade-off between performance&lt;br/&gt;and number of changes in virtual
topology, we can still find the solutions using a
multiobjective&lt;br/&gt;evolutionary algorithm with the concept of Pareto
Optimal. The algorithm provides a set&lt;br/&gt;of solutions in the Pareto front
while the policy picks one of solutions in the Pareto front that
gains&lt;br/&gt;the optimal expected outcome. The policy depends on the pattern
of traffic. If the future pattern&lt;br/&gt;of traffic can be predicted or
estimated, the Markov Decision Process (MDP) can define the
policy.&lt;br/&gt;However, the status of network or the MDP's state which
effects the Pareto front needs an intensive&lt;br/&gt;study.&lt;br/&gt; Our goal
is to develop the theory and algorithms in accordance with realistic traffic
demand and&lt;br/&gt;protocol. The model will be the centralized control over
the network, which will not be designed&lt;br/&gt;only for the specific
performance objective or traffic type but be applicable for various
objectives&lt;br/&gt;and traffic types. The development of practical algorithms
for solving these problems represent an&lt;br/&gt;important step in allowing
reasonable scale implementation of optical networks.&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual
Merit of the proposed research rests on the integration between the
reconfiguration&lt;br/&gt;process and the policy based on the Pareto optimal
concept and MDP that has not yet happened in&lt;br/&gt;the Optical network
reconfiguration field. Reconfiguration problems are among the most
difficult&lt;br/&gt;in the areas of optical networks since such problems
encompass the construction of algorithms&lt;br/&gt;involving the extremely high-
speed communication over an optical fiber. The consequence problem&lt;br/&gt;is
how or when to perform the reconfiguration process. From the practical
application viewpoint,&lt;br/&gt;we want to advance our model to the practical
optical networks.&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts of the proposed research is
expected to be strong since we are proposing&lt;br/&gt;to integrate two
disciplines, the evolutionary computing and the stochastic process for the
recon-&lt;br/&gt;figuration in the optical networks. We expect that the work
will have broad impact in industrial&lt;br/&gt;practices on network
provisioning, protection and restoration areas.&lt;br/&gt;