* 0443991
* YIA-PGR: The Alternaria-Brassicaceae Pathosystem as a Model for Necrotrophic Fungal-Plant Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Christopher Lawrence, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 11/30/2007
* USD 963,009.00

Plant diseases caused by necrotrophic fungi are of world wide economic
importance and result in millions of dollars in crop losses annually. In
contrast to organisms exhibiting a biotrophic lifestyle, necrotrophic fungi
actively kill host tissue prior to colonization usually through the secretion of
toxic substances. Necrotrophic diseases are not well controlled by resistant
plant cultivars. Modern fungicides can help to control necrotrophic pathogens,
but many consider these chemicals to be both environmentally and economically
undesirable. The ultimate goal of this project is to identify and develop
improved disease resistance strategies for these types of fungal pathogens. This
project is focused on the development of an ideal model pathosystem for
exploring interactions between plants and necrotrophic fungi. This pathosystem
consists of select species found within the plant family Brassicaceae and the
necrotrophic, toxin producing fungus, Alternaria brassicicola. This project will
further our understanding of host-necrotrophic pathogen relationships in
Brassicaceae by first identifying a set of ESTs related to a compatible
interaction. A comparative genomics study of pathogen-induced defense responses
in resistant and susceptible hosts will be performed using Arabidopsis full-
genome microarrays and will give critical insight into the role of specific
genes and signaling pathways involved in these responses. A functional genomics
approach using knockout mutatgenesis will be performed to elucidate
pathogenicity mechanisms in the fungus. A publicly accessible database for this
information will be created. This project also includes a major educational
component involving an outreach program that will use knowledge and materials
obtained from this research as an aid in educating K-12 students about genomics.
This project will provide education and scientific training to undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral scientists and will focus on the inclusion
of underrepresented groups.