* 0443807
* Cooperation, Conflict and the Evolution of Social Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2005,07/31/2009
* Bruce Lyon, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 07/31/2009
* USD 229,887.00

Striking ornamental traits such as colorful bird plumage are often viewed as
synonymous with sexual selection. The bizarre chicks of the American coot,
resplendent with their bright orange plumage of modified feathers and a head
capped with colorful naked skin, challenge us to consider ornamental signals in
a broader evolutionary context. Previous research revealed that parental choice
(parental favoritism for particular offspring characteristics) provides
extremely strong natural selection for ornamented offspring in American coots
and raised a fundamental question: why do parents prefer ornamented offspring?
The proposed research will answer this question by investigating how the chick
signals function (i.e., their effects on parental behavior), and the
consequences of these effects on the reproductive success of the parents (i.e.,
the number and quality of offspring produced). Both cooperation and conflict can
shape the evolution of social signaling systems - determining the relative
importance of each remains an important challenge for evolutionary biologists
and is a major focus of the proposed research. Experimental manipulation of
chick signals (e.g. plumage color, bill color, and skin color) will be used to
determine both the mechanism of chick signal function and the consequences to
parents and offspring. A two-factor experiment will be conducted to investigate
the interaction between chick signals and parental tactics central to food
allocation (degree of hatching asynchrony, the main determinant of offspring
competitive asymmetries). The research will provide a comprehensive
understanding of the evolution of a social signaling system by exploring how
natural selection shapes both the signaler and the receiver, and how these
fitness consequences interact to produce an integrated social system. While
pursuing these research objectives, this project will also provide intensive
mentoring of undergraduate students. Nine students will be involved in all
aspects of the research program - from planning the field season, to setting up
field experiments, to making behavioral observation and data management and
analysis - and will gain hands-on experience with a scientific investigation.

