* 0443337
* RCN Establishing a Seamount Biogeoscience Network (SBN)
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2011
* Hubertus Staudigel, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2011
* USD 495,214.00

This grant is for the establishment of a seamount research coordination network
to be known as the "Seamount Biogeosciences Network (SBN)" for communication and
scientific collaboration, data archiving and integration and for sharing of
seagoing logistical operations. Seamounts, submerged isolated mountains in the
oceans, are amongst the most diverse and still most poorly understood marine
biological environments. They are formed by a range of geological processes and
may be found at any ocean latitude, depth and environment. Most seamounts are
volcanoes that eventually may grow to become ocean islands or reefs. Seamounts
travel with tectonic plates away from their site of origin, often by thousands
of miles, and then subside as the plate cools with age. This makes seamounts the
oldest intact mountains on Earth. They remain in isolation for up to 150 million
of years, each one of them an experiment in benthic life evolution within
distinct geological boundary conditions. Seamounts offer access of benthic life
to a range of mid-water conditions, from deep nutrient rich currents to shallow
water. Initial biological studies reveal that seamounts display extreme
biodiversity. This offers unique opportunities to identify and explore novel
microorganisms, and to study their physiology, biochemistry and genomics in well
constrained settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seamount research involves many
scientific disciplines (e.g. oceanography and volcanology) that only rarely
communicate with each other, but biology has much to gain from interfacing with
the whole spectrum. Overcoming these challenges of interdisciplinary integration
are important to successful biological exploration of the interface between the
hydrosphere, lithosphere and biosphere. The goal of the SBN is to bring together
all the diverse scientific disciplines involved in seamount research, to
communicate about and discuss seamount science, and to ease or share the
logistical burden of field expeditions. Key components of this network include
regular workshops, and the development of a community website and a database
that integrates a wide range of seamount data.&lt;br/&gt;