* 0443133
* Rapid Prototyping for Embedded System Applications Via High Level Development Tools
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Armando Rodriguez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 04/30/2008
* USD 75,000.00

This project is developing a new unique textbook supplement that will enable
undergraduate students to design, validate, and synthesize complex digital
designs with minimal knowledge of Hardware Description Languages (HDL). The
textbook supplement, with accompanying interactive MATLAB software, focuses on
the use of Xilinx' high-level, PCMATLAB/Simulink compatible XSG 6.2 tool for
rapid prototyping of Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) designs. Xilinx's
Spartan III 90 nm FPGA technology serves as the main synthesis platform. The
textbook supplement targets applications and algorithms in signal processing,
communications, controls, low power electronics, robotics, and biosensors. While
algorithms are explained using minimal mathematics (e.g. descriptive pictures),
focus is placed on alternative algorithm implementations, application-specific
issues, and tradeoffs. MATLAB GUIs that facilitate the examination of
alternative implementations are being developed. Special core examples, in each
of the above areas, are carried throughout the supplement to motivate, develop,
and illustrate all concepts. Comprehensive examples to illustrate how concepts
can be brought together to synthesize complex systems (e.g. medical image
enhancement, radio receiver, CVD furnace/robot control, biosensor linearization)
are being included. These examples, selected to reflect cutting-edge
applications, represent another central pedagogical contribution. The team is
working with an engineering education assessment specialist to evaluate the
material and faculty at several major universities are providing feedback on the
material. Dissemination plans include journal and conference papers and a
mainstream publisher has expressed interest in publishing the completed material
as a paperback book.