* 0443121
* Online Curricula for Monitored, Closed-lab First-year CS Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Marcia Linn, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Scott Grissom
* 04/30/2009
* USD 249,703.00

Computer Science (31)

This project is designing, evaluating, and disseminating a new approach for
teaching introductory computer science courses. It uses a web-based learning
environment to take advantage of recent research on learning and incorporate
successful strategies for teaching diverse students in first year programming
and data structures courses. It includes a diverse set of activities,
collaboration and group work, support mechanisms to help students keep up with
course assignments and sustain consistent participation, activities to help all
students, especially underrepresented groups including women, have more success,
embedded student information so instructors have better knowledge of student
conceptions and progress, and a learning environment to help instructors
allocate time where it can be of best use. The project includes designing and
testing faculty workshops for this approach and evaluating student learning and
instructor workload using internal, external, and expert review processes.

This approach is being extended to the full range of cultural groups and
educational contexts important for ensuring a diverse workforce in technology.
Techniques proven successful at Berkeley are being tailored to students in
community colleges, minority-serving institutions, and liberal arts colleges.
The project is collaborating with instructors from diverse institutions to
customize the instruction to the curriculum and expectations in their
departments. The detailed information available to instructors helps them guide
students in a more timely and effective way. This pedagogical approach helps
instructors use their time effectively and does not demand more time for
teaching.

The project evaluation includes the participation of leading computer science
instructors to review and critique the materials that are developed. The
evaluation benchmarks progress prior to instituting innovative approaches and
compare the new cohort of students to the benchmark group. It includes
comparison studies using the learning environment to randomly deliver compelling
alternatives to groups of students and follows the trajectories of a randomly
selected and diverse group of students over a several year period. Overall, the
project is developing a coherent, tested set of practices that can be used
widely.