* 0443144
* ITR: Study of Complex Nanoclustered States using Novel Efficient Algorithms
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Adriana Moreo, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 373,692.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational and theoretical research
on complex nanostructures. Some compounds tend to spontaneously form complex
spatially inhomogeneous electronic states on the nanoscale. Examples include
high temperature superconductors, colossal magnetoresistive manganites, and
dilute magnetic semiconductors. The PIs will explore the origins of the
nanocluster generation phenomenon in a variety of compounds using a simplified
framework provided by spin-fermion models. These models contain charge carrier
and localized spin degrees of freedom; classical phonons may also be included.
Research involves a careful computational effort to capture the percolating
characteristics of the phenomenon and to elucidate the nature of complex
inhomogeneous electronic ground states. Researchers using currently available
algorithms have been able to unveil amazingly rich structures in these models,
but further progress is difficult due to severe cluster-size and CPU
limitations. The PIs will further develop algorithms for spin-fermion
Hamiltonians to enable access to system sizes large enough so that magnetic and
transport properties can be reliably calculated in percolative nanostructures.
This research will emphasize the similarities among different materials and will
help to relate investigations in different fields that use similar spin-fermion-
like models. An aspect of this work involves modification of an algorithm from
the computational lattice-gauge-theory community in high-energy physics. Codes
developed in the course of this work will be made available to the broader
materials theory community. This award supports broad educational experiences in
computational science and physics for graduate students and educational
experiences in physics for K-12 students. It also supports efforts to broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in science. The research uses
computation to advance fundamental theoretical condensed matter physics at the
scientific frontiers. %%% This award was made on a 'small' category proposal
submitted in response to the ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports
computational and theoretical research on complex nanostructures. As a
consequence of electronic correlations, some compounds tend to spontaneously
form complex spatially inhomogeneous electronic states on the nanoscale.
Examples include high temperature superconductors, colossal magnetoresistive
manganites, and dilute magnetic semiconductors. The PIs will explore the origins
of spatially inhomogeneous electronic states using spin-fermion models. These
models focus on charge carriers, localized spins, and their interactions.
Research involves a careful computational effort to elucidate the nature of
complex inhomogeneous electronic ground states. Researchers using currently
available algorithms have been able to unveil amazingly rich structures in these
models, but further progress is difficult due to severe cluster-size and CPU
limitations. The PIs will further develop algorithms for spin-fermion models to
enable reliable calculations of magnetic and transport properties for
percolative nanostructures. This research will emphasize the similarities among
different materials and will help to relate investigations in different fields
that use similar spin-fermion-like models. An aspect of this work involves
modification of an algorithm from the computational lattice-gauge-theory
community in high-energy physics. Codes developed in the course of this work
will be made available to the broader materials theory community. This award
supports broad educational experiences in computational science and physics for
graduate students and educational experiences in physics for K-12 students. It
also supports efforts to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
science. The research uses computation to advance fundamental theoretical
condensed matter physics at the scientific frontiers. ***

















