* 0443785
* Solid State Chemistry of Crystalline and Glassy Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2005,11/30/2006
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/2006
* USD 301,598.00

This project deals with the effectiveness of salt fluxes to lead to new
materials in the broad chalcogenide class of compounds. The ability to control
chemical reaction systems and to discover new materials through developing
general synthetic methodologies defines one of the main challenges to our
understanding of the relationships between chemistry, crystal structures, and
properties in complex solids. The project focuses on complex metal
chalcophosphate and chalcoarsenate materials. This class continues to present
marvelous scientific challenges and it is broadly relevant to many technological
applications. We anticipate new materials with interesting and potentially
useful physical properties such as semiconducting behavior, second harmonic
generation, glass formation, and reversible phase-change crystal to glass
transitions. The project explores (a) lithium polythiophosphate fluxes (b)
alkali metal polythioarsenate and polyselenoarsenate fluxes (c) 31P NMR
spectroscopy to investigate poly-thiophosphate fluxes and reactions performed in
such fluxes. (d) Finally, we will investigate and study the properties of glass
forming systems occurring in certain element combinations. The project will
educate and expose students in a worthwhile intellectual discourse. The students
working on the project will receive outstanding training in solid-state
chemistry and materials research. They will acquire a direct awareness of the
relevance of their materials to science and technology. The proposed activity
will strive to furnish a meaningful, coherent research and education program for
students so that they, as future independent scientists, are able to generate,
handle and manipulate novel classes of solid-state materials. Relatively few
laboratories in the US provide the type of training proposed. Undergraduate
students also participate in this type of research, which has a lasting impact
on their college laboratory experience and future career choices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials are at the core of
many advanced technologies and products. This project seeks to discover new
materials using novel synthesis techniques and to train students in the
discourse of this type of research. The materials belong to the broader class of
semiconductors and are expected to possess interesting and potentially useful
physical properties. These include controllable electrical conductivity,
photoactivity, glass forming properties and phase-change properties. This
project will investigate new phase-change materials relevant to non-volatile
data storage and computer memory applications. The methodology developed and the
insights gained relevant to the formation, chemistry and properties of unusual
solids, could enable or facilitate useful technologies and thus could make an
important contribution to science and could have a significant impact in a
number of technologies and by extension on the US economy. Graduate and
undergraduate students participating in this type of will have a wide range of
future career choices, and will be very competitive in the job market. The
results of this research will be available to the public. The broad
dissemination of scientific results and knowledge through the communications
media, the web and journal publications will help enhance the public's
scientific understanding and appreciation.&lt;br/&gt;