* 0443556
* Collaborative Research: Science Opportunities for a Multidisciplinary Long-Range Aircraft for Antarctic Research
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* David Bromwich, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2005
* USD 40,000.00

This award provides support to host a three-day workshop in September 2004 to
formulate a science justification for a long-range research aircraft. The
workshop will bring together scientists representing the Antarctic research
community's interest in having an aircraft for modern aerogeophysical,
glaciological, atmospheric and oceanographic science. The specific goals of the
workshop are to: 1) Develop a strong science and implementation plan for a
multi-disciplinary long-range research aircraft facility; 2) Produce a high-
quality workshop report that will create the necessary impact given the scope of
the project and 3) Submit an article to the AGU publication EOS that summarizes
the deliberation and recommendations of the workshop in order to ensure the
widest possible dissemination. The intellectual merit of this workshop includes
the fact that there are many different problems in a variety of fields (e.g.
solid earth geophysics, glaciology, atmospheric sciences) that can only be
addressed with a long-range research aircraft and without such an aircraft
progress will never be made in advancing these areas of science. In terms of
broader impacts, broad community interest in having the capability to enable a
more in-depth exploration of the Antarctic continent comes on the eve of the
50th anniversary of the International Geophysical Year. The upcoming
International Polar Year (IPY) scheduled for 2007-2009 will be a wonderful
opportunity to excite the public about polar research and such an aircraft will
play an important role by transporting novel and comprehensive instrumentation
to many parts of Antarctica to provide observations of key processes taking
place in the atmosphere, ice sheet, solid earth and in the oceans. IPY will also
provide a wonderful opportunity to train the next generation of polar scientists
and having a long-range aircraft will enable many new areas of scientific
discovery which are not possible at the current time without such a
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;