* 0443076
* A Civil Action" - Using the Landmark Trial for Learning Environmental Geoscience and the Connection Between Geology and Human Health
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* E. Scott Bair, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 02/28/2010
* USD 357,653.00

This project is creating an on-line instructor's manual and websites containing
course modules, datasets, and materials for use individually by faculty and
students in courses in physical geology, environmental geology, hydrogeology,
and medical geology, or sequentially in an interdisciplinary science course that
culminates in a mock trial enacted by students. The modules center around the
landmark 'A Civil Action' case in which eight families in Woburn, Massachusetts
filed suit against two local industries alleging improperly handled toxic
chemicals entered the groundwater system, traveled to two municipal supply
wells, and consumption of the contaminated water by local residents caused
childhood leukemia and other health disorders. The modules are introducing the
scientific methods and geoscience skills that enable students to explore,
analyze, and interpret the geologic, hydrologic, and geochemical datasets from
the actual trial. With these datasets and other course materials, students are
constructing maps, graphs, and diagrams (used later as trial exhibits) to help
them formulate and write their own professional opinions as 'expert witnesses'
in the mock trial, where they present and defend their opinions before a judge
and jury. The project is fostering critical thinking skills, enhancing basic
academic skills (data analysis, computational methods, and written and oral
communication), and introducing scientific methods and geoscience skills. The
intellectual merit of the project lies in students manipulating the actual trial
datasets; creating, interpreting, and explaining the maps and graphs that they
created; applying a variety of scientific principles and methods to address a
poignant real-world problem; and teaching students how to formulate and defend
their own opinions. In the broader view, this project is connecting STEM
education to societal problems, demonstrating the role of science in society,
particularly in the courtroom and in public health assessments, and documenting
the need for professional ethics and standards.