* 0443699
* Program in Geometry of String Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2005
* Mikhail Kapranov, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0443699&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Mikhail Kapranov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to run a year-
long program at the Fields Institute on&lt;br/&gt;the subject of ``Geometry of
string theory''. The program will&lt;br/&gt;be devoted to mathematical subjects
motivated by string theory,&lt;br/&gt;and to recent developments in string
theory and related physical&lt;br/&gt;fields which are of strong mathematical
interest. On the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical side, the aim is to foster interaction
between such&lt;br/&gt;areas of mathematics as derived categories, elliptic
cohomology,&lt;br/&gt;geometric Langlands correspondence, quantum
cohomology,&lt;br/&gt;differential geometry varieties with special holonomy and
of&lt;br/&gt;special Lagrangian varieties. On the more physical side, the
aim&lt;br/&gt;is to foster new progress in the continuing drive
towards&lt;br/&gt;understanding the foundations of string/M-theory, and in
the&lt;br/&gt;wealth of new ideas involving D-branes, BPS states and
various&lt;br/&gt;dualities which are of great importance to mathematical
subjects&lt;br/&gt;such as algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of the program is to advance our understanding&lt;br/&gt;of the fundamental
questions of physics of the&lt;br/&gt;microworld. Probably the most promising
application of quantum&lt;br/&gt;physics contemplated nowadays is the Quantum
Computing Project&lt;br/&gt;which can potentially lead to creation of computers
whose power&lt;br/&gt;exceeds the present-day limits by many orders of
magnitude. This&lt;br/&gt;direction is a part of the proposed activitie and we
plan to have&lt;br/&gt;a distinguished lecture series (the Blyth Lectures)
devoted to&lt;br/&gt;the subject. This program represents an excellent
opportunity&lt;br/&gt;for young scholars to experience a high-level
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;collaboration. In particular, it is going to be a
very important&lt;br/&gt;training ground for young American
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;