* 0443803
* Spectral analysis of population time series using nonlinear stochastic models: quantitative tools and experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2011
* Robert Costantino, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 01/31/2011
* USD 1,404,945.00

PROPOSAL Id : DMS - 0443803&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Rockefeller
University&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR and co-PI's: Cohen, Joel E., Constantino, &lt;br/&gt;Robert F., and
Decharnais, Robert, A.&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Spectral Analysis of Population Time
Series using Nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;Stochastic Models Quantitative Tools and
Exeriments&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the interactions between
nonlinearities in dynamical &lt;br/&gt;models (both physical and biological) and
stochastic variation in &lt;br/&gt;the parameters of dynamical models is a
fundamental challenge in many &lt;br/&gt;branches of the natural sciences,
including ecology and population &lt;br/&gt;biology. Nonlinear effects in
population dynamics interact with &lt;br/&gt;environmental variability in ways
that are, thus far, poorly &lt;br/&gt;understood. This project seeks to
understand the interactions &lt;br/&gt;between, and the relative importance of,
internally and externally &lt;br/&gt;generated sources of population
fluctuation. It also seeks to &lt;br/&gt;understand the relationship between the
domination of many field &lt;br/&gt;population time series by low frequencies
and the domination of &lt;br/&gt;many environmental fluctuations by low
frequencies. The project &lt;br/&gt;aims to: 1) Develop new computational
mathematical methods for &lt;br/&gt;fitting nonlinear stochastic models to
ecological time series data &lt;br/&gt;in the frequency-domain; 2) Develop
methods of inferring the &lt;br/&gt;spectral &lt;br/&gt;properties of
environmental perturbations that affect empirical &lt;br/&gt;population time
series; 3) Apply the new frequency-domain fitting &lt;br/&gt;techniques to
existing data from population dynamics experiments &lt;br/&gt;on the flour
beetle Tribolium that did not impose environmental &lt;br/&gt;variability, and
to models of these data that are already well &lt;br/&gt;tested in the time-
domain; 4) Design, conduct and analyze experiments&lt;br/&gt; to test the impact
of red-shifted, white, and blue-shifted environment&lt;br/&gt;al variability on
systems exhibiting known population dynamics (by&lt;br/&gt; analogy to light,
variability dominated by low-frequency fluctuations&lt;br/&gt; is called red-
shifted, variability dominated by high-frequency &lt;br/&gt;fluctuations is
called blue-shifted, and variability with all &lt;br/&gt;frequencies equally
represented is called white); and 5) Apply gained &lt;br/&gt;insights to
important ecological systems in the field (by contrast to &lt;br/&gt;those in
the laboratory). &lt;br/&gt;The inherent biological processes that determine the
dynamics of some animal populations can lead them to fluctuate chaotically.
Variations in the external environment (for example, weather or anthropogenic
perturbations) can also lead to unpredictable fluctuations of animal
populations. The interactions between the environmental fluctuations and the
inherent biological processes can produce large, complex and varied effects that
presently defy simple explanations. Small changes in the nature of the
environmental noise affecting a system can sometimes be magnified and
transfigured by the internal system dynamics to produce substantial and diverse
qualitative changes in how a population fluctuates. This project seeks to
develop mathematical and statistical tools to understand and model the
interactions between internally driven fluctuations and externally driven
fluctuations of animal populations. The research focuses on the effects of
changing the frequencies of the dominant environmental fluctuations. Preliminary
modeling predicts, for instance, that the average population size in a
laboratory population of Tribolium flour beetles, widely used as an experimental
model for animal population dynamics, can be increased or decreased as the
dominant environmental-variation frequency changes across a fixed range,
depending on the internal dynamics of the system. Understanding the complex
interaction between environmental noise and internal dynamics is essential for
predicting which effect will occur, and therefore could have implications when
larger populations are desirable (endangered species), or undesirable (pests,
including insect vectors of disease). New experiments on the flour beetle system
will investigate the interactions between environmental variability and internal
dynamics. The knowledge gained from these experiments and the novel analytical
techniques developed in this project may have practical importance in pest
control, conservation, and the control of human disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;