* 0443231
* Implementation of a Self-Evaluation Template and Performance Indicator Report for NSF's Tribal Colleges and Universities Program [TCUP]
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Linda Crasco, Systemic Research, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 03/31/2008
* USD 1,156,959.00

Systemic Research, Inc. is continuing the implementation of a Self-Evaluation
Template and Performance Indicator Report for the National Science Foundation's
(NSF) Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP). Systemic Research is
currently engaged in a 24 month grant (9/15/02 - 8/30/04), "Development and
Implementation of a Self-Evaluation and Assessment System for NSF's Tribal
Colleges and Universities Program" (HRD-0223659) to design, develop, and
implement TCUP Self Evaluation Template (TSET) and TCUP Performance Indicator
Report (TPIR). TPIR presents both TCUP individual institution's and overall
performance reports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the context of TCUP goals and
relevant GPRA requirements, Systemic&lt;br/&gt;Research proposes to continue the
implementation of a TCUP indicator monitoring system, TSET, and relevant reports
for program accountability. Each year Systemic Research will develop and deliver
a customized annual TSET instrument to each TCUP site, host a TSET workshop,
compile collected TSET data to produce TPIR, and administer the TSET web
management system. In the first and second year the project team will conduct
three site visits to gather additional information to publish case stories.
Other activities will include hosting TCUP advisory panel meetings,
presentations at NSF PI/PD meetings, and participating in the relevant national
conferences. Systemic Research will provide technical assistance to all TSET
grantees, and disseminate outcome reports to TCUP sites, NSF, and other
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;