* 0443542
* "Workshop: Cross-Legume Advances Through Genomics (CATG), Sante Fe, NM, December 13-15, 2004"
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Paul Gepts, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jane Silverthorne
* 08/31/2005
* USD 20,000.00

The goal of this workshop is to establish a cross-legume genomics initiative.
This initiative will build on the rapid advances that have been made in the
genomics of the model legumes Medicago truncatula and Lotus japonicus and of
soybean, the major legume of economic interest in the U.S. To bring these
results to bear on other legumes, a more organized effort is necessary to
establish specific goals and milestones.

Legumes are the third largest botanical family and second to cereal in
agricultural importance. They fulfill important roles in human nutrition (as a
source of protein and health-promoting secondary compounds) and ecosystem
function (as a source of nitrogen). Research on legume species can contribute to
an understanding of specialized phenomena such as plant biotic interactions,
flower and fruit (pod) development, crop domestication, and co-evolution between
legume plants and other organisms.

The expected outcomes of the workshop include:

-A report defining the major goals and activities of a cross-legume initiative,
which will be posted at the Legume Information System database
(http://www.comparative-legumes.org/).

-Development of a cohesive legume genomics researcher network focused around on
collaborative projects.

-Strengthened interaction and cooperation that should ultimately generate
genomic information and tools addressing important issues related to legumes,
such as bioinformatics, the biochemical bases of nutritional and health issues,
yield, disease and pest resistance, plant development, and metabolic processes.

-Development of cross-species markers and other genomic tools to help integrate
data in a unified database.