* 0443793
* Dissertation Research: Remaking Indonesian Bodies: The Origins and Implications of the Nutritionalization of Food Intervention in Developing Countries
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Frederick Buttel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2005
* USD 11,989.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant will provide
funds to the doctoral student to collect needed data in order to better enable
completion of the dissertation. The NSF fund will support fieldwork in Indonesia
in order to conduct interviews with key players in food policies in addition to
some archival research. This project will examine the increasing
"nutritionalization" of food policies in Indonesia and its impacts. The research
will utilize ethnographic investigation of science and commodity analysis on
wheat, chicken and rice. "Nutritionalization" refers to the shift of policies
from increasing food production towards enhancing the micronutrient status in
developing countries. This change in focus from hunger to "hidden hunger" has
occurred since the 1990s. Scholarly contribution will be made in three areas.
(1) Firstly, this research addresses the neglected role of nutritional science
in food politics in developing countries. Existing literature on science in food
has focused on green revolution technology. Given its historical importance in
colonial and development practices, not enough attention has been paid to
nutritional science. Rather than taking the ascendance of nutritional science
for granted, however, the present project asks how nutritional science has
attained a privileged status. The researcher will investigate the process in
which nutritionalization has taken place by taking Indonesia as an example. (2)
The detailed investigation of the localized workings of science is the second
contribution of this research. This is contrasted with two dominant perspectives
on science's role in developing countries. The literature was dominated by
simple diffusion perspective. More recently, this diffusionist view has been
critiqued by postmodern critics of development. However, these recent studies
have paradoxically overlooked the contradictions in the increasing techno-
science in developing countries, because these studies have focused on the
larger project of unveiling the hegemony of development discourse. The present
research address what these existing studies have largely remained silent - the
complex history of disciplines and actors. divergent viewpoints. By conducting
in-depth interviews and analysis of history of the scholarly debates, the
present research seeks to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of how
scientization take place in a particular place and time. (3) Third contribution
is to concretely analyze the impacts of nutritionalization. The present study
also works as a useful corrective to science and technology studies which have
explained the impact of scientization in abstract terms. By examining the impact
of nutritionalization on different commodities (chicken, rice and wheat), the
study addresses the material impact of the global circulation of knowledge.
Nutritionalization characterizes many food politics in developing countries. Yet
the paucity of empirical information on such food policies prevents an adequate
assessment of their soundness. The proposed study will in all likelihood be the
first to measure the process and the consequences of latest phase of food
politics in Indonesia, and perhaps in the global South as a whole. Particularly
by examining the material impacts of nutritionalization, this research will help
critique the dominant food policies and suggest the potential of alternatives to
improve the social and ecological sustainability of food systems in developing
countries.