* 0443994
* Head Stabilization in Running
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2008
* Daniel Lieberman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean E. Turnquist
* 03/31/2008
* USD 144,339.00

It has recently been hypothesized that many novel aspects of human anatomy
reflect adaptations for endurance running. But humans, as bipeds, have special
problems counteracting the tendency of the head to pitch forward during running,
especially when the heel strikes the ground (heelstrike). The hypothesis tested
here is that humans have evolved a novel mechanism, partially convergent with
that of quadrupedal running animals, for counteracting the tendency of the head
to pitch during bouncy running gaits at moderate, endurance speeds. Therefore,
the project will study how humans stabilize the head during walking and running,
and compare some of these mechanisms with a quadrupedal mammal.&lt;br/&gt;The
key component of this project is a biomechanical and anatomical model that
incorporates differences between the pendular and mass-spring mechanics of
walking versus running. Although humans have vertically-oriented necks with
restricted ranges of head movement, the muscular connections between the head
and the shoulder are mostly de-coupled in humans, with the primary exception of
the a small portion of the trapezius muscle (the cliedocranial trapezius, CCT).
Humans also have a nuchal ligament, a tendon-like structure absent in great apes
but present in other mammals. The human nuchal ligament connects with the CCT
and inserts on the back of the head. Thus when the CCT contracts, it is
hypothesized to link the mass of the arm with the mass of the head.
Specifically, as the arm and shoulder girdle fall at heelstrike, inertial forces
of the arm may passively extend the head just when it tends to pitch forward.
&lt;br/&gt;Hypotheses derived from the model will be tested experimentally in
humans and sheep during walking and running on a treadmill and force plate at a
variety of speeds and with different tasks while looking at a focal point.
Various sensors will be used to collect data on positions, accelerations and
displacements of the head, shoulder and arms. In addition, electromyography
(EMG) data will be obtained from the major muscles involved in head
extension.&lt;br/&gt;In terms of scientific merit, the results of these
experiments will help improve our understanding of the how humans stabilize
their heads during running, a poorly studied subject. While there has been much
research on the functional morphology of walking, less is known about running.
The results are especially relevant to framing and testing the hypothesis that
endurance running played a key role in human evolution. &lt;br/&gt;In terms of
broader impact, the experiments planned here will be published in anthropology
and biology journals, helping to integrate experimental and evolutionary
research in these related fields, and on the web via the Peabody Museum as part
of a new exhibit on human evolution. The experiments will provide research
opportunities and training for students, as well as for a post-doctoral
position. The results will also be useful to the wider audience of people
interested in running. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;