* 0443470
* RCN: DeepFin will Advance The Phylogeny of "Fishes"
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Guillermo Orti, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy M. Collins
* 12/31/2009
* USD 500,000.00

"Deep Fin" is an emerging international consortium of systematic ichthyologists
and theoreticians with expertise in the analysis of fish biodiversity, seeking
to integrate knowledge of morphology, paleontology, molecular biology, and
bioinformatics. The ultimate interest of the group is to establish the
phylogenetic tree of all fishes, to decipher their evolutionary relationships.
The goals of the RCN are (i) to build on this incipient organization and provide
leadership in fish phylogenetic studies; (ii) to develop cyberinfrastructure, a
portal for fish phylogenetics (www.deepfin.org) with networking tools and
interconnected relational databases; and (iii) to develop didactic material to
foster education on fish biodiversity, fish evolution, and current knowledge on
the phylogenetic relationships of fishes. These goals will be reached by
coordinating activities in three main fronts: group meetings/workshops, website
and database development, and student recruitment, training, and
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This effort bridges disciplines
in both physical and virtual space to promote communication and education
between senior-level systematic ichthyologists, students at all levels, and the
general public. Development of cyberinfrastructure and public databases will
significantly increase information and material sharing throughout the
international community dedicated to phylogenetic studies of fishes. The newly
established phylogenetic framework will enhance scientific understanding in
other disciplines, such as genomics and evolutionary developmental biology.
"Deep Fin" will provide public outreach and education. A student exchange
program will increase communication between institutions and disciplines. Active
recruitment of students for the proposed activities will broaden opportunities
for underrepresented groups in systematic ichthyology. Most importantly, a new
generation of scientists will be broadly trained across disciplinary
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;