* 0443318
* National and International Activities of the U.S. National Committee for Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Aida Sztein, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 03/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

U.S. National Committee for Psychological
Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. National
Committee for Psychology (USNC), which is supported by the National Science
Foundation, reaches out to and coordinates international activities with the
U.S. psychological science community. Committee members represent U.S. interests
in the International Union of Psychological Science (IUPsyS) and, along with the
representatives of other member countries, help shape the agenda and activities
of the unions. U.S participation in the union is important and fulfills a unique
role in the national science infrastructure. Over the course of the next four
years, the USNC will conduct four major activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1
Survey and Workshop on International Collaboration&lt;br/&gt;The USNC will
convene an international workshop in which participants will assess the
barriers, challenges, and opportunities for international collaborative research
in the social and behavioral sciences that involve human subjects and identify
possible creative solutions for facilitating such research. The workshop will
result in a "best practices" guide that will help to enhance international
collaborations among social and behavioral scientists. &lt;br/&gt;2 Conference
on Scientific Access in Psychology&lt;br/&gt;The committee will convene
international scientists to discuss access issues in the conduct of research and
policy regulation in their respective fields. This discussion will also provide
the framework for a pilot project that will eventually lead to a database that
provides information about scientific access for social and behavioral
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;3 Symposium on Social and Behavioral Aspects of Technology
and Information Systems&lt;br/&gt;The national committee will sponsor a
symposium, perhaps at an AAAS meeting, on the social and behavioral aspects of
science and technology information communication. The symposium will feature
scientists who are conducting research on interactive machine learning, human
and machine learning, and human-computer interaction. &lt;br/&gt;4 Collaborative
Workshop on Capacity Building&lt;br/&gt;The USNC will collaborate with the
International Union of Psychology in convening a workshop to enhance and
increase the scientific workforce in psychological sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of these activities as well as the other
activities of the USNC will be broadly disseminated to have the largest impact
possible on the field of psychology. &lt;br/&gt;