* 0443155
* Southeast Geometry Seminar 2005-2007
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2008
* Gilbert Weinstein, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2008
* USD 16,500.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0443155 Principal Investigator: Gilbert A. Weinstein, John E. McCuan,
Vladimir I. Oliker

The Southeast Geometry Seminar is a series of semiannual one-day events
focussing on geometric analysis. These events are hosted in rotation by the
following institutions: * The University of Alabama at Birmingham. * The Georgia
Institute of Technology, * Emory University. One guest speaker is invited for
each event from outside the region, with the remaining talks given by local
participants. The main goals of these short meetings are to present to young
mathematicians, especially graduate students, interesting lectures in geometric
analysis by leading experts in the field, and to foster collaboration among
researchers in this area and related fields.

Geometric analysis is an area of mathematics in which geometric objects, such
as, curves, surfaces, and higher dimensional spaces, are studied with the help
of tools from analysis. It has applications in many areas of science and
technology, for example, in gravitational physics, material science, optics,
electromagnetics and the design of mechanical systems. This series of
conferences will contribute to the infrastructure of the United States by
stimulating development of new research in geometric analysis in the Southeast.
It will help attract and train graduate students and post-docs in this important
area of mathematics.