* 0443827
* Collaborative Proposal: NCR-Circuit Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2005,02/28/2007
* Konstantin Mischaikow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/28/2007
* USD 254,291.00

Using a combinatorial decomposition of a genetic regulatory network into sub-
networks and harnessing the versatility of yeast to encode each of these as a
separate strain, this research will dissect, deconvolve and decipher the
dynamics of nitrogen catabolite repression. Based on detailed measurements using
transcription factor fusion proteins, live cell imaging, and quantitative
measurement of transcription rate, the investigors will develop precise models
of the dynamical behavior of the complex yeast network. Quantitative models will
provide a platform for for the discovery of mathematical theorems, that relate
the structure of genetic circuits to their dynamics and function. This theory in
turn will allow a study of the robustness of the circuit with respect to
parameters and its output. The mathematical theory that will be developed will,
among other things, allow researchers to streamline simulations of large
biological networks.

In recent years there has been a growing awareness of the connections between
biological organisms and engineering systems. There are networks of genes that
control and regulate the behavior of other genes and ultimately all biological
processes. These networks of genes are analogous to electrical circuits and
switches. There has been an expanding willingness and desire to use mathematical
and computational techniques to leverage all existing information regarding the
structure of biological control circuitry to understand the basic rules on which
they are predicated and to acquire the ability to predict their output.
Understanding the dynamics of such networks promises revolutionary changes in
the treatment of human diseases as well as providing insight for the development
of a new generations of robust electronic and digital devices. This project will
have a significant impact on graduate education and on recruitment of
mathematics graduate students for interdisciplinary scientific work as well as
the recruitment of biology, computer science and medical students into the
interdisciplinary and emerging field of biomedical informatics.