* 0443981
* Conference:  2005 3-D Electron Microscopy of Macromolecules Gordon Conference to be Held June 12-17, 2005 in New England
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2006
* Kenneth Downing, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 5,000.00

This grant will partially support the 11th Gordon Research Conference on 3D
Electron Microscopy of Macromolecules. Electron microscopy (EM) occupies a
unique position in the biological armamentarium in that it can address questions
at the molecular and cellular level that are unapproachable by other structural
methods. EM can bridge light microscopic studies at subcellular resolutions with
atomic resolution structures provided by X-ray crystallography and NMR. Recent,
technical breakthroughs enable 3D structures to be determined with ever
increasing accuracy thereby opening the way to the study of macromolecular
systems under defined physiological conditions. The result is new opportunities
for understanding biological mechanisms, interactions between macromolecules and
the principles of biomolecular design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2005 Conference
is organized around the theme of "Whither EM?" - looking forward to envision how
to move from mainly gathering structural information to improving understanding
of biological mechanisms and function. The goal is to create a dynamic forum for
(i) the dissemination of major progress in the field over the past two years and
(ii) identification of new technical and biological challenges which must be
addressed in order for 3D EM to become an essential and ubiquitous tool for
solving cell biological problems. In the spirit of the Gordon Conference, a
program has been chosen that represents the frontier of the field. Speakers have
been chosen based on the importance of their recent contributions and the
potential impact of their particular research approach. Speakers from outside
the field have been selected in the hope of fostering interdisciplinary
approaches and for challenging the field to reach in directions it has so far
not contemplated. Based on past experience, it is confidently expected that the
3D EM Gordon Conference will continue to play a central role in defining new
technical challenges, and in focusing a concerted approach to understanding
fundamental biological questions. The impact of the conference will be the
improved abilities of the participants and their colleagues to carry out their
current projects on subjects of importance in basic biology and medicine, and
the inspiration to develop new directions that take advantage of new knowledge
and capabilites in advancing these fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This series of conferences fosters an integrated view of biological
complexity by bringing together scientists working at different levels of the
structural hierarchy. These meetings serve to define the challenges of the
future and to focus a concerted approach to problems in the preparation, imaging
and interpretation of biological specimens that range in size from the molecular
to the subcellular. The impact of the preceding ten conferences has been such
that the 3D EM community has come to regard this Gordon Conference as an event
of pivotal importance. Thus the intellectual merit of the activity lies in the
sharing of information on latest results and technological developments among
participants. There are very few opportunities for organized training in this
type of work. The 3DEM GRC is the largest gathering of people at the cutting
edge of molecular and three-dimensional microscopy in terms of the number of
attendees and the length of the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The broader impact of the 3DEM GRC is far reaching, as attendees return
to their labs with new insights on how EM can be better used to address a wide
range of problems in molecular and subcellular structure. The Conference
provides one of the primary venues for introducing modern biological electron
microsocpy to new users and disseminating the very latest advances to the
community. It is thus unique in the amount of information shared, the training
it provides to those new to the field, and the intellectual support it provides
to even the most established labs. It is also a forum for presenting and
discussing the insights and implications derived from the basic technology that
it helps to foster.&lt;br/&gt;