* 0443809
* Faculty Workshop to Develop New STS Courses, Clemson University, South Carolina, 2005
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Pamela Mack, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 07/31/2005
* USD 5,000.00

This proposal is to support a semester-long faculty workshop to develop new
courses at Clemson University to meet a new Science, Technology, and Society
general education requirement. The outcome of the project will be 20 new course
proposals, to serve Clemson students starting in 2005, all of whom will be
required to take a course addressing interactions among the natural sciences,
technology, and society. Twenty core faculty and interested additional faculty
members will participate in a seminar that will meet every other week during
fall semester 2004. Five scholars from outside Clemson University will be
invited to meet with the seminar and also give public lectures. In other seminar
meetings participants will discuss readings providing an overview of the field
of Science, Technology, and Society. The intellectual merit of the proposed
project comes from scholarly interaction of the faculty who will be teaching STS
courses with a rigorous orientation to the field. Faculty from departments all
across campus will participate, so the seminar itself will be an exciting
interdisciplinary dialog. This interaction will improve the intellectual quality
of the STS courses these faculty offer to Clemson students starting in the fall
of 2005. As a result of developing new courses on the Clemson University campus,
the most important broader impact of this project will come through the students
who take the courses developed by the faculty who participate. The students in
these new courses will learn to ask informed questions and think critically
about how science and technology interact with society. They will be better
citizens and better able to make thoughtful choices about the use of science and
technology in their professions and their lives.