* 0443549
* Collaborative Research:    Modeling the Growth and Adhesion of Auricular Chondrocytes Under Controlled Flow Conditions
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Doreen Rosenstrauch, Texas Heart Institute
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 04/30/2009
* USD 253,789.00

This is a collaborative, interdisciplinary proposal in the area of Mathematical
Biology. The main goal is to develop mathematical models and numerical methods
to study diffusion-mediated and stress-induced growth and adhesion of ear
cartilage cells (auricular chondrocytes) in a novel environment: seeded on an
artificial surface exposed to the pulsatile flow conditions. Chondrocytes are
typically studied in the environments where they normally reside such as the
joints in hips, intervertebral disks or the ear. It is not known how auricular
chondrocytes grow, adhere or slough-off from artificial surfaces immersed a
fluid. By developing mathematical models, numerical simulations and experimental
procedures the investigators propose to design a cell-fluid-structure
interaction algorithm that would couple chondrocytes growth with the novel
environmental conditions. The proposed mathematical models are based on the
study of the coupling between the three-phase flow equations describing ear
cartilage growth, a probabilistic model for cell adhesion dynamics, and a
numerical model for particle-fluid interaction. Experimental validation will be
performed using the flow loop assembled by the investigators at the Texas Heart
Institute. Results from the basic research proposed by the PIs will shed light
on the feasibility of using genetically engineered auricular chondrocytes as a
long-lasting biocompatible coating for vascular devices.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This is an interdisciplinary proposal combining mathematical
modeling, engineering, and biology. The goal is to study the behavior of
genetically engineered ear cartilage cells as linings for artificial blood
vessels and stents used to repair weakened and blocked arteries. Vessel blockage
and rupture are the underlying cause of most heart attacks and strokes which are
the leading causes of death in America. Cartilage cells might provide a long-
lasting and biocompatible surface lining which could minimize the incidence of
inflammation, immune reactions, and restenosis following repair and stenting of
diseased blood vessels. This collaborative study utilizes sophisticated
mathematical tools, scientific computing techniques, genetic engineering, high
resolution ultrasound, and cell biology methods to target the problem of
treating vascular disease with a high potential impact for the national health.