* 0443526
* RCN:  Drought Impacts on Regional Ecosystems Network (DIREnet): Coordinating Studies on Southwest Forests &amp; Woodlands.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2012
* Neil Cobb, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 03/31/2012
* USD 497,766.00

The Drought Impacts on Regional Ecosystems Network (DIREnet) will promote the
coordination and synthesis of ecological research on drought effects and the
potential role of global climate change. A severe regional drought in the last
nine years has rapidly and dramatically altered Southwest forest and woodland
ecosystems. DIREnet will promote and integrate research needed to address key
questions that can only be addressed with a regional network. DIREnet will bring
researchers and land managers together to assess the impacts of the drought
through conferences that will foster new research and synthesize existing
research. A student researcher exchange program will promote novel research
opportunities, and facilitate technology transfer. A sophisticated online forum
(Southwest Ecological Research Forum [SERF]) will serve as a globally accessible
data clearinghouse, providing advanced analysis and visualization and a forum
for scientific discussion and communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
combination, these efforts will greatly promote our understanding of how
droughts impact major ecosystems, including altered fire regimes and habitat
degradation, and how climate change scenarios may alter drought dynamics in the
future. Outreach to Native Americans and the general public will help improve
natural resource use planning and policy development. DIREnet will provide a
model for network technologies that are needed to bring together
interdisciplinary, geographically-distributed scientific communities in a common
research effort focused on addressing broad research issues.&lt;br/&gt;