* 0443048
* SGER:     Statistics of Extremes, with Applications in Financial Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Zhengjun Zhang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2005
* USD 38,574.00

The proposal pursues a series of developments of new test statistics for tail
independence and of new measures for tail dependence. Particularly, the
investigator studies extreme correlation coefficient, tail dependence measures,
gamma test statistics. These are related to the study of statistics of
multivariate extremes. In financial applications, the proposal will also specify
new models for asset pricing and extreme co-movements for market data, and
develop new portfolio evaluation tools more sensitive to these co-movements. A
new measure for extreme co-movement is introduced. The proposal includes the
development of statistical estimation methods for max-stable processes.
Procedures of how to calculate portfolio risk measures are also introduced using
combined Markov process and max-stable process models.

As all definitions used for extremal dependence depend on some limit procedures
and often concern statistical testing for parameters at the edge of a specific
parametric space, great care has to be taken to obtain tests with sufficient
power. The proposal is exactly aiming at finding a solution for this. The
investigator will carefully compare and contrast new approaches with existing
ones using simulated as well as real data. The real data will come from areas as
diverse as insurance, finance, telecommunications, climatology, seismology,
medicine, etc. Throughout applications in diverse fields (like above), extreme
risks play an important scientific, societal as well as (possibly) political
role. The dissemination of new statistical tools leading to a better
understanding of the occurrence of joint extremes is of great importance. This
can be very well achieved at the level of new graduate courses, publications in
journals aimed at a broaden audience and in discussion with scientists from
other fields.