* 0443831
* SGER: Exploration of a new apporach to natural language understanding within a controlled application area
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2005
* Gregg Vanderheiden, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2005
* USD 123,960.00

There is a general vision that in the future, natural language interfaces will
provide access to information and services with the simplicity and flexibility
required for virtually anyone to participate, eliminating both intellectual and
physical barriers, and impacting the way products interface with consumers as
well as creating whole new product types. In this project, the PI will test a
promising new, innovative natural language processing approach called tridbit
technology that may provide a practical way for humans to talk to computers and
other devices. Tridbit technology uses unique knowledge structures (called
tridbits) and rules for discriminating and combining different types of
information to represent the meaning of natural language. The PI's goal is to
test whether tridbit technology will hold up in more demanding and realistic
environments than previously explored. Various aspects of an existing prototype
system will be enhanced and evaluated, including performance in subject areas
with varying levels of familiarity and handling of ambiguity and contradictions.
Grounding of concepts and constructing natural language to express arbitrary
knowledge will also be explored. The technology will be applied to a simulated
household environment to control devices such as TVs, VCRs and alarm clocks,
with the goal of enabling people to say in their own words what they want a
device to do. The PI hopes to demonstrate that natural language interfaces are
feasible within a household environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The technology being tested identifies key constraints within the representation
of meaning, potentially simplifying many aspects of the natural language
understanding problem. A departure from current paradigm, its underlying
theories speak to the way information is structured. If validated, it will
enhance our understanding of how natural language works, and could influence a
wide range of disciplines. A positive outcome to this project could have
tremendous impact for people with physical or cognitive disabilities that
prevent them from using standard device controls, and would also prove to
manufacturers that they need to prepare for these interfaces of the future.