* 0443293
* International Travel: European Social Cognition Conference, Lisbon, Fall 2004
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Jeffrey Sherman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 07/31/2005
* USD 4,000.00

The principal investigator will attend the sixth meeting of the European Social
Cognition Network in Lisbon, Portugal to be held from September 8-11, 2004. The
meeting is sponsored by the European Science Foundation. The primary objective
of the trip will be to foster greater international interaction in the
development and promulgation of social cognition research and to facilitate
integration of rapid progress made by American and European scholars who study
social-cognitive processes. The PI will make a featured presentation at the
meeting and will interact in formal and informal ways with many of the
approximately 80 attendees at the meeting. A special goal will be to offer
constructive feedback and encouragement to young scientists in attendance at the
meeting. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These objectives have clear intellectual merit,
as they pertain to the integration, consolidation, and stimulation of high-
quality research on a wide variety of issues in social cognition, a field that
is central to social psychology more generally. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the proposed activity will likely be considerable and will
surely extend beyond the meeting itself. Particularly with respect to the goal
of enhancing international contact and interaction and encouraging the
development of young scholars, conferences such as this one can have a major
impact on scientific progress.