* 0443171
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: East African Middle Stone Age Projectile Technology and Modern Human Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Sally McBrearty, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 12/31/2006
* USD 11,982.00

Under the supervision of Dr. McBrearty, Veronica Waweru will seek archaeological
markers of modern human behavior at the three Kenyan Middle Stone Age (MSA)
sites of Cartwright's Site, Prospect Farm, and Prolonged Drift. Determining the
age and technological sophistication of the MSA artifacts, and the sources of
stone raw material from which they are made, will be the primary goals of the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is at present a major debate in
anthropology as to whether the earliest members of Homo sapiens in Africa were
behaviorally modern. The MSA is significant in this argument because at other
African sites it has been shown to contain evidence of sophisticated behaviors,
including symbolism, self-adornment, trade networks, and regional
differentiation in technology. Genetic and fossil evidence indicates that our
species appeared in Africa between 300 ka and 160 ka and the earliest dates for
MSA technology indicates that it appeared in the same time interval. A
potassium-argon (K/Ar) date of 440 ka for Cartwright's Site, published in 1965
when the method was still in its infancy, far exceeds estimates obtained
elsewhere. This project will employ the more accurate and precise 40Ar/39Ar
method to establish the age of the site, and thus the time depth of the
MSA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological complexity, including the use of
projectile weaponry, is an important attribute of modern human behavior. The
series of technical steps involved in the manufacture and use of the bow and
arrow call for complex motor and cognitive skills, and the use of projectile
weapons confers the advantage of "death at a distance," facilitating hunting
without close confrontation with the quarry. Stone points occur at all three MSA
sites that will be examined in this study, but they may have been used to arm
short stabbing spears (assegais), long throwing spears (javelins), or arrows. To
clarify this issue, the points' aerodynamic properties and traces of damage and
use-wear will be examined and compared with a replicated assemblage of stone
points with a known history of experimental use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exchange
networks are an aspect of complex behaviour that may have facilitated
flexibility in early modern human subsistence strategies. Among contemporary
foraging peoples, social relationships with distant trading partners are an
important 'insurance policy' during times of local resource failure. This
investigation will seek information on MSA exchange networks through analysis of
obsidian used in artifact manufacture. The geochemical composition of a sample
of obsidian artifacts will be determined through electron microprobe analysis,
and compared with a database of the geochemical make-up of obsidian flows in
East Africa. This data will serve to determine the sources of the different
types of obsidian, the distances they have been traded or transported, and thus
the geographic reach of the social networks of the MSA site occupants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue to foster institutional co-
operation by providing opportunities for regional and international students to
learn practical fieldwork skills. In the 2003 season, two Ugandan students
attached to the British Institute in Eastern Africa were part of the excavation
team at Cartwright's site. During the proposed season, one undergraduate geology
student in the employ of the National Museum of Kenya (NMK) and a number of
local excavators will participate in field work. The project will also train
both employed and volunteer students from the University of Nairobi in basic
analytical skills at the NMK archaeology laboratory. Results from this study
will be disseminated in scientific journals and the University of Connecticut
website and will contribute to the body of knowledge regarding the origin and
evolution of behavioral complexity in our species. &lt;br/&gt;