* 0443316
* Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art Scanning Probe Microscope for Research and Teaching in the Chemical Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Vicki Grassian, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2008
* USD 180,002.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities -
Multiuser Instrument Acquisition (CRIF-MU) Program, the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Iowa will purchase a scanning probe microscope (SPM) with
the following capabilities: atomic force and scanning tunneling microscopy (AFM
and STM); magnetic force microscopy; electrochemistry capabilities; liquid
attachment for controlled environments; optical microscope attachment;
patterning/molecular attachment; glove box attachment; temperature control; and
quantitative AFM phase imaging. The SPM will enable the following projects: a)
the synthesis of bottlebrush polymers; b) assembly of monolayers on silicon and
their applications in nanotechnology; c) in situ studies of surface reactions of
atmospheric and environmental relevance; d) studies of hierarchical structures
of nanocrystalline zeolites; e) characterization of nanoelectrode structures;
and f) investigation of cellular function at single
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scanning probe microscope (SPM) enables
researchers to image atoms directly. The interdisciplinary studies that will be
carried out using this instrument will have an impact in materials sciences,
nanotechnology and environmental chemistry. In addition, a significant number of
graduate and undergraduate students will gain hands-on experience with this
state-of-the-art instrumentation since it will be used in both a laboratory
course and in research. Finally, external users from regional universities and
colleges will have access through a weekend program. &lt;br/&gt;