* 0443998
* Attention and the Representation of Scenes and Objects
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Robert Gordon, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Vincent R. Brown
* 07/31/2009
* USD 149,583.00

Imagine driving down a busy street full of pedestrians, other cars, traffic
signs and signals, and potential road hazards. In order to drive safely down
this street, one must be continuously aware of all of these stimuli, ready to
react to any changes. Dealing with this complexity would be relatively
straightforward if one were able to maintain a mental representation of all of
this information at once. Recent evidence, however, suggests that mental
representations of the world in the "mind's eye" are not nearly as detailed as
the world itself. For example, people routinely fail to notice large changes in
their surroundings, leading some to suggest that much of the visual environment
is not sustained in the mind's eye. Why do we keep some aspects of our
surroundings in mind and not others? The key appears to lie in the "focus" of
the mind's eye called visual attention: those aspects of our surroundings that
we give particular attention to are more likely to be sustained in mind. To
understand the sustained representation of the world in the mind, therefore, it
is necessary to examine the factors that influence focus of the mind's
eye.&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Robert
Gordon will examine how the mind's eye develops and sustains meaningful scenes
and objects within the mind. Dr. Gordon combines three approaches that are
sensitive to the very earliest moments of perception and argues that previous
studies have not used such approaches. Participants in Dr. Gordon's experiments
view full-color scenes depicting familiar environments. In some experiments, the
distribution of their attention will be assessed in order to identify the
factors that determine where people pay attention while viewing meaningful
scenes. In other experiments, the consequences of attentional selection for the
representation of such scenes will be investigated. Together, the results of the
experiments will help reveal the processes that allow people to perceive and
comprehend visual information. Broader impacts include implications for the
design of displays in which users must rapidly extract visual information.
Moreover, the project will integrate research and educational goals by
supporting graduate and undergraduate students who contribute to the
research.&lt;br/&gt;