* 0443928
* CAREER: Lattice models of martensitic phase transitions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Anna Vainchtein, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

A characteristic feature of materials undergoing martensitic
phase&lt;br/&gt;transitions is hysteresis they exhibit in response to cyclic
loading.&lt;br/&gt;The process involves formation and evolution of finely
layered&lt;br/&gt;microstructures which depend in a crucial way on the
orientation and&lt;br/&gt;history of the loading. The origin of energy
dissipation, phase nucleation and kinetics of phase boundaries are important
open problems in modeling of martensites and other active materials. This
research program seeks to advance the understanding of these phenomena from the
perspective of mesoscopic and microscopic frameworks. It will focus on a series
of prototypical lattice models of increasing complexity with a goal of capturing
the essential features of phase nucleation, interface kinetics and the
associated hysteresis. The models have two main ingredients: (i) nonconvex
interactions between nearest neighbors allowing for existence of two or more
stable homogeneous states and (ii) the long-range interactions. Among the
outcomes of this research will be derivation of an interface kinetic law and
prediction of nucleated microstructural patterns. These results will be compared
to experimental observations. In particular, the proposed work will relate the
macroscopic observations such as the size and other features of a hysteresis
loop to the microscopic characteristics of the
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this research will be important for
emerging civil, aerospace and industrial applications which require significant
passive&lt;br/&gt;damping exhibited by martensites. These include damage and
vibration&lt;br/&gt;control in composite structures and attenuation of
earthquake and wind-induced vibrations in buildings and bridges. The work will
impact many other scientific areas where similar discrete systems are
encountered, including dislocation theory, fracture mechanics, biology, image
recognition and numerical analysis. The broader impact of this program will be
also achieved through training of graduate and undergraduate students in an
interdisciplinary research program and a variety of educational and outreach
activities. These include developing new courses, mentoring women graduate
students and running programs for middle and high school students. These
activities will promote mathematics and science in general as an interesting
intellectual pursuit and a prospective career path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;