* 0443939
* Applications of Probability Measures on the Self-Motion Manifold of Deformable Fragments in Proteins
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* R. James Milgram, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 03/31/2010
* USD 1,124,529.00

X-ray crystallography remains the workhorse of experimental techniques to obtain
the 3-D structures of proteins. Deformable fragments in the protein, ranging in
length from 5 to 20 amino-acids, often lead to disorder in the crystal, which
makes interpretation of the electron density map difficult. At the same time,
such mobile fragments can be critical to a protein's ability to bind to other
molecules and thus achieve its function. This project will develop a new
mathematical model for a redundant, closed, protein-like kinematic chain, and
use techniques from algebraic geometry and differential topology, in particular
Morse Theory, and probabilistic roadmap techniques from robotics to determine
the structure of its configuration space (the self-motion manifold). Precise
knowledge of the structure can be exploited to develop efficient algorithms
capable of defining a probability distribution over all configurations, derived
from the electron density map and an energetic model of the molecule. The
objective of the program is to enable crystallographers to retrieve and study
important, dynamic properties of the molecule, and furthermore to develop new
algorithms for protein model building in areas of weak or ambiguous electron
density. In a multimodal disordered case, the goal will be to identify all
substates, along with their probabilities, and to reconstruct energetically
plausible conformational pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are the worker
molecules that carry out life's essential processes. A protein's function is
largely dictated by its folded, three-dimensional structure. X-ray
crystallography is the most widely used experimental technique to obtain a
protein's 3-D structure. Flexible fragments in the protein, vital for performing
its function, are often poorly resolved in the data, and lead to structural
models with gaps. This project will investigate the mathematical structure of
the set of configurations of gap-closing fragments, and use these insights
together with experimental data and energy models to associate a likelihood with
each configuration. Algorithms will be developed to study important, dynamic
properties of proteins, and to aid protein structure determination from
experimental data. The research and developments described in this proposal will
have a direct impact on medical research. Improved 3-D models will lead to a
better understanding of a protein's function. An ability to infer the most
likely configurations of a fragment, that is known to be of functional
significance, may enhance structure-based drug design capabilities. It will
furthermore contribute substantially to the Protein Structure Initiative's (PSI)
broader mission of developing methods for automating crystallographic analysis.
The program is a joint effort of the Department of Mathematics and the Computer
Science Department at Stanford University, and the Joint Center for Structural
Genomics (an NIGMS funded PSI center) at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation
Laboratory. The project will support the training of PhD level students at
Stanford University. Computer software based on the research will be made
available to the structural biology community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;