* 0443249
* "SGER: Development of Tools for High Throughput RNA Interference in Plants."
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Gregory Hannon, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Jane Silverthorne
* 02/28/2006
* USD 200,000.00

As the scientific community progresses toward the completion of genome
sequences, the availability of genome-scale tools for investigating gene
function becomes critical. Of course, conventional mutagenesis and genetics will
always be a mainstay of such efforts; however, more directed tools that
selectively attack the expression of genes in a targeted fashion would
accelerate reverse genetic approaches to understanding the function of genes and
gene families. With the discovery of RNA interference (RNAi), the design of such
tools has become possible, and genome-scale projects are already well underway
in worm, Drosophila and human systems.

In this project, we will lay the groundwork for rapid generation of genome-scale
resources for trigging post-transcriptional gene silencing of plant genes.
Initially, we will use tobacco and Arabidopsis and once we validate our approach
in these models, we will move on toward application of these technologies in
rice. Flexible vectors will be developed that incorporate short and long hairpin
RNAs and their efficacy will be tested in plant cell cultures and intact plants.
The optimized vectors will be made available as well as silenced plants. The
long-term goal is to use these vectors to develop genome scale RNAi libraries
for plants in a rapid and cost-effective way.

This work is appropriate for support through a Small Grant for Exploratory
Research for several reasons. Not only does it represent preliminary work on a
risky and untested idea but success in this venture would also be transforming
for the plant community in that it would provide the basis for building new and
widely applicable tools. Furthermore, success would likely provide a new
technology that would catalyze rapid advances in a broad spectrum of areas in
plant biology.

Project outcomes Vectors will be distributed through Open Biosystems
(www.openbiosystems.com) and plant materials will be available from Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory.