* 0443901
* Collaborative Proposal: NCR-Circuit Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Terrance Cooper, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 04/30/2009
* USD 245,748.00

Using a combinatorial decomposition of a genetic regulatory network into sub-
networks and harnessing the versatility of yeast to encode each of these as a
separate strain, this research will dissect, deconvolve and decipher the
dynamics of nitrogen catabolite repression. Based on detailed measurements using
transcription factor fusion proteins, live cell imaging, and quantitative
measurement of transcription rate, the investigors will develop precise models
of the dynamical behavior of the complex yeast network. Quantitative models will
provide a platform for for the discovery of mathematical theorems, that relate
the structure of genetic circuits to their dynamics and function. This theory in
turn will allow a study of the robustness of the circuit with respect to
parameters and its output. The mathematical theory that will be developed will,
among other things, allow researchers to streamline simulations of large
biological networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years there has been a
growing awareness of the connections between biological organisms and
engineering systems. There are networks of genes that control and regulate the
behavior of other genes and ultimately all biological processes. These networks
of genes are analogous to electrical circuits and switches. There has been an
expanding willingness and desire to use mathematical and computational
techniques to leverage all existing information regarding the structure of
biological control circuitry to understand the basic rules on which they are
predicated and to acquire the ability to predict their output. Understanding the
dynamics of such networks promises revolutionary changes in the treatment of
human diseases as well as providing insight for the development of a new
generations of robust electronic and digital devices. This project will have a
significant impact on graduate education and on recruitment of mathematics
graduate students for interdisciplinary scientific work as well as the
recruitment of biology, computer science and medical students into the
interdisciplinary and emerging field of biomedical informatics.