* 0443843
* Ensemble Density Analysis for Stochastic Models of Cardiac Excitation-Contraction Coupling
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Mohsin Jafri, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/28/2011
* USD 2,000,000.00

Many cellular processes are governed by discrete molecular events that are
intrinsically stochastic, e.g., single channel gating, the binding and unbinding
of ligand and receptor, and the collective activity of intracellular calcium
channels giving rise to "calcium sparks." These subcellular phenomena are
typically modeled using Monte Carlo simulation methods. The proposed work begins
with the observation that realistic models of cardiac myocytes are required to
strategically investigate the generation of cardiac arrhythmias and to develop
medical device or drug interventions that can prevent this pathophysiology.
Unfortunately, widely used deterministic cardiac myocyte models do not reproduce
certain cellular phenomenon in which discrete molecular events and local
signaling within subcellular compartments play an essential role. An important
example is pathological excitation-contraction (EC) coupling during heart
failure that is due in part to aberrant local signaling between small numbers of
voltage-gated calcium channels and ryanodine receptors co-localized at the same
dyadic cleft, so-called "stochastic functional units" (SFUs). Another example is
the phenomenon of "graded release" where the amount of calcium released by
internal stores is a gradually increasing function of calcium entry through
voltage-gated calcium channels. In these cases deterministic models provide only
limited mechanistic insight and stochastic cellular models only include a
compact representation of subcellular events that are required to assist
experimental design and interpretation. Moreover, Monte Carlo simulations of
SFUs are computationally expensive and difficult to apply at the cellular scale.
To address those issues, the development of an "ensemble density" approach is
proposed where coupled Fokker-Planck-like equations are used to accurately
represent SFU activity and the resulting independent probability density of
subsarcolemmal calcium concentrations in mathematical models of normal and
pathophysiological EC coupling in cardiac myocytes. The ensemble density method
will be validated using traditional Monte Carlo techniques and the computational
advantage of the method explored. A hierarchy of models will be developed and
tested in the context of a joint experimental/theoretical investigation of the
stochastic aspects of normal and pathological EC coupling in cardiac myocytes.

To summarize, many cellular processes are involved in single events that occur
with a certain probability. These seemingly random events combined determine
cellular function. The proposed research will develop methods and
representations for the cardiac muscle cell incorporating discrete random events
in efficient cellular models. The modeling efforts will be guided and confirmed
by experimental work. The development of computationally efficient whole cell
models of cardiac myocytes is a step toward realistic tissue and organ level
models of the heart.