* 0443903
* Flow-Induced Platelet Responses to Pathophysiological Shear Stress
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Greg Burgreen, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 04/30/2009
* USD 590,630.00

The investigators proposes to study platelet responses to high shear stresses
via coordinated, mechanistic studies involving in vitro bioengineering
experiments combined with biocomputational simulations. One of the main
innovations of the project is that pathophysiologically relevant shear exposure
times and magnitudes will be studied, in contrast to the vast majority of prior
platelet function studies that employed time exposures on the order of seconds
to minutes. A microfabricated experimental platform is to be developed to
investigate blood damage in dynamic fluidflowing environments with mechanical
stresses of magnitude and duration typical of cardiovascular devices and
occlusive arterial disease. Another innovation of this project is the use of
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) in conjunction with experiments to jointly
provide complete fluid dynamic information for blood damage analysis. This
reliance upon CFD to provide such vital information is unique among platelet
function studies performed to date. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomedical devices are
frequently employed to repair or replace various elements of the cardiovascular
system. Prosthetic heart valves, vascular grafts, circulatory assist devices,
and hemodialysis systems are in wide clinical use, often saving or extending the
lives of patients with otherwise hopeless medical conditions. This project will
provide a deeper understanding of the interactions of blood flow with the
dynamics of blood damage may yield new insights into the mechanisms of blood
damage and, thus, enable further progress in the design, evaluation, and
improvement of cardiovascular devices as well as provide direction for new
preventative clinical therapies. The outcomes of this project will impact FDA
(U.S. Food and Drug Administration) submission packages by providing guidelines
and validated models of blood damage to better evaluate the efficacy and
performance of future devices. In addition, the project has a substantive
educational impact through the involvement of undergraduate and graduate
students with this research. The biomechanics of blood damage will be taught in
bioengineering classroom settings, and graduate students will experience cross-
disciplinary training via laboratory visits between the computational and
experimental facilities involved in this project.&lt;br/&gt;