* 0443999
* Enabling a Giant Segmented Mirror Telescope for the United States Astronomical Community
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2005,06/30/2012
* William Smith, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeffrey R. Pier
* 06/30/2012
* USD 18,000,000.00

AST 044399&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design and
development of a Giant Segmented Mirror Telescope is the highest ranked ground-
based initiative in the 2000 astronomy and astrophysics Decadal Survey. The GSMT
is envisioned to be a public/private partnership requiring approximately equal
contributions from both funding sources for design, construction and operation.
Funds from this award will further the GSMT effort in the following
areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) The design and development phase for a 30-meter
diameter segmented-mirror, optical/infrared telescope, the Thirty Meter
Telescope (TMT); &lt;br/&gt;(2) The design and development phase another
alternative extremely large telescope (ELT) concept, such as the 22-meter Giant
Magellan Telescope (GMT), to the point where its performance, cost and risk can
be assessed; &lt;br/&gt;(3) Technology development common to both ELT concepts;
&lt;br/&gt;(4) Conceptual designs for two instruments: one for TMT and one for
the alternative ELT concept; &lt;br/&gt;(5) Support for an education and public
outreach program; and &lt;br/&gt;(6) Support for a Theory Challenge program
aimed at engaging theorists in shaping the design of ELTs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first of these investments will leverage $35M in non-
federal funding (donated by the Moore Foundation to the California Institute of
Technology and the University of California), plus funds requested by the
Association of Canadian Universities for Research in Astronomy from the Canadian
Foundation for Innovation. This investment will enable the Association of
Universities for Research in Astronomy to participate on behalf of the U.S.
community in a partnership to advance the design to a fully-costed preliminary
design by 2008. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second major investment will support a
design study for an alternate technical approach that will be funded as a
competitive subaward. At this time, the GMT is the only competitive alternative
design concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The power of Extremely Large Telescopes to
address questions that excite the imagination of the public, as well as students
and teachers, provides a natural focus for a vigorous program of science
education and public outreach activities. Activities to be supported by this
award emphasize national education needs in science, technology, engineering and
math (STEM), and build on extant activities within AURA and the partnering
institutions in the TMT project. &lt;br/&gt;