* 0443858
* RUI: The Fate of Lipid Rafts in Apoptotic Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Patrick Williamson, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 06/30/2009
* USD 435,000.00

In multicellular organisms, cells are born by the process of cell division, and
die by the process of apoptosis. Apoptotic cells are recognized and engulfed by
neighboring cells or professional phagocytes such as macrophages. The mechanism
of recognition is complex and poorly understood, but depends on the
rearrangement of the phospholipids that make up the two leaflets of the plasma
membrane. Lipid rearrangement induces membrane proteins to join the recognition
process, but the mechanism of this induction is not understood. Prior to
rearrangement, some phospholipids and cholesterol in the outer leaflet of the
plasma membrane aggregate into domains, or rafts, which segregate from the rest
of the membrane some, but not all, of the proteins that cooperate in the
recognition of apoptotic cells. The rearrangement of lipids in apoptotic cells
may result in the disappearance of these rafts, creating new contacts between
receptors and both lipids and other proteins; disruption of rafts is thus a
potential mechanism for activating and combining recognition proteins.
Determining whether lipid rearrangement disrupts rafts requires analyzing the
status of rafts in small subpopulations of still living cells. Dr. Williamson
and his students will combine a biophysical approach for detecting rafts
(measuring the correlation between fluorescence anisotropy and fluorescence
intensity) with flow cytometric analysis of cell subpopulations to determine
whether lipid rafts are disrupted during apoptosis.

The research in this project will be entirely integrated into an undergraduate
teaching environment. Most of the experiments will be carried out by
undergraduates, including seniors as part of a capstone research experience, and
freshmen/sophomores as an introduction to laboratory research, all under the
direct supervision of the Principal Investigator. In addition, the laboratory
has repeatedly hosted middle and high school science teachers with no previous
exposure to research, for whom this project would be an introduction to the
practice of science. The project proposes to develop a (reversible) modification
of the mostly widely distributed benchtop clinical cytometer as a platform for
testing living cells for the presence of lipid rafts.

