* 0443372
* Model Institutions of Excellence Dissemination Activities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Jamie Merisotis, Institute for Higher Education Policy
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 12/31/2006
* USD 412,348.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Model Institutions for Excellence (MIE)
program was conceived in 1992 at the instigation of NSF Director Walter Massey.
At the time, several federal agencies expressed interest in being partners, but
only NASA eventually chose to participate in MIE. An across-directorate task
force designed the program. The solicitation described the goals of MIE as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Provide an opportunity to define methods for
improving minority institutions in SEM education and undergraduate
research;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Target a small number of minority institutions
poised to make a substantial contribution to the goal of increasing the number
of minorities who earn SEM baccalaureate degrees and then enroll in graduate SEM
programs or enter SEM careers; produce minority institutions that will serve as
models for the successful recruitment, education and production of quality-
trained SEM baccalaureate degree recipients; and,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Allow the
Foundation to more effectively exercise its statutory authority "to undertake or
support a comprehensive science and engineering program to increase the
participation of minorities in science and engineering "&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The program was organized into three phases: Phase I: Develop the
Models (5 years); Phase II: Implement the Models (3 years); Phase III:
Institutionalization and Dissemination of Models (3 years). The Dissemination
phase began during FY04; each NSF funded site has received its remaining and
final three-year dissemination phase grant commitments, and some have begun to
disseminate data and best practices. However, this overall process was seen to
be uneven at best, and elemental and disjointed at worst. New (February 2004)
Program Director David Temple determined that a comprehensive and jointly
coordinated MIE dissemination effort was needed, one that would affirm and
reveal the worth and value of the findings and products of this decade-long
demonstration initiative, as well as its challenges, and inferences for the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance for Equity in Higher Education (AEHE
or the Alliance)-a District of Columbia based coalition comprised of the
American Indian Higher Education Consortium (AIHEC), the Hispanic Association of
Colleges and Universities (HACU), and the National Association for Equal
Opportunity in Higher Education (NAFEO)-has submitted an unsolicited proposal to
the National Science Foundation (in concurrence and coordination with, and on
behalf of, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration) for the
dissemination of models under the Model Institutions of Excellence (MIE)
program. The proposal has been submitted by AEHE's parent organization, the
Institute for Higher Education Policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;