* 0443861
* CAREER:SYSTEMS FOR EFFECTIVE VISUALIZATION IN EDUCATION AND ENGINEERING
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2010
* Grigori Humphreys, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 05/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-performance computing has
traditionally been the realm of lengthy, batch-oriented computations. As
consumer technology has become more robust and feature-rich, clusters of
commodity computers have emerged as a popular alternative to traditional
monolithic supercomputers. Because these computers can easily be augmented with
inexpensive consumer graphics processor units (GPUs), researchers have begun to
investigate their use for high-performance interactive applications such as
visualization. The computational power of a commodity GPU is increasing much
faster than Moore's Law, and this, along with the GPU's inherent parallel
vector-processing architecture, is making it an attractive platform for high
performance general purpose computing. Unfortunately, clusters of graphics-
enabled workstations have historically been underutilized because of their
centralized nature; scientists must leave their normal work environment to
access a dedicated "visualization center" containing a graphics-enabled cluster
and exotic display and input devices. The investigator is solving this problem
by enabling flexible remote access to these scalable, inexpensive clusters of
commodity PCs. The ultimate vision is that a collection of centralized, easily
maintainable and upgradeable, and inexpensive computers could serve the
interactive, high-performance graphics and computation needs of an entire group,
building, university, or even city. The research involves the design of
appropriate visualization delivery infrastructure, as well as compelling multi-
user, remotely accessible applications in the areas of engineering and
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging his existing cluster-rendering
infrastructure, the investigator is exploring two novel research directions.
First, he is designing a remotely accessible graphics system that adapts to the
capabilities of the target display. Using compressed video and streaming
graphics API filters, he is creating technology to allow a single application to
run effectively on displays with differing characteristics, such as resolution,
color depth, brightness and form factor. This application need not be aware of
the changing characteristics of the display; in fact a running application can
be retargeted to a different display without restarting it. Secondly, he is
creating the first ever network-aware graphics system, so that the rendering
infrastructure and even the graphics architecture itself can adapt to the
capabilities of the underlying network. For example, dynamic configuration of
compression codecs will provide a consistent user experience as network
bandwidth changes. To validate these ideas, the investigator will deploy a new
visualization suite for mathematics education. Working closely with education
researchers at the University of Virginia, he will design and field test new
uses for visualization in the teaching of secondary mathematics. The
availability of the remote delivery mechanism makes this an especially cost-
effective way to bring judiciously applied high-performance 3D graphics into the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;