* 0443217
* Collaborative Research: Defining the Structural Basis of the Optical Properties of Chromophoric Dissolved Organic Matter
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Elizabeth Kujawinski, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2007
* USD 150,201.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0443263&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chromophoric
dissolved organic matter (CDOM) is a complex organic material found ubiquitously
in aquatic systems where it plays a central role, not only through its impact on
the aquatic light field and on the remote sensing of phytoplankton biomass by
satellite ocean color sensors, but also through its photochemical reactions.
Although the optical absorption and emission properties of CDOM have been known
and studied extensively for over fifty years, no satisfactory explanation has
yet been provided that can account for the long-wavelength absorption and
emission behavior of these materials. Researchers at the University of Maryland
and at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution have teamed up to propose that this
behavior results from intramolecular charge transfer interactions between
hydroxy-aromatic donors and quinoid acceptors formed by the partial oxidation of
soluble lignin precursors. They will test this hypothesis by combining
wavelength-selective monochromatic (laser) and polychromatic photobleaching
studies with ultrahigh resolution electrospray ionization mass spectrometry to
acquire structural information on the species that are specifically destroyed or
produced by the wavelength-selective irradiations. Absorption and fluorescence
spectroscopy, gel permeation chromatography and lignin phenol analyses will be
employed to provide complementary structural information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both model humic and lignin systems will be examined,
followed by CDOM samples collected during a series of field studies in the
Delaware Bay/Mid-Atlantic Bight region. These field studies will provide further
tests of this hypothesis through an examination of the relationships among the
optical properties and the lignin phenol content, molecular size and mass
spectra of CDOM collected across a wide range of oceanic environments and
seasons. This work will place fundamental constraints on the origins and modes
of formation of CDOM, as well as on its photochemical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;