* 0443820
* Re-evaluation of the Earthworks at Tikal, Guatemala, Phase 2
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2007
* Timothy Murtha, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 172,494.00

War is so widespread that it is, for all practical purposes, a universal human
behavior, especially among complex societies. Until quite recently the Classic
Lowland Maya (AD. 250-900) were perceived to be an exception to this rule. A
major blow to the "peaceful Maya" perspective was the 1966 discovery of
impressive earthworks associated with the huge center of Tikal, located in the
forests of northeastern Guatemala. These earthworks were many kilometers in
length, and along with flanking swamps were interpreted as fortifications that
defended an agricultural hinterland some 120 sq km in area. More importantly,
they represented a blatant (and unique) statement by the Maya themselves
concerning what parts of the ancient environment were important to
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inscriptions and art have since confirmed that
intense forms of Maya &lt;br/&gt;warfare existed, and archaeologists have
documented many other defensive systems. For almost 40 years, however, the Tikal
earthworks were ignored. Much was assumed about them and their significance, but
very little was known. Generous NSF support enabled Dr. David Webster and
colleagues to return to Tikal in 2003 to properly map the earthworks and search
for missing sections. They discovered new parts of the system, which now is
almost 26 km long and forms a rough polygon that plausibly encloses at least 200
sq km. The team also mapped a 250 m wide and 12.8 km long corridor of ancient
settlement associated with the earthwork. The research in part constituted a
test of new GIS/GPS technologies and their usefulness in rugged tropical forest
conditions, where they worked extremely well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current
2005 project will build on these discoveries by mapping large blocks of
settlement associated with the new earthwork segments, as well the earthwork
itself. The work will extend the eastern side of the perimeter, and find the
hitherto missing southern boundary. In all, it is suspected that the earthwork
system might be 50-60 km long---one of the biggest single construction projects
ever undertaken by ancient Mesoamericans. Of critical importance is dating this
system, which was likely built in the mid-6th century. Detailed mapping will
allow assessment of suggestions that the earthwork had non-defensive functions
(such as an irrigation &lt;br/&gt;channel) and will also increase understanding
of how such a perimeter could have been built and defended by a local population
that probably numbered only 20,000-30,000 people. Innovative methods of soils
analysis will provide chemical signatures of the agricultural production used in
and near Tikal. The research will also constitute a purely archaeological test
of Tikal's dynastic and military history as recorded in
inscriptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has both culture-historical and
theoretical implications. It will allow construction of labor estimates that
contribute to an understanding of the scale of political centralization of a
major Maya polity. If the earthworks are in fact fortifications, they will
reveal much about ancient Maya military strategies and tactics. The research
will integrate recent remote sensing imagery produced by a joint NASA/NSF
(AIRSAR) project. The imagery will be used to search for missing parts of the
earthwork, but the results will test the potential of such remote sensing in
forested tropical environments. The ultimate payoff, once the chronology is
secure, will be the ability to apply GIS models of land use, agricultural
production, and demography as a new generation of remote sensing provides
unparalleled topographic and environmental information.&lt;br/&gt;