* 0443540
* US-Netherlands Dissertation Enhancement: Using Infrared Spectra to Distinguish Isomeric Ions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2005
* John Eyler, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 13,532.00

0443540&lt;br/&gt;Marshall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year award will support
the dissertation enhancement project of Jose Valle, a University of Florida
student at the National High Field FT-ICR Mass Spectroscopy Facility supported
by NSF. Mr. Valle's research involves using infrared spectra to distinguish
between structural isomers of various classes of ions. He is concentrating on
mono- and small oligo-saccharides. He will make two extended visits to a free
electron laser (FEL) facility at the Institute for Plasma Physics (FOM) in The
Netherlands. Mr. Valle will work with Dr. Jos Oomens, coordinator of the
Molecular Dynamics program at the FOM institute. He will use a unique
instrumental configuration that couples a Fourier transform ion cyclotron
resonance (FTICR) mass spectrometer to the free electron laser for infrared
experiments (FELIX) to permit infrared (ir) spectra of gaseous ions to be
obtained for classes of chemical species. He will concentrate on using the ir
spectra he obtains to differentiate between structural isomers of small
saccharides and will obtain the spectra of one or more polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon ions formed by electrospray ionization. He will also spend a week at
a second FTICR-FEL facility at the University of Paris XI. He will offer the
Europeans interaction with a knowledgeable Hispanic and a more complete picture
of the cultural diversity present in US higher education.&lt;br/&gt;