* 0443387
* Facility Support: Multi-User Facility for U-Th-Pb Geochronology Utilizing a Laser-Ablation Multicollector ICPMS
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2008
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2008
* USD 346,472.00

EAR-0443387&lt;br/&gt;Gehrels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
development and operation of a U-Th-Pb geochronology lab (the Arizona LaserChron
Center) that utilizes a multicollector ICP mass spectrometer (from GV
Instruments) coupled with a 193 nm excimer laser (from New Wave Research). These
instruments are capable of generating U-Th-Pb ages rapidly (40 per hour), with a
precision of 2-3% (2-sigma), utilizing a beam size of 10 to 50 microns. This
rapid throughput is optimal for applications that require generation of large
data sets (e.g., detrital zircon provenance studies). The spatial resolution
provided by laser ablation also provides a powerful tool for unraveling complex
growth/disturbance histories commonly encountered in igneous and metamorphic
terranes. The laboratory is presently able to routinely conduct U-Th-Pb age
determinations on zircon, sphene, monazite, and monazite inclusions in garnet
grains, and efforts to develop analytical methods for analysis of apatite,
rutile, and xenotime are ongoing. We anticipate generating ~50,000 U-Th-Pb ages
per year in support of ~50 different projects. Students are encouraged to use
the facility, and funds are available to support student involvement. We also
encourage use of the instrument in a classroom setting as it can be operated
remotely with simultaneous displays of laser excavation and age calculation.
&lt;br/&gt;