* 0443748
* Creating Comprehensive Accessibility on Open Computing Platforms
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Janina Sajka, Free Standards Group
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2005
* USD 52,125.00

This is funding to support a workshop where approximately 40 invited experts
from industry, developer communities, research and educational institutions, and
persons with disabilities can have in-depth, face-to-face discussions to further
ongoing standardization efforts in support of comprehensive access to
information and accessible user interfaces for persons with disabilities on
computing platforms that adopt free and open standards, such as Linux, BSD, AIX,
MacOSX, and Solaris. Increasingly, persons with disabilities are turning to
Linux and other open source environments to prototype and develop consumer
driven solutions to common, and not so common, computing challenges, industry
and business are adopting open environments for various computing tasks, and
technology providers are developing solutions to serve these growing needs
through packaged distributions and technical service plans. Clearly,
comprehensive accessibility support cannot be achieved without a comprehensive
agreement among affected stakeholder groups. Yet, the diverse nature of the
technology that constitutes today's open platforms also makes it difficult to
achieve a comprehensive and cohesive layer of accessibility support; the
heterogeneous nature of toolkits, component inter process communication models,
libraries, and applications has made the development of robust and effective
assistive technologies difficult, at best. This workshop, which is the first of
its kind, will be convened in early 2005 by the Accessibility Workgroup of the
Free Standards Group (FSG), and hosted by The Archimedes Project at the
University of Hawaii, Honolulu. The workshop will provide the most appropriate
forum for finalizing proposals for industry-wide accessibility standards where
FSG work has already begun, for developing a "road map" for additional open
source technologies and standards to support comprehensive accessibility on open
platforms; and for reaching broad stakeholder consensus on a common layer of
accessibility support that can be deployed and maintained on multiple platforms
and can serve as the basis for future collaborative research to provide
multiple, cost effective, interoperable, heterogeneous and accessible products.
The workshop organizing committee consists of leaders from industry and academia
with widely recognized expertise in assistive technology. The organizers will
make a concerted effort to ensure broad participation, by personally inviting
appropriate representatives of stakeholder communities worldwide, and by
announcing the workshop on targeted e-mail lists and on the Web. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Open computing platforms are important and
meritorious environments for individual and institutional users alike, and
especially for the research community. Achieving standards to support
comprehensive accessibility in such environments will benefit persons with
disabilities, students and researchers with disabilities, as well as those
without (who must now constantly address the basics of accessibility support
rather than creative and innovative approaches to more complex questions),
governmental agencies and educational institutions that are now legally required
to support accessibility, and developers of assistive technology who will find
it easier to create more useful technologies than those available today. These
benefits will be available world-wide, in developing and developed nations
alike, because neither cost nor access to the technology itself will be a
barrier to anyone's participation, either as an end user or as a technical
contributor.