* 0443531
* Analysis of Plasma Wave Growth, Anomalous Resistivity, and Diffusion in the Dayside Magnetopause and Reconnection Region
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Pavel Travnicek, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 01/31/2009
* USD 210,000.00

The effectiveness of plasma waves in providing sufficient anomalous resistivity
in the reconnection region of the dayside magnetospause is an important and as-
yet unresolved question. Plasma wave observations of the
magnetopause/magnetosheath by the plasma wave instrument on board the Polar
spacecraft have shown the correspondence between different wave modes and
probable reconnection sites. The plasma wave instrument (PWI) on board Polar has
the unique capability of positively identifying waves using 3 axis electric and
magnetic observations at unprecedented resolutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A one-
dimensional electrostatic Vlasov simulation code has been used to investigate
the role of ion acoustic waves in providing the necessary anomalous resistivity
along the magnetopause reconnection region. The results have shown that
analytical estimates of weak quasilinear effects were incorrect. These studies
make a strong case for further non-linear studies of diffusion coefficients in
the magnetopause region. This project will use the unique capabilities of the
PWI on board the Polar spacecraft along with newly developed analysis tools to
more accurately classify and analyze waves in this region. Observed plasma
distribution functions which include electron and ion beams will be modeled to
determine the existence and growth rates of the observed waves. Linear
calculations will provide a benchmark for subsequent non-linear Vlasov and
particle-in-cell (hybrid) simulations. The PWI high resolution waveform data
will be used to determine wave modes and propagation properties. A newly
developed compressible MHD mode analysis will be used to distinguish fast and
slow mode waves at low frequencies. Particular attention will be given to the
role of waves in providing anomalous/diffusive resistivity along the
magnetopause and in the reconnection region. Particle-in-cell (PIC) and hybrid
codes will be used to study the non-linear diffusion of waves along the
magnetopause, including lower hybrid (LH), whistler mode and low-frequency
electromagnetic modes. The results will complement the previous non-linear
studies of the reconnection region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will involve
the significant efforts of an undergraduate research assistant in the space
physics program at the University of Iowa, as well as three visiting scholars
from the Czech Republic.