* 0443640
* Purchase of a Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting System
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Craig Lunte, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2008
* USD 214,973.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser Instrument Acquisition (CRIF:MU) Program, the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Kansas will acquire instrumentation for time correlated
single photon counting. This equipment will enhance research in a number of
areas including the following: a) characterization of three-dimensional DNA-
dendrimers and aptamers for sensitive fluorescence detection; b)
characterization of protein dynamics and interactions and fast orientational
dynamics and distributions of structures in short-chain peptides; c) fast
photophysical and photochemical events involved in reagent release in new,
water-soluble caged-release compounds; and d) dynamics and unfolding in
cytochromes with dissociated hemes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measuring time
resolved fluorescence affords researchers direct insight into the local
environment and dynamics around a probe. Techniques developed to monitor time
resolved fluorescence have been broadly applied to established fields such as
photobiology as well as newly emerging areas in materials chemistry. The new
instrument will also significantly enhance training of students at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels at the University of Kansas. A large group of
undergraduate and graduate students will have the opportunity to learn and apply
advanced fluorescence methods in coursework and research. Undergraduate
participation will occur through (i) a new experiment in the physical chemistry
laboratory course (ii) an independent project component of the advanced
undergraduate analytical and physical chemistry laboratory courses; (iii)
undergraduate research carried out by undergraduate chemistry majors at Kansas
or by students in an active Research Experience for Undergraduates (NSF REU)
program, which has been successful at involving underrepresented groups.
Graduate students in Chemistry and in Molecular Biosciences enrolled in advanced
courses will be given hands-on training in advanced fluorescence measurements on
this instrument. &lt;br/&gt;