* 0443044
* PureWaterLab - Conservation Education and Research Through Interactive Simulation
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2010
* Richard Herz, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ann F. Mckenna
* 04/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

PureWaterLab is a software resource for education and research on water
conservation in manufacturing. The Lab consists of a web site and desktop
software which accesses learning modules via the Internet for on- or off-line
use. The key educational technology is that of interactive software simulation
of manufacturing water systems. Interactive simulations enhance student
understanding of complex systems, and the active engagement of students in
learning helps attract and retain a diversity of students. Simulations are based
on detailed mathematical models from the research literature and include
consideration of economic costs and regulatory constraints. Such realistic
simulations allow undergraduate students to participate in research on water
systems in addition to learning about water conservation. Simulations are one
component of the complete educational modules provided, which state learning
objectives, include explanatory text and media, encourage collaborative
learning, challenge students with projects and quizzes, and solicit feedback.
The Lab uses the Internet to distribute educational modules and also to provide
course bulletin boards, conversations among students and instructors, links to
web resources, and usage logs to aid assessment and evaluation. The software
framework is field-independent and can be extended to other educational fields.