* 0443897
* 2005 Polar Marine Science Gordon Conference; March 13-18 2005; Ventura, CA
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Kevin Arrigo, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 12/31/2005
* USD 40,000.00

The proposed workshop is a Gordon Research Conference (GRC) titled "2005 Polar
Marine Science: Climate Feedbacks and Trophic Shifts in Polar Seas". It will be
held in March 2005 in Ventura, California USA. This award will provide partial
support for the participation of invited speakers, discussion leaders and young
investigators. The objective of the conference is to assess the recently
documented large-scale, interannual changes that have impacted the northern and
southern polar ocean systems, their physical bases, and their impacts on
physical, chemical, biological and coupled systems. The plan of conference is to
examine the impacts of the changing climate on sea ice cover, and likely
consequences to ice biota and to the exchange of such substances as carbon
dioxide and dimethyl sulfide, will be considered. An attempt will be made to
assess aspects of concurrent interannual changes in broader food web
variability. Both field and modeling results and paleoceanographic
reconstruction of past conditions will be used in the discussions. The goals of
the conference are to promote learning and participant diversity, and attendance
will be open to scientists, technologists and educators from academia,
government and industry. A forum is thus provided for support and encouragement
of young scientists and scientist from developing countries as they establish
initial scientific and personal contacts. Registrants will be drawn from
underrepresented groups and from a wide geographic base. A second aspect of this
conference is a bilateral treatment of the northern and southern high latitude
oceans. The Arctic and the Antarctic often can be treated in separate sessions
at scientific meetings. Because of commonality between many of the biological,
geochemical, and physical processes, interactions and impacts will be addressed
in this conference that are common to both polar regions. A bipolar focus can
help lead to new insights into these processes, and future collaborations
between scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;