* 0443145
* Providing Technical Assistance to Increase the Competitiveness of Biology Faculty at Minority Institutions in the Directorate for Biological Sciences
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 07/31/2009
* USD 698,394.00

The Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network has been awarded a three-year
grant from the National Science Foundation to provide technical assistance to
Biology faculty members at minority institutions and underrepresented minority
Biology faculty at other institutions to enable them to participate more
successfully in programs within the Foundation's Directorate for Biological
Sciences (BIO). Technical assistance will be in the form of proposal development
workshops as well as alerts regarding potential funding and other opportunities
within BIO, including possible service as ad hoc proposal reviewers, members of
review panels, and/or rotators (temporary program staff positions). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The workshops will involve 80 faculty per year, 40 in each of two
workshops that will be held in different parts of the country. Each workshop
will assist participants in becoming better informed about NSF and the programs
within the BIO Directorate, including NSF's merit review criteria, how to
prepare proposal narratives and budgets, and how to successfully manage and
implement research projects. NSF/Directorate Officials and BIO Program Officers
will be invited to the workshops to discuss their programs, respond to
questions, and offer advice to participants regarding the participants' research
ideas. In conducting the workshops, QEM staff will be assisted by former or
current BIO grantees who will provide a strong source of expertise for
participating faculty, particularly in helping them identify proposal strengths
and weaknesses. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Faculty at minority-serving institutions
and minority faculty at other institutions play a major role in the production
of minority baccalaureate degree recipients in the biological sciences as well
as in the disproportionate production of minority college graduates who pursue
doctoral degrees in the Biological Sciences. For these reasons and others, it is
important that Biology faculty among this group receive external support for
their research and teaching. BIO awards can help to build a strong support
structure for faculty research and the integration of research and teaching.