* 0443447
* RCN: PEATNET-Globalization of Northern Peatland Ecosystem Research
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2005,09/30/2011
* Dale Vitt, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2011
* USD 498,905.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PEATNET Core Participants.-PEATNET will be
directed by Dale Vitt (Southern Illinois University Carbondale) with input from
a Steering Committee consisting of Jill Bubier (Mount Holyoke College), Jennifer
Harden (U.S. Geological Survey, Menlo Park), Merritt Turetsky (Michigan State
University), Melanie Vile (Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia), and R.
Kelman Wieder (Villanova Univer-sity).&lt;br/&gt;This proposal establishes
PEATNET (Peatland Ecosystem Analysis and Training NETwork), an in-ternational,
interdisciplinary collaborative effort that focuses on northern peatland
ecosystems. PEATNET activities focuses on a central question: How do the
structure and function of northern peat-land ecosystems respond with respect to
climate change and human and natural disturbances over past, present, and future
time scales? Since the most recent deglaciation, northern peatlands have
accumulated 1/3 of the world's soil carbon, yet occupy only about 3 % of the
Earth's land surface. The future of these vast carbon stores, however, is in
question, given ongoing and future climate change and natural/human disturbance
regimes. Two overarching goals of PEATNET are to encourage and foster
interactions among scientists at various stages of their careers and to enhance
the education and training of the next generation of peatland ecosystem
ecologists. PEATNET will: 1) establish a website, which will serve as the public
countenance for PEATNET, as the mechanism to coordinate PEATNET activities and
commu-nicate findings and outcomes, and as the location of a peatland web-
discussion group and the PEATNET Virtual Resource Center; 2) conduct annual
targeted network retreats (3-5 days) coupled to training the next generation of
peatland scientists; 3) conduct more specifically focused workshops (1-2 days)
in asso-ciation with international and/or national meetings, also coupled to
training the next generation of peat-land scientists; 4) establish and maintain
the PEATNET Virtual Resource Center, which will post "50 Classical Papers in
Peatland Ecosystem Ecology," as well as titles of peatland-relevant papers
accepted for publication, but that not yet appeared; 5) produce and post on the
website a web-based peatland man-ager's handbook, the PEATGUIDE; and 6) produce
and post on the website a series of popular articles aimed at heightening public
awareness of the importance of peatland functions and values, as well as a
pictorial guide to northern peatlands, the WEBGUIDE. The PEATNET Steering
Committee will actively promote participation in the network, and the website
will make it clear that membership in PEATNET is open to all interested in
peatland ecosystem research, especially as related to climate change and distur-
bance. To promote PEATNET activities, a poster will be prepared for display at
appropriate international and national meetings.&lt;br/&gt;PEATNET will provide
a virtual and actual mechanism for fostering cooperation and collaboration among
peatland researchers from different countries and with different disciplinary
approaches to peat-land ecosystem science. PEATNET is strongly dedicated to the
education and training of the next genera-tion of peatland ecosystem
researchers, and will do so in a way that will nurture a sense of community not
only among young scientists (including both undergraduate and graduate students
and post-doctorals), but between young and established scientists, as well.
Every effort will be made to include women and groups traditionally
underrepresented in peatland research in all PEATNET activities. PEATNET will
work to transfer peatland research into information that will be of use to
peatland managers, and will strive to popularize the importance of northern
peatland functions and values.&lt;br/&gt;