* 0443443
* RCN - The Scarabaeinae Research Network: Coordinating the Development of an Invertebrate Biodiversity Focal Taxon
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2013
* Felicity Arengo, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Whiting
* 02/28/2013
* USD 499,916.00

Spector The scarcity of quantitative, comparable data on invertebrate
biodiversity has made the development of focal taxa that may serve as
informational surrogates or proxies for broader patterns of invertebrate
biodiversity a high priority for the research and biodiversity conservation
communities. This effort has been hampered by a lack of coordination among
researchers needed to establish common methods, agendas and taxonomic resources.
Addressing this problem is the overarching purpose of the Scarabaeinae Research
Network (ScarabNet) project. ScarabNet will link together a large, international
network of scarab beetle taxonomists, ecologists and conservation biologists
committed to developing the practical and scientific infrastructure necessary to
establish scarabaeine (dung beetles) as a focal taxon for use in conservation
practice, ecology, systematics, and biogeography. ScarabNet will channel the
current research output of its members toward a suite of cooperatively designed
standardized sampling methods, centralized taxonomic resources, and
collaborative research agendas. Through annual meetings, electronic
communications, and databasing tools, ScarabNet will: (1) Synthesize existing
information on the taxonomy of Scarabaeinae, including collating historical
literature, especially identification keys to taxa. This information will form
the foundation of the first on-line catalog of the world's Scarabaeinae and a
clearinghouse for taxonomic and identification resources. (2) Design a
standardized, quantitative approach to using scarabaeine communities as
biodiversity surrogates or proxies worldwide. (3) Create a central on-line
repository for comparable datasets on dung beetle communities and their response
to anthropogenic and ecological factors. (4) Develop priorities for scarabaeine
research on key global conservation issues. And (5), foster collaboration
between network members, within and across disciplines, by implementing means of
sharing data, specimens, and taxonomic resources. This project will unite a
broad array of taxonomists, ecologists, and conservationists to accelerate the
pace of scarabaeine systematics and ecology, and broadly enhance the usefulness
of each participant's research in the biodiversity conservation context.
Scarabaeine dung beetles have enormous potential as an invertebrate focal taxon;
they are supported by widespread ecological and behavioral research, a group of
active systematists focused on Scarabaeinae's species-level taxonomy, and
quantitative support for their uses as environmental and biodiversity
indicators. ScarabNet will allow the research and conservation communities to
capitalize on these opportunities by developing the informational tools and
infrastructure that must support a useful invertebrate focal taxon. The effort
will also serve as an effective, low-cost model for future collaborative
networks dedicated to establishing other invertebrate taxa as biodiversity focal
taxa, or for coordinating ecological or systematic research more broadly.