* 0443564
* Purchase of a Computer Cluster for Computational Molecular and Materials Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Thomas Orlando, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 02/29/2008
* USD 225,000.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities -
Multiuser Instrument Acquisition (CRIF) Program, the School of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the Georgia Institute of Technology will purchase a computer
cluster for computational molecular and materials chemistry. The research
projects relate to:(i) new methods for chemical accuracy description of
molecular structure; (ii) potential energy surfaces for bonded and nonbonded
interactions; (iii) the role of nonequilibrium dynamics in materials science and
chemical biology; (iv) the theoretical design of novel organic materials for
electronics and photonics;(v) the cation-induced inhibition of excited-state
intramolecular proton transfer to aid in the development of ratiometric cation
sensors for multi-photon microscopy; and (vi) tunable photonic crystals based on
conjugated materials and the effects of intermolecular interactions on two-
photon absorption of conjugated molecules. In addition, faculty from a number of
undergraduate institutions will have access to these resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cluster of fast, modern computer workstations is vital
to serving the computing needs of active research departments. Such a "computer
network" also serves as a development environment for new theoretical codes and
algorithms, provides state-of-the-art graphics and visualization facilities, and
supports research in state-of-the-art applications of parallel processing. These
studies will have a significant impact in materials chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;