* 0443676
* RUI: Characterization of Proteins Interacting with PKABA1 in Abscisic Acid Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Russell Johnson, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2009
* USD 164,732.00

The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) is an important signaling molecule, both
during normal processes of growth and development and in responding to
environmental stresses such as drought. Many of the responses to ABA involve
changes in the expression of particular genes. Some genes are stimulated by the
presence of ABA, while other genes are repressed. In cereal grains, the protein
kinase, PKABA1, acts as an intermediate in the ABA-signaling pathway.
Specifically, the action of PKABA1 brings about an ABA-induced repression of
several seed-expressed genes. To understand the precise role of PKABA1 in ABA-
signaling, it is necessary to identify proteins that act in concert with PKABA1.
Two such proteins, TaABF and TaWD40, have recently been identified and will be
the focus of this project.&lt;br/&gt;TaABF belongs to the ABF family of
transcription factors, a type of protein that binds to DNA sequences and
regulates gene activity. To confirm the biological role of TaABF in cells that
are responding to ABA, aleurone cells of barley grains will be induced to both
overproduce and underproduce TaABF, and the effects on ABA signaling will be
observed. In addition, the interaction between PKABA1 and TaABF will be
characterized by binding assays, and the ability of PKABA1 to phosphorylate
TaABF will be assessed. To confirm that TaABF functions as a transcription
factor in modulating gene activity, its DNA-binding properties will be assayed.
The biological role of TaWD40 will be assessed in experiments similar to those
proposed for TaABF. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work will lead to a better
understanding of how plants respond to ABA. Such knowledge will support the
future development of practical solutions to a number of agricultural problems,
such as protection of crop plants from stresses in the field, preharvest
sprouting of cereals, and the control of weedy species with strong seed
dormancy. The project will contribute to education by involving undergraduate
students. The techniques used and the results obtained from the research program
will be incorporated into courses taught by the PI so that many students not
directly involved in the project will also benefit. The PI's extensive
involvement with Introductory Biology courses and with programs for the
mentoring of minority students will lead to recruitment of students from groups
traditionally underrepresented in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;