* 0443708
* Experimental Measures of Preferences to Augment Survey Research
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* William Zame, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2005
* USD 80,000.00

This SGER provides funding to exploit an unprecedented opportunity to combine
laboratory-experiment based measures of preferences with a large-scale
longitudinal survey, the Mexico Family Live Survey (MxFLS). Incentivized, task-
based measures of preferences have been shown to be superior to survey measures
in laboratory tests. Field testing of these tasks has received considerable
attention recently, proving that these lab-based tasks can be effectively
translated into field settings. However, combining survey and experimental
measures has been limited to a few studies involving only one task. This project
develops and refines measures of time preferences, risk attitudes, and several
aspects of pro-social preferences and field tests them with a small subsample
(1000 subjects) of the next wave of the MxFLS. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SGER
funding is requested because of the short time-frame, and because of the
exploratory nature of the research. This phase of the project will test the
feasibility and refine the protocol for attaching experimental measures of
preferences to a much larger subsample of the survey in subsequent waves.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are: &lt;br/&gt;o The development and
refining of experimental preference measures that can be used in the field to
accompany a wide range of survey studies. &lt;br/&gt;o A better understanding of
the complementarities between survey and task-based &lt;br/&gt;research methods.
&lt;br/&gt;o Collection of preference data that can be used to refine models of
individual and &lt;br/&gt;family decision making. &lt;br/&gt;o Testing of the
external validity of experimental preference measures, to assess the
&lt;br/&gt;power of these measures to predict future behavior of individuals and
families. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;