* 0443322
* Topics in Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/30/2004,04/30/2005
* Malabika Pramanik, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2005
* USD 51,279.00

The proposal addresses three subfields of harmonic analysis : (1) cone
multipliers and local smoothing, (2) oscillatory integrals and integral
operators, and (3) spectral analysis of Schroedinger operators. The work in (1)
uses an important result of Wolff in the theory of Fourier-analytic estimates
associated to the light cone. Possible areas of application include (a)
multipliers related to space curves, (b) generalizations of local smoothing to
special classes of Fourier integral operators, (c) local smoothing of maximal
averages associated with space curves, and (d) Hausdorff dimension of Kakeya-
type sets. The projects in (2) deal with special cases of degenerate oscillatory
integrals and integral operators in high dimensions (larger than two) that are
known to exhibit features absent in their two-dimensional counterparts. The
analytic machinery is that developed by Phong and Stein for the two-dimensional
case, but the results obtained are of a very different nature. A long-term goal
here is to devise an analytically accessible method of resolution of
singularities. Another part of this work concentrates on the double Hilbert
transform along polynomial surfaces, following Carbery, Wainger and Wright. The
projects in (3) are part of an effort to understand the spectral theory of
Schroedinger operators with matrix-valued potentials. This draws on earlier work
of Guillope and Zworski, Laptev and Weidl, and Korotyaev.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following is a more nontechnical description of the
projects outlined above, with a brief note about applicability in scientific
disciplines. The projects in (1) may be viewed as a study of wave propagation in
non-uniform media (as used in seismic imaging). ``Local smoothing'' quantifies
the gain in regularity of the propagating wave viewed as a function of space-
time compared with the same wave considered as a function of space alone for a
fixed time. Offshoots of this problem have combinatorial flavors in terms of
arrangements of circles in the plane, as pointed out by Wolff. The projects in
(2) deal with integrals and integral operators which come up in solutions to
partial differential equations, including fundamental ones like the heat
equation, wave equation and Korteweg-deVries equation. An important feature of
these integrals is the presence of a complex-valued exponential factor in the
integrand. In the case under study, the exponent is typically a polynomial that
vanishes to high degree at a point. The ``order of vanishing'' of the polynomial
contributes to the rate of decay of the integrals. A main ingredient in the
analysis of these objects is a technique from algebraic geometry known as
resolution of singularities -- a systematic method for factorizing polynomials
and studying their roots. The spectral theory of Schroedinger operators, which
is the basis for the projects in (3), is intimately related to quantum
mechanics, which finds vast applications in physics and many disciplines of the
engineering sciences. The current project is to understand the spectral
properties of the Schroedinger operator in dimensions larger than one, and more
specifically to count the number of resonances of such operators. Resonances are
generalizations of the concept of bound states or eigenvalues, and have a
physical significance in terms of exit times in electron motion. The
interdisciplinary nature of these projects has proved an extremely rewarding
research experience for the applicant.