* 0443771
* Bayesian methods for structural equation models in quantitative genetics with applications to the study of mammary gland disease
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Daniel Gianola, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 540,000.00

This project will develop quantitative genetic theory and statistical methods
for studying complex genetic systems where recursive or feedback relationships
between variables exist. Methods researched will be used to study mastitis, a
disease of the mammary gland in breast-feeding women (mastitis), employing the
cow as an animal model. Extensive health, milk production and milk somatic cell
cow data from the Norwegian cattle health registry will be used to model
relationships between variables. The 3-year project includes: 1) development of
Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms for quantitative genetic systems
under Gaussian assumptions. 2) Extension to systems in which some phenotypes are
limited-dependent (e.g., binary). 3) Modeling of relationships between
presence/absence of clinical mastitis, somatic cell concentration in milk, milk
yield, genotype and several explanatory variables, using information from cow
records. A fully pedigreed data set (complete medical treatment history of
33,453 first-lactation cows from 4961 herds, daughters of 245 sires) will be
used for pilot studies.

The research focuses on a new framework for the study of multivariate systems in
quantitative genetics, using the cow as a model for a disease of the mammary
gland, mastitis. Relationships between milk output, somatic cell concentration,
presence or absence of clinical mastitis and several potential explanatory data
will be investigated using data from the Norwegian cattle health registry
system. Knowledge will be drawn and integrated from econometrics, structural
equation modeling and statistical genetics. An educational component in a novel
area in the interface between statistics, genetics, disease modeling,
econometrics and sociometrics will be included. Software developed will be made
available to the scientific community through the Internet.