* 0443508
* RCN: RNA Ontology Consortium (ROC)
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2012
* James Williamson, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/29/2012
* USD 500,000.00

This Research Coordination Network (RCN) project supports the establishment of
the RNA Ontology Consortium (ROC), which aims to create an integrating
conceptual framework--an RNA Ontology (RO)--with which to understand RNA
function in biological systems and to advance research in RNA biology, chemistry
and genomics. This will require the integration of the research paradigms of
chemists, molecular biologists, genomicists, information scientists and
structural biologists, and will in turn require the creation of a common,
dynamic, controlled vocabulary (the RO), pertaining to RNA function and based on
RNA sequences, secondary and three-dimensional structures. Thus, the central
objective of the ROC is to identify all RNA motifs mentioned in the literature
or appearing in databases, to agree upon a definition for each motif and to
write that definition down in a structured manner. This is very timely as
knowledge about RNA accumulates and progresses rapidly. The purposes for
creating the RO are therefore (1) to integrate sequence and structural databases
and (2) to create powerful software tools that bring advanced computational
methods to the bench scientist. In short, this will advance RNA science by
turning diverse information and data accumulation into knowledge. To achieve
these aims, ROC will foster communication and promote collaboration among RNA
scientists by coordinating frequent face-to-face workshops to discuss, debate,
and resolve difficult conceptual issues. These meeting opportunities will create
new research directions at various levels of RNA research. At the RNA Society
meeting each year, ROC working groups will report progress and obtain feedback
from the wider community of RNA scientists. The broader impacts of the project
will flow from the tangible products of the networking activities: (1) the RNA
Ontology itself, (2) usefully linked databases, and (3) powerfully integrated
software. The creation of the RO will facilitate communication and collaboration
among the overlapping communities of scientists involved in various aspects of
RNA science. Moreover, the RO will provide students and teachers of science at
all levels with clear concepts for understanding the molecular basis of life,
and the important roles played by RNA. The integration of disparate sources of
information and the creation of integrated software and collaboration tools will
expand and enhance the ability of bench scientists to interpret their
experimental data and of computational biologists and genomicists to mine
genomic data. The project will build on the experience of the core group in
constructing the RNA mark-up language, RNAML, the structural mark-up language
PDBML, a comprehensive classification of basepairing in RNA, as well as SCOR
(Structural Classification of RNA) and the Riboweb project. The ROC will work
closely with the Gene Ontology and Sequence Ontology communities to create a
comprehensive integrated ontology pertaining to RNA and will make its work
accessible on the World-Wide Web using servers hosted by Bowling Green State
University. The Consortium has the support of the RNA Society to actively foster
participation in its activities and to seek broad input for its work. The
mechanism for actively promoting diverse participation will include active
recruitment by the Coordinator and Steering Committee and dissemination of
information regarding the ROC through the WWW and the email lists of the RNA
Society and related professional societies. The ROC encourages the participation
of all interested scientists.