* 0443277
* Theoretical Archetypes for Understanding Interactions Between Sea-Ice and Large-Scale Atmospheric Dynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Johnny Wei-Bing Lin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 02/28/2005
* USD 11,629.00

The development of sea-ice parameterizations for use in general circulation
models (GCMs) has historically been characterized by a focus on increasing the
complexity of the parameterization. Currently, ice model development has
involved adding previously un-represented or under-represented physics, such as
melt ponds, ice ridging, etc. Increased physical complexity, however, is not the
core issue in the GCM parameterization. In the case of parameterizing moist
convection, parameterization is the link between that which provides a "control"
upon the physical process being parameterized and the "feedback" the physical
process provides. With sea-ice parameterizations, there does not currently
appear to be an adequate understanding of how the large and small-scales
interact. What the large-scale ultimately cares about, both a control and as a
recipient of feedback, is not the microscale physical behavior per se, but
rather what the parameterized process dynamically accomplishes. Preliminary work
in adding a stochastic parameterization for winter leads to the ARCSyM Arctic
regional climate model suggests that climate sensitivity to ice processes lies
fundamentally in how the ice couples with large-scale atmosphere dynamics, and
not so much in the ice model itself. In this project, very small perturbations
to ice concentration can result in melting of nearly half of the January ice
pack, and also appear to affect the development and evolution of synoptic
cyclones. Since the sea-ice model reasonably emulates mean ice extent, the
coupled model 's sensitivity appears due to ice-atmosphere interactions and
feedbacks.