* 0443783
* Testing alternative models of stability and change in adult attachment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* R. Chris Fraley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 07/31/2006
* USD 293,635.00

According to attachment theory, people construct "internal working
models"-mental representations of the self and the social world-that play a
critical role in guiding their interpersonal behavior and affective experience
across time. Unfortunately, we do not have a good understanding of how stable
these representations are, nor do we have a consensual understanding of the
dynamic processes that promote continuity and change in attachment
representations. Some researchers, for example, have suggested that working
models are trait-like in the sense that they are enduring features of people-
representations that facilitate stability in thoughts, feelings, and behaviors
across time and context. In contrast, some researchers have argued that working
models behave in a contextual manner, with different features of those models
being activated under different conditions, ultimately leading to instability in
attachment over time. The primary aims of the proposed research are to answer
three critical questions of the dynamics of attachment: Are patterns of
stability and change in adult attachment more consistent with the predictions of
a trait-like model, a contextual model, or some combination of the two? Second,
can basic personality traits, such as neuroticism, explain empirical patterns of
attachment stability? And, third, how do attachment representations influence-
and get influenced by-relational experiences? To accomplish these aims,
individuals in dating/marital relationships will be recruited to complete self-
report measures of attachment, personality, and interpersonal experiences weekly
(Sample 1) or bimonthly (Sample 2) for twelve months. The proposed study will
provide the first rigorous investigation into these fundamental theoretical
questions. Moreover, because the proposed research addresses a set of issues
that are of broad significance in social and personality psychology (e.g., What
are the dynamic mechanisms underlying stability and change?), this investigation
has the potential to facilitate the development of a generalized framework for
understanding the dynamics of stability and change in personality, affective,
and social processes more generally.