* 0443254
* Bridging the Gap:     End-to-End Networking for Landmark Applications; Ann Arbor, MI; 2005
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* George Brett, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2006
* USD 76,322.00

This proposed two-day workshop, from the University of Michigan and Internet2,
addresses the "Wizard Gap" involved in networking problems experienced by the
scientific application community. The workshop will involve multiple discipline
communities. It will be the first workshop to simultaneously address this gap
from both the network engineering standpoint, and the network expert (or wizard)
point of view, and also will be significant in bringing together these experts
with members of scientific research communities that use demanding, network-
driven applications, along with developers of these applications and campus
network engineers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of the workshop are to:
&lt;br/&gt;1) Share the needs, expectations, and related challenges of using
networks by scientific applications with network engineers, &lt;br/&gt;2)
Identify commonalities of end-to-end network problems and issues across various
scientific communities to prioritize problem solving and focus research
&lt;br/&gt;3) Raise awareness and inform the use of various diagnostic tools to
facilitate science by making better use of cyberinfrastructure resources.
&lt;br/&gt;4) Advance research into designing integrated software and frameworks
to support troubleshooting for the most complex end-to-end
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to construct and execute a
workshop focused on performance in grid computing environments. The workshop
will approach this area from a new perspective - that of the user. The workshop
will evaluate current approaches to understanding and improving grid performance
for applications. Gaps will be identified and areas for future concentration
will be summarized in a report. Measurement (what and how), analysis (how to
apply measurements), and simulation (applying measurement and analysis) will
provide the focus areas. The workshop is targeted for 45 invited experts over 2
days, with funding sources from several agencies.&lt;br/&gt;