* 0443751
* Penguins as Monitors of the Krill-centric Southern Ocean Marine Ecosystem
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2008
* George Watters, NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service
* Interagency Agreement
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2008
* USD 466,650.00

The focus of this long-term research has been a comparative study of the
breeding biology, foraging ecology, and demography of Adelie, gentoo and
chinstrap penguin. (Pygoscelis adeliae, P. papua and P. antarctica,
respectively) at Admiralty Bay, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. Long-term
data acquired annually since 1977 on these species including survival and
recruitment, population size and breeding success, diets and foraging ecology,
provide clear evidence linking offshore biological and physical processes to
their effects on dependent predators in the Southern Ocean. These populations
have exhibited fluctuations in abundance that have been related to long-term
changes in environmental conditions, in particular sea ice coverage and its
effects on krill availability. The present research will continue the long-term
research to test hypotheses relating penguin breeding biology, foraging ecology
and demography to environmental variability during the breeding season. In
addition, the work will be expanded further address questions on the
distribution and trophic interactions among the three species during the winter
period. The approaches involve three foci: correlative analysis, winter ecology
and population-dynamics modeling. Correlative analysis will be used to detect
inter-annual trends in the predator data parameters over the 20-30 year periods
for which there are data individual parameters. Winter studies will involve
tracking foraging movements using satellite-tags and fatty acid signatures in
egg yolk lipids will be used to examine the winter diets. The results from these
studies will be incorporated into population-dynamic models. This study is one
of the few ongoing research projects that have the historical data needed, from
both land-based predator studies and marine surveys, to examine the effect of
environmental variability on predator-prey interactions in the Southern Ocean.
In terms of broader impacts, this research is a major contributor to the
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources Ecosystem
Monitoring Program, an international effort designed in the mid-1980s to provide
data for management purposes that would detect, monitor and predict the
potential impacts of a new krill fishery on the prey (krill) and dependent
predators (penguins, seals, whales) in the Southern Ocean. A group of key
monitoring species were identified that were both obligate krill consumers and
easily studied, among them were the main krill consuming genus, the Pygoscelis
penguins. This project is jointly supported by the National Science Foundation
and the National Marine Fisheries Service.



