* 0444891
* RUI: Evolution of Vertebrate Design: Functional Morphology of a Novel Feeding Mechanism in Osteoglossomorph and Salmonid Fishes.
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Christopher Sanford, Hofstra University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Slocum
* 03/31/2009
* USD 468,000.00

RUI: Evolution of Vertebrate Design: Functional Morphology of a Novel Feeding
Mechanism in Osteoglossomorph and Salmonid Fishes&lt;br/&gt;Christopher P. J.
Sanford &lt;br/&gt;Hofstra University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
investigate the origin and subsequent evolution of feeding behaviors in two
ecologically and economically important groups of fishes. The origin of novel
feeding behaviors allows organisms to exploit new resources and is critical to
their success, particularly when facing changes in the availability of food in
the environment. New behaviors and functions can be the result of novel
anatomical structures, modifications of pre existing anatomical structures, or
simply changes in the sequence of muscle activity that control movement. The
relationship between these three factors in the origin of new behaviors remains
largely unexplored, but is crucial if we are to understand what drives
evolutionary success. Using an integrative approach, the aim of this research is
to determine how changes in the pattern of muscle activity relate to the origin
of new behaviors and functions that are linked to fitness. Quantitative analysis
of a novel feeding behavior that has evolved independently in two different
groups of fishes will establish if new patterns of muscle activity are a common
feature in the origin of new behaviors. This project is significant because it
will provide the first rigorously tested example of a repeated and predictable
change in function that is the direct result of changes in muscle activity in
these fishes. It will also demonstrate the central role of muscle activity in
providing a platform for new functions to evolve. Three approaches will be used
to quantify a novel chewing behavior in both salmonids and bony-tongue fishes.
This novel chewing behavior centers around an impressive bite between large
teeth on the bony tongue and an opposing set of teeth on the roof of the mouth
that is used to shred and disable prey. Cranial muscle activity will be recorded
in representatives of these two groups of fishes during feeding events, and
along with video, will provide an accurate picture of the functional
consequences of any changes in the pattern of muscle activity during chewing.
Traditionally, one of the difficulties in tracking the movement of bony elements
of the head is that many structures important in feeding cannot be viewed
externally. Thus, a new technology, sonometric ultrasound, will be used to track
the movements of those elements not observable using video analysis. This
research will provide a robust test of the extent to which muscle activity
patterns change in the origin of new functions, and the level of muscle activity
variation necessary to elicit important functional changes that can be linked to
feeding success. The broader impacts of this study are extensive because it will
provide important information on chewing behavior and thus optimal food sources
in economically important fishes. The research will also provide training for a
postdoctoral researcher. As this research is being conducted at a primarily
undergraduate institution it will foster cooperative training and learning among
all educational levels, from undergraduates to advanced-level researchers. The
modern techniques and equipment used in this project will have significant,
positive educational impacts through incorporation into several areas of a new
undergraduate curriculum. Furthermore, this research program will attract well
qualified individuals from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;