* 0444761
* The Synthesis and Characterization of Imprinted Silica Using Nanoparticle Templates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2009
* Alexander Katz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2009
* USD 240,679.00

This project provides imprinted materials consisting of isolated pockets with
interfaces of uniform and controllable structure, connectivity, and chemical
composition, embedded within a bulk material framework. New synthetic methods
are being developed for the synthesis of imprinted pockets within bulk inorganic
oxide materials on the length scale of 2 to 15 nanometers, while retaining a
high degree of control over interfacial states within the pocket. These
nanoparticle-imprinted materials will be developed to study the effects of
nanoscale assembly of fluorescently active molecules and metal/semiconductor
nanoparticles within the confines of isolated mesoporous pockets in silica.
There are currently few methods for the synthesis of solid-state materials that
will permit such controlled assembly of functional elements, in part because
much of the relevant length scales are inaccessible to conventional
photolithographic methods of material synthesis. Imprinting is a promising
approach for the synthesis of solid-state materials that can perform nanoscale
assembly of functional elements. The designed and controlled assembly of matter
promises to impact optical, electronic and functional materials for devices of
all sorts. Because this is an area of high interest to industry, the graduate
students, including women and minority students being recruited and educated,
will be very competitive in the job market.



