* 0444550
* International Research and Education Planning Visit:  Supplement to NSF Grant #0431948 to Visit Baumann Moscow State University, Russia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Ramesh Agarwal, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2006
* USD 11,397.00

This is a project to plan for long-term U.S.-Russian collaborative research in
the area of nano- and microsatellite design. The principal investigators are
Ramesh Agarwal from Washington University and Valentin Zelentsov from Bauman
Moscow State Technical University (MSTU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's current
efforts are focused on modernizing the engineering curriculum taught at
Washington University - a need emphasized by aerospace industry advisors. The
current curriculum focuses on the standard ABET-required courses: aerodynamics,
aerospace structures, propulsion, flight mechanics and control, orbital
mechanics and aerospace design. Industry advisors have noted, in particular, the
need to include the physics, theory and design of micro air vehicles and
nanosatellites into the standard courses and to provide hands-on experience
along two tracks: aircraft design and spacecraft
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSTU has a well-established and outstanding nano-
and micro-satellite design, build and fly program. It offers a distinctive
approach to engineering education by combining academic studies with research,
design, and experimental work, and it has been a leader in research, design, and
building of satellites in Russia. Working with MSTU will provide an excellent
educational opportunity for U.S. engineering students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in aerospace engineering research fulfills
the program objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and
Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.