* 0444071
* Model Theoretic Semantics, Proof Theoretic Semantics, and Semantically Flavored Syntactic Features
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2006
* Edward Stabler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,950.00

One of the fundamental goals of grammatical research is to explain how form and
meaning relate in language. Semantics is the study of meaning. Semantic
considerations come into play in at least three ways. First, grammar calculates
the meaning of a sentence from the meanings of its component parts, defined
typically with reference to truth in a modeled situation. For example, No whale
flies is true if and only if the intersection of the sets of whales and things
that fly is empty in the modeled situation. Second, the acceptability of a
syntactic construction may depend on morpho-syntactic features with a semantic
flavor. For example, Under no circumstances would a whale fly is acceptable,
whereas Under some circumstances would a whale fly is not, corresponding to the
negative vs. non-negative feature of the preposed phrase. Such features play a
pervasive and theoretically prominent role in syntax. Third, speakers make
various inferences based on semantic knowledge. For example, No whale flies
entails No blue whale flies and No whale flies high.

It is usually assumed that once a compositional model theoretic semantics is
specified for all expressions, its fruits can be freely enjoyed by syntax and
inferencing. But especially computational linguists and logicians have argued
that this is not feasible, and have developed proof theoretical methods. Recent
work has furthermore indicated that proof theoretical considerations may not
only be computationally advantageous but may also be enlightening from the
perspective of "pure" theoretical linguistics.

The National Science Foundation will support a workshop, entitled "Model
theoretic semantics, proof theoretic semantics, semantically-flavored syntactic
features," to be held at the 2005 Linguistic Society of America Summer Institute
in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Its central goal is to explore how the use of proof
theory as a mediator between model theoretic semantics and generative syntax can
lead to theoretically interesting insights at the syntax/semantics interface.
Starting with a proof theoretic tutorial, it will achieve this goal by bringing
together semanticists, syntacticians, and theoretically inclined computational
linguists, possibly also psycholinguists, to investigate the relation between
these three uses of semantics. The broader impacts of the workshop derive from
(i) fostering the interaction between "pure" theoretical linguistics and
computational linguistics, (ii) promoting international collaboration, (iii)
being freely accessible to the large numbers of graduate and undergraduate
students attending the Institute, and (iv) serving as a basis for seminars by
Dr. Anna Szabolcsi at New York University and Dr. Edward Stabler at UCLA.
Journal publications and a website dedicated to the workshop will help
dissemination of the results inside and outside academia.

