* 0444129
* CAREER: Regulation of Interpersonal Incentives and Threats
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,10/31/2007
* Shelly Gable, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 10/31/2007
* USD 320,868.00

Close relationships are powerful sources of both pleasure and pain. The
potential incentives of close relationships, such as companionship, love, and
intimacy are immense. Comparable in magnitude however are the potential threats
in close relationships, such as rejection, conflict, and loss. Despite this
precarious balance of incentives and threats in interpersonal relationships,
people, across the life span are nevertheless tenaciously motivated to form and
maintain strong and stable social relationships, and failing to do so is linked
with higher mortality and lower health and well-being. The motives and goals
people have for relationships can be focused either on incentives and desired
end-states-approach-or they can be focused on the threats and undesired end-
states-avoidance. Prior research has shown that this distinction (approach
versus avoidance) has important implications for cognition, behavior, affect,
well-being, and health. For example, avoidance motives and goals are often
associated with less effective regulation (e.g., stronger emotional reactions to
negative interactions) and poorer outcomes (e.g. more loneliness). In this
CAREER grant, Shelly Gable of the University of California - Los Angeles
explores how and why motives and goals influence interpersonal outcomes.

Specifically, this project focuses on five likely mechanisms for these effects:
direction of attention to social cues (incentives and threats), memory of
relationship events, interpretation of ambiguous social information, evaluation
of progress in relationships and the corresponding emotional consequences, and
satisfaction with relationships and decisions to dissolve relationships. Strong
approach motives and goals are expected to facilitate recognition of social
incentives; increase accessibility of positive social information in memory;
benevolently bias interpretation of ambiguous social cues; lead to gain-based
progress assessments with corresponding joy-disappointment emotional
consequences; and direct greater weighting of rewards for satisfaction and
commitment decisions. Conversely, strong avoidance motives and goals are
expected to be associated with increased hypervigilance to social threats;
greater memory for negative social information; negatively biased interpretation
of ambiguous cues; loss-based progress assessments with corresponding relief-
anxiety emotional consequences; and higher weighting of threats in satisfaction
and commitment decisions. The project balances the careful control offered in
the laboratory with studies that occur in the natural context of everyday social
interaction by employing diverse methods, including laboratory experiments,
daily experience studies, and longitudinal designs. To reflect the diversity of
interpersonal relationships, the project includes studies targeting individuals'
broader social networks, specific close relationships, and discrete
interactions. Finally, because close relationships, by default, involve
coordination with another person (who also has his or her own motives and goals)
over some time course, the project includes investigations of individuals and
dyads, sampled at specific moments, as well as over longer periods of time.

This project brings together well-established ideas and findings from motivation
and close relationships. Due to the near constant need to regulate social
behavior, the ever shifting tapestry of relationship rewards and costs, and the
potential impact of individual differences, examination of social motives and
goals and the processes regulating relationship incentives and threats is
critical. This project is important because the majority of life experiences,
both meaningful and trivial, take place in the context of close relationships;
and the quality and stability of our close relationships has a significant
impact on well-being, health, and mortality. The findings from this project may
advance understanding of these links, inform public policy debates, and provide
the basis for effective interventions.