* 0444700
* RUI: The Gene Stream: From Sequence to Cell Function
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2008
* Eric Cole, Saint Olaf College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 09/30/2008
* USD 604,891.00

This project, which will be performed at St. Olaf College (a predominantly
undergraduate institution), is a remarkable cross-disciplinary collaboration
that involves bio-informatics, proteomics, and both cellular and molecular
biology, while linking laboratory research to classroom laboratory activities.
The scientific core of the project is the biology of conjugation in the
freshwater ciliate, Tetrahymena thermophila. Nuclear-cortical interactions
initiate meiosis and mediate a cascade of events including nuclear exchange,
programmed nuclear degeneration, and the determination of somatic and germinal
nuclear fates. While engaged in a broadly targeted program of gene discovery,
the PI and his collaborators and students will explore the roles of 3 specific
gene products: T-MEC1, which plays a role in meiosis; fenestrin, which has a
role in mediating pronuclear exchange and fertilization; and T-VASA, which has a
role in the determination of nuclear fates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Eric S.
Cole has developed a method of isolating intact nuclear exchange junctions and
assaying their abundance with fluorescently tagged lectins. His lab is also
competent at creating GFPtagged constructs and genetic knock-outs by
manipulating targeted gene expression. The Cole lab is particularly well trained
in conventional and confocal fluorescence microscopy skills.&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI
Robert Rutherford brings bioinformatic resources to the project, allowing the
team and their students to search the Tetrahymena genome for genetic homologs.
His "CCT" program has identified meiosis checkpoint genes homologous to those in
yeast and pattern-gene orthologs from Drosophila, among others.&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI
Douglas Beussman brings state-of-the-art proteomics to the collaboration.
Beussman's laboratory can take proteins from polyacrylamide gels, fragment them,
and determine precise molecular weights via mass spectrometry. This data can be
used to scan the recently published Tetrahymena genome pulling out corresponding
gene sequences for molecular genetic analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific
Objectives of the project: The investigators will continue searching the
recently published Tetrahymena genome for homologs a/o orthologs to meiotic
checkpoint genes, and genes whose products participate in establishing embryonic
polarity and pole-plasm determination within metazoan embryos. They have already
identified target genes for the project, including Tetrahymena homologs for MEC1
(a gene mediating a meiotic checkpoint in yeast) and VASA (a gene whose product
is associated with germ-line determination and polar granule formation in
metazoan embryos). They are also isolating and analyzing proteins that form the
nuclear exchange junction. These proteins will be used to generate antibodies
for western blots and immunofluorescence localization, and to perform Mass
Spectrometry in order to identify the corresponding genes for future molecular
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teaching Objectives of the project: Undergraduate
students will enter the proposed "Gene Stream" from their faculty mentor's
research laboratories or from independent projects launched from academic
courses in the biology, chemistry and computer science departments at St. Olaf
College. Students will carry a favorite gene sequence or protein from one
classroom laboratory to another, effectively creating "research bridges" between
classes which will provide project continuity and an inter-disciplinary research
experience for each student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Conjugal
development in Tetrahymena has much to teach us about how nuclear-cortical
interactions govern meiosis, fertilization and determination of nuclear fates.
Of particular interest to Dr. Cole and his collaborators is the possibility that
the mechanism for distinguishing somatic and germline nuclear fates within
metazoan embryos arose initially within unicellular
protozoans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The "Gene Stream" program will
be inviting and nurturing to students of all backgrounds regardless of gender or
ethnicity. Dr. Cole and his collaborators have a long track record of including
women and minority undergraduates and providing research students with
opportunities for attending state, national and occasionally international
meetings. The team has also been included in the Research Links 2010 initiative
to share Tetrahymena as a model research system with undergraduate institutions
across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;