* 0444762
* Development of Learning and Memory in Aplysia
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2010
* Thomas Carew, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2010
* USD 799,691.00

The assembly of neural circuits in the developing brain and the formation and
storage of memories in the adult nervous system reflect two extraordinary
examples of neuronal plasticity which, in a broad sense, serve a common purpose:
they endow the nervous system with lasting changes in its functional
architecture through ongoing refinement of the connections among nerve cells.
This functional similarity raises the theoretically important issue of whether
development and learning are fundamentally related in terms of their underlying
mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While attractive in concept, directly testing
this theory is challenging. Thus there is excitement about recent developments
in our research program in which it is directly shown that "growth factors",
known to play critical roles in the development of the brain, also play a
fundamental role in memory formation. Specifically, a simple model system, the
marine mollusk Aplysia, will be used because it has a numerically simple nervous
system composed of giant neurons (in some cases a hundred times larger than the
nerve cells of humans). This project will study changes in the connections
between these neurons that occur during simple forms of learning, and then
examine the molecular events that give rise to those changes. Using the new
discovery about the roles that growth factors can play in adult learning, it is
expected that some of the changes that are seen will be similar to those that
occur during the development of the brain. Thus these results could open the
door to explicit examination of the relationship between development and
learning in this powerful experimental system. Broader impact are apparent in
that this project will be instrumental for integrating both research and
education by serving as an incubator for future scientists and engineers.
Additionally, the PI serves as a mentor in the Minority Neuroscience Fellowship
Program and actively recruits students to work in his lab. Beyond the
traditional mechanisms for disseminating scientific information the PI has
developed a website full of information that is available to both students and
interested laypersons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;