* 0444417
* A Framework for Next-Generation Scheduling and Task Management for Extreme-Scale Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2009
* Abhijit Bose, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 10/31/2009
* USD 503,150.00

A Framework for Next-generation Scheduling and Task Management &lt;br/&gt;for
Extreme-scale Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kang G. Shin and Abhijit
Bose&lt;br/&gt;The University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research project is to develop efficient &lt;br/&gt;algorithms
and robust software for scheduling and resource management in &lt;br/&gt;support
of extreme-scale computing. Such computations may involve tens &lt;br/&gt;of
thousands of processors configured as a high-end computing system.
&lt;br/&gt;More efficient scheduling and resource management systems than those
&lt;br/&gt;currently used are needed to address scalability and fault-tolerance
for &lt;br/&gt;such large systems. The same argument also holds for the
increasingly &lt;br/&gt;complex requirements of many emerging applications. The
&lt;br/&gt;current-generation schedulers primarily manage a cluster of CPUs that
&lt;br/&gt;are configured statically for an application. An application is
&lt;br/&gt;allocated a fixed number of processors or nodes (for SMP systems),
and &lt;br/&gt;is not expected to modify its resource requirement during the
execution. &lt;br/&gt;This may result in lower resource utilization.
Furthermore, most of the &lt;br/&gt;current schedulers do not provide
transparent fault-tolerance to the &lt;br/&gt;running workload. One or more
processor/node failures often terminate &lt;br/&gt;the currently-executing task
on these processors, resulting in wasted &lt;br/&gt;cycles. Fault-tolerant
scheduling will be critical to the scalability of &lt;br/&gt;future HEC systems
to an extremely large number of processors. The &lt;br/&gt;increasing usage of
high-end systems for both computation- and &lt;br/&gt;data-intensive
applications requires that future scheduling systems must &lt;br/&gt;address the
problem of co-scheduling CPUs, I/O and network resources &lt;br/&gt;when mapping
tasks to appropriate resources. In some HEC architectures, &lt;br/&gt;the
placement of processes has an effect on the overall performance of
&lt;br/&gt;the application due to the underlying interconnection topology. Both
&lt;br/&gt;co-scheduling and workload-aware scheduling will be important for
future &lt;br/&gt;high-end computing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated
software framework will be developed for scheduling &lt;br/&gt;and resource
management for extreme-scale computing systems that &lt;br/&gt;provides the
following capabilities: (i) on-line workload &lt;br/&gt;characterization, (ii)
predictive scheduling based on time-series &lt;br/&gt;modeling and forecasting
of resource utilization and queued workload, &lt;br/&gt;(iii) transparent fault-
tolerant scheduling of applications that are &lt;br/&gt;interrupted by one or
more faults, and (iv) efficient heuristic and &lt;br/&gt;evolutionary algorithms
that consider the workload and resource &lt;br/&gt;characteristics and forecasts
as part of the scheduling decision.&lt;br/&gt;This work represents a mix of
scheduling theory and robust &lt;br/&gt;software development. These algorithms
and the software framework in &lt;br/&gt;a production HEC environment at the
Center &lt;br/&gt;for Advanced Computing (CAC) at the University of Michigan.
The CAC HEC &lt;br/&gt;facility provides a testbed consisting of over 1400 CPUs
representing&lt;br/&gt;multiple processor families (AMD Athlons, Opterons, Apple
Xserve/G5) and &lt;br/&gt;several interconnection systems such as Gigabit
Ethernet and Myrinet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
research will be to advance the &lt;br/&gt;state-of-the-art in scheduling and
resource management for HEC systems. &lt;br/&gt;By implementing and deploying
the proposed framework at CAC, we will be &lt;br/&gt;able to collect realistic
workload traces from a diverse array of &lt;br/&gt;end-users and applications.
This research will serve as a catalyst for &lt;br/&gt;the development of robust
fault-tolerant scheduling algorithms and their &lt;br/&gt;implementation
software for such systems. We specifically address the &lt;br/&gt;scalability of
fault-tolerance mechanisms such as checkpointing/restart&lt;br/&gt;and I/O that
can scale across thousands of processors. Furthermore, our &lt;br/&gt;proposed
integration of research, outreach and education activities will &lt;br/&gt;make
broader impacts to other HEC centers and the scheduling research
&lt;br/&gt;community. The framework developed as part of this project and our
&lt;br/&gt;research results will be disseminated to industry and academia
through &lt;br/&gt;open-source software and high-quality
publications.&lt;br/&gt;