* 0444363
* Collaborative Research:    Performance Toolset for Dynamic Optimization of High-End Hybrid Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Felix Wolf, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 04/30/2008
* USD 128,124.00

Current high-end applications usually exploit just a fraction of the theoretical
performance of large platforms. Interactions among the hardware, system
software, programming interface, and algorithm are extremely complex, and the
implications for development of hybrid MPI+OpenMP Fortran/C/C++ applications are
challenging. The emerging generation of machines will be even more complex, as
will the applications that exploit them. Typical application development and
tuning scenarios involve the manual and separate use of compilers and
performance tools, and program modifications based upon insights laboriously
gleaned from their output. In this proposal, we intend to raise the quality of
the application development and tuning process by creating an integrated
environment for program optimization that reduces the manual labor and guesswork
of existing approaches. We will develop strategies and the corresponding
interfaces that enable the application developer, compiler and performance tools
to collaborate to generate optimized code based upon a variety of sources of
feedback, including performance data from .offline. development runs as well as
from .online. production runs. We will build and deploy a flexible, working
system that combines robust, existing, open source software . a compiler, a
program analysis tool and two performance tools with complementary features -
into a single, coherent environment for collaborative static and dynamic
application tuning. Application codes of varying complexity supplied by our
application partner will motivate our development work as well as test and
demonstrate our results. The result will be a powerful, integrated environment
that can be used to obtain traditional performance data via program monitoring,
event tracing and/or the extraction of hardware counter information, and to
obtain support for the static or dynamic tuning of an application code.
Intellectual Merit The proposed environment integrates several different
existing technologies to provide a new level of support for optimizing hybrid
MPI+OpenMP codes. Support for experimentation with the hybrid programming model
is provided. The range of information that may be exploited by the compiler to
optimize code is expanded to cover many system and application-level phenomena
and a variety of optimization scenarios. Interactions between tools will
facilitate the provision of an approach that is able to handle extreme-scale
computations. Integration issues will be addressed with the goal of creating a
deployable, extensible system. Broader Impacts The tools, ideas, and results of
this project will be freely distributed and made available to the HPC community,
nationally and internationally. Besides the general dissemination of results,
the project has strong ties to performance engineering experts at NCSA. The
tools will be installed on NCSA systems for testing and evaluation and will be
made available to other users. The research brings together compiler,
performance tool, and application developers, enriching the research experience
of graduate students to create a well-rounded IT workforce. The PI is active in
the OpenMP community and the project team has close working relationships with
DOE and DOD. New knowledge generated will be integrated into advanced graduate
coursework.