* 0444712
* Resource and Stress Interactions in Regulating Microbial Communities in a California Grassland Soil
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Joshua Schimel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Resource and Stress Interactions in Regulating Microbial Communities in a
California Grassland Soil &lt;br/&gt;Patricia A. Holden&lt;br/&gt;University of
California-Santa Barbara&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From surface to groundwater, soil
is rich in microbes that perform many functions essential to the entire planet.
In the past, soil microbes have mostly been studied by sampling the surface
where nutrients from plants abound yet microbes experience extremes of moisture
and temperature. Comparatively less studied are soil microbes at depth where
moisture and temperature stresses are reduced, but microbes are more starved for
nutrients. How do the counteracting pressures of water stress and nutrition
affect the makeup and function of soil microbes throughout a depth profile? In
this project, soils along a well-studied depth profile at the UC Sedgwick
Natural Reserve will be sampled and moisture plus carbon nutrition will be
manipulated in the laboratory. Sensitive DNA-based techniques will be used to
discover how microbes change with changing nutrition and how nutrition
facilitates survival when soils are dry. Stable isotopic (13C) forms of carbon
substrates will be traced through microbial populations to discover which
microbial groups are most actively processing nutrients. This research is
important because, while society depends on soil microbes to recycle nutrients
and biodegrade pollutants, how surface and deep soil microbes function is only
weakly understood. The knowledge gained from this research will help in
understanding such broad concerns as pollutant fates and consequences of global
warming. To educate others about the importance of deep soil microbes, an
interpretive display will be constructed at the research field site where adult
groups and K-12 students tour with docents through an existing educational
visitation program.