* 0444682
* SGER: Model Simulation of the Southern Hemisphere Atmospheric Circulation, Antarctic Sea Ice, and Their Interaction: An Evaluation
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Marilyn Raphael, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 09/30/2005
* USD 25,000.00

This research is motivated by the knowledge that there are important
interactions&lt;br/&gt;between Antarctic sea-ice and the large-scale
extratropical circulation that have&lt;br/&gt;to be properly represented in our
climate models because these interactions have&lt;br/&gt;regional as well as
global consequences. Within the twentieth century, large-scale&lt;br/&gt;changes
have been recorded in the atmospheric circulation of the Southern
Hemisphere&lt;br/&gt;and in the Antarctic sea-ice. Therefore the major
scientific goal of the research is that of determining the accuracy of the
models - the Community Climate System Model (CCSM3), the Goddard Institute for
Space Sciences (GISS) model and the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL)
model - with respect to their representations of the Southern Hemisphere large-
scale circulation and the Antarctic sea-ice, and their interaction. To
accomplish this goal, the study will compare satellite-observed sea-ice data and
surface and mid-tropospheric observations with the equivalent data generated by
the model simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has significant broader
impacts. It will establish research collaboration between two women in science
at two institutions - The National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) and
the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Additionally, it will help
educate and train a graduate student at UCLA. The results of the research will
be disseminated at conferences, workshops and in the scientific literature.
&lt;br/&gt;