* 0444517
* Evolutionary convergence and parallelism in zebrafish pigment pattern development
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2005,08/31/2005
* David Parichy, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

Parichy &lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We know very little
about the developmental genetic mechanisms underlying adult form and the
differences in adult form among species. Nevertheless, identification of the
genes and cell behaviors responsible for adult morphology will be essential for
a fuller understanding of diversity and evolution. These studies will
investigate the development and evolution of adult form using as a model pigment
patterns of fishes in the genus Danio. Pigment patterns are especially
interesting because of their ecological and behavioral significance, and
especially tractable because many genetic and cellular mechanisms for pigment
pattern formation have been identified in the zebrafish, D. rerio. Moreover,
close relatives of the zebrafish exhibit a diverse array of pigment patterns
that can be investigated using many of the same methods employed in studies of
the zebrafish itself. Thus, analyses of pigment patterns offer the prospect of
truly integrative studies spanning multiple levels of organization, from genes
to cells, and from individuals to populations and species. The proposed studies
will investigate an important question in evolutionary developmental biology;
namely, when"and how" are genetic changes translated into morphological
differences between species?&lt;br/&gt;First, mechanisms underlying the
evolutionary loss of a striped pigment pattern will be examined in D.
albolineatus. Genetic analyses identified a receptor tyrosine kinase, Fms, as a
likely contributor to the difference between D. rerio (stripes) and D.
albolineatus (no stripes). To test this possibility directly, interspecific
differences in Fms expression and activity will be assayed and fms sequences
will be examined for evidence of natural selection on this locus. This work will
advance our understanding of the mechanisms underlying evolutionary changes in
morphology, and will serve as a model for integrative analyses of biological
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, stripe development in D. kyathit and D.
shanensis will be examined to test whether the same mechanisms underlie stripe
formation in these species as in D. rerio. Previous studies revealed that
horizontal stripes in D. rerio depend on interactions between two classes of
pigment cells. Such interactions may explain a diverse array of pigment patterns
in vertebrates. This will be tested by investigating different modes of
horizontal stripe development in D. kyathit and vertical stripe development in
D. shanensis, using imaging, molecular marker analyses, and genetics. These
studies will determine how conserved developmental mechanisms can be used to
generate differences in trait expression across species, and will provide
insights into pigment pattern evolution across a wide range of ectothermic
vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, different mechanisms
underlying superficially similar stripes in D. rerio and D. nigrofasciatus will
be elucidated. Adult stripes in D. rerio and other species arise from stem cells
at metamorphosis. Adult stripes in D. nigrofasciatus resemble those of D. rerio,
yet develop largely from melanophores that differentiated at earlier stages,
with little contribution from stem cells. Molecular analyses and cell
transplantation experiments will elucidate how the stem cell lineage has changed
in D. nigrofasciatus, and how early melanophore behaviors have been affected.
These experiments will indicate the extent to which developmental mechanisms can
evolve in the absence of corresponding changes in morphology, and will
simultaneously address an important but understudied problem, the role of
postembryonic stem cells in&lt;br/&gt;vertebrate development and
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies will have significant
broader impacts by involving undergraduates and minority students, and by
providing an example of integrative research spanning molecular and organismal
biology. The location of the proposed studies (University of Texas) has a high
proportion of minority students, and the PI has an excellent track record of
involving undergraduates in laboratory research. In addition, one of the senior
personnel is female, has excellent training in organismal biology and chemistry,
and already serves as an outstanding role model for female undergraduate and
graduate students. Finally, the PI is a member of two departments and attracts
students with interests in behavior, ecology, evolution, genetics, and
developmental&lt;br/&gt;biology, thus providing an unusually high degree of
synergism in the laboratory environment.