* 0444748
* Megatransect Population Genetic Survey of the Andes and the Adaptive Hemoglobin Respiratory Proteins of South American Ducks
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Kevin McCracken, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 02/28/2009
* USD 349,558.00

South America's Andean Cordillera offers an unparalleled opportunity to study
the adaptive characteristics of hemoglobin proteins that are locally adapted for
high-altitude respiration (oxygen pressure is 60% of sea level at 4,000 meters).
Hypoxia and natural selection are predicted to have played causal roles in the
speciation of waterfowl within the Andes, shaping morphology and subdividing co-
distributed subspecies and populations among shared areas of endemism. The
population genetics of South American ducks and adaptive characteristics of
hemoglobins will be studied across a Megatransect of the Andes. Vouchered
specimens will be collected and archived in museum collections. Adult and
embryonic a- and b-hemoglobin genes will be sequenced and compared to
mitochondrial DNA and nuclear genes that have evolved
independently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will bridge a gap between
phylogenetic systematics and physiological genetics by studying the population
genetics of adaptation. It will provide comparative DNA and amino acid sequence
data, including specific information about the amino acid positions that have
evolved adaptively in the Andes. This information will contribute to studies of
high-altitude physiology and gene expression and erode the long-standing
disconnect between history and mechanism and pattern and process in studies of
biomolecular adaptation and its role in stimulating
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;