* 0444886
* Collaborative Research: Genomic Analysis of  Dimorphism in Stalk-Eyed Flies (Diopsidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Gerald Wilkinson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 02/28/2010
* USD 363,820.00

This project aims to identify genetic variation responsible for the evolution of
elaborate male traits. Head shape of stalk-eyed flies will be studied because
this trait can exhibit extreme sexual dimorphism. In some species the eyes of
males are separated by a stalk that is longer than the body. Genes and genetic
pathways that exhibit sexually dimorphic expression during eye-stalk development
will be identified and then DNA sequence variation at several candidate genes
will be examined to elucidate the functional roles of these genes. Candidate
genes will be chosen using microarrays, a technology that compares expression of
thousands of genes between two samples, such as males and females. Those genes
with sexually dimorphic expression will be implicated in eyestalk development by
comparing closely related species with or without dimorphic eyestalks. The
functional significance of these genes will be confirmed by detecting
associations between sequence variation and eyestalk lengths of individuals in a
large pedigree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite having most of their DNA in common,
males and females often exhibit dramatic differences in shape and form. Which
pathways create these differences and how these pathways evolve over time is
poorly understood. This research will examine, at the level of the entire
genome, variation in gene expression associated with a specific sexually
dimorphic character. Overall, the results from this project will provide insight
into the relationships between selection, the evolution of sexual dimorphism and
DNA variation.&lt;br/&gt;