* 0444205
* Collaborative Research: Structure and Evolution of Diurnal Cold-Air Pools and Seiches in Small, Closed Basins
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2005,11/30/2009
* Charles Whiteman, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2009
* USD 335,740.00

The meso- and micro-scale meteorology of the stable boundary layer (SBL) over
mountainous terrain is one of the most challenging subjects in the applied and
basic geosciences. The rapid progress in the observation and simulation (Direct
Numerical Simulation, DNS; Large Eddy Simulation, LES; mesoscale modeling, MM)
of the SBL in complex terrain during recent years has led to synergistic
activities, which have helped close cultural gaps between meteorology and
geophysics, between basic and applied research, and between the academic and
operational communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research
project will be another effort in this spirit. In contrast to other recent SBL
field studies that have tried to deal with observations and simulations of very
complex topography, the Principal Investigators will emphasize understanding the
meso- and micro-scale structure and evolution of the SBL within, above, and in
the vicinity of an ideal simple-shaped, small, closed basin cut into a nearly
homogeneous plane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort has been termed
the Meteor Crater Experiment (METCRAX) and the site of the month-long field
phase is the 1.2-km wide, 175-m deep, circularly symmetrical Meteor Crater near
Winslow, Arizona. The simple terrain setting eliminates complicating factors
such as advection from outside the crater and slope asymmetry, allowing the cold
pool structure and evolution to be studied in a controlled manner that typically
is only achieved in laboratory settings. The field observations are designed to
capture (a) the mean and turbulence characteristics of the down-slope and up-
slope flows into and out of the crater, (b) the diurnal cycle of buildup and
breakup of the cold-air pool, (c) seiches and other waves in the cold pool, and
(d) the mesoscale variability of the ambient wind, which is expected to trigger
seiches and waves in the basin. The observations will span length scales from
centimeters to tens of kilometers and time scales from tens of milliseconds to
days. The observed data will be supplemented with state-of-the-art DNS/LES and
MM simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will synthesize and advance
knowledge in a variety of disciplines, including boundary-layer meteorology,
mountain meteorology, the physics of atmospheric waves and instabilities, in
situ and remote sensing of the lower troposphere, DNS, LES, and MM modeling, and
statistical fluid mechanics. The four Principal Investigators and their co-
investigators represent a well-balanced mix of observationalists and
theoreticians, instrumentalists and modelers, applied and basic researchers, and
meteorologists and geophysicists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is the
first in-depth observational and computational study of seiches in a cold-air
pool and is expected to lead to an enhanced understanding of the formation and
breakup of cold pools that will be beneficial for a wide range of applied and
theoretical problems. Between the 1990 and 2000 national censuses, the five
fastest growing states were Nevada, Arizona, Colorado, Utah, and Idaho.
Socioeconomic impacts of cold air pools in this region continue to grow, as well
as vulnerability to climate variability. Potential benefits of this activity for
society at large include improved understanding and prediction of cold pool
events and the associated hazardous weather conditions and air pollution
problems over the western United States. Improvements in understanding of the
meteorology of these SBLs may lead to improvements in the forecasting of the
onset and cessation of the cold-air pools that will have significant societal
benefits and will improve the knowledge of western U.S. climate.