* 0444027
* SGER:    Self-Aligned Nanomanufacturing of Electronic Structures with Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2006
* Yongfeng Lu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2006
* USD 49,997.00

The proposed research will establish a processing method to grow carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) in a self-aligned manner and hence lay a foundation for the
nanomanufacturing of future nanoelectronics using CNTs. The objective of this
project is to develop a laser-based process that will achieve self-aligned
growth of CNTs to connect metallic electrodes at room temperature, for the
purpose to form interconnections and transistors in nanoelectronics. The
proposed process will utilize light enhancement of metallic tips and directional
control of CNT growth by an electrical field. The research team will
systematically investigate: 1) light enhancement and nanoscale local heating at
the apex of tip-shaped electrodes, 2) CNT growth between two metallic electrodes
under laser irradiation, 3) growth direction control by an electrical field, and
4) real-time monitoring of electrical conductivity and growth end-point
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of the proposed
project will lay a foundation for the nanomanufacturing of future
nanoelectronics. The process to be developed will be a self-aligned process
suitable for mass production. It is also compatible to the current manufacturing
processes used in microelectronics. Therefore, this process can be used to
integrate CNT devices and interconnections as key components in integrated
circuits fabricated using the current semiconductor manufacturing
infrastructures. The integration of CNT devices will improve the integration
density, circuit functionality, power consumption and circuit speed with minimum
additional capital investment. The proposed method will not raise the substrate
temperature besides nanoscale local heating at the electrode apexes to
facilitate CNT growth. Therefore, it will not degrade the device structures
fabricated in previous steps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;