* 0444088
* Acquisition of English Articles by Child and Adult L2-English Learners
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Maria-Luisa Maria, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2009
* USD 195,434.00

Children and adults who learn a second language have to learn not only new
linguistic forms, such as words and sentences, but also the subtleties of their
meaning. For instance, articles, such as 'the' and 'a' in English, while simple
in form, encode complex meanings about the state of speaker and hearer
knowledge. Different languages encode subtly different meanings in their article
systems. Some languages lack articles altogether and use other means to talk
about speaker and hearer knowledge. A second language learner acquiring English
is thus faced with the difficult task of establishing exactly what 'the' and 'a'
mean, a task which requires an ability to distinguish subtle differences in
meaning, as well as to attend to the states of speaker and hearer knowledge. The
types of errors that learners make with English articles provide important
information about second language learners' ability to pair complex meanings
with new linguistic forms, and contribute to our understanding of how human
beings acquire new languages. With support from the National Science Foundation,
Dr. Maria-Luisa Zubizarreta and Dr. Tania Ionin will study the acquisition of
English articles by second language learners, examining the patterns of errors
of article use in light of recent linguistic theory, and investigating different
factors that influence the course of acquisition. The role of the learner's
first language in the acquisition of a second language will be examined through
a comparison of English article use among learners whose native languages are
Spanish (whose article system is similar to English); Samoan (whose article
system is different from English); and Russian (which has no articles). The
effect of age on successful acquisition of article meanings will be studied
through a comparison of child and adult second language learners. Learners'
article use will be studied by means of both written tests and recordings of
speech samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to our
understanding of how such factors as learner's age and the grammar of the
learner's native language affect the course of second language acquisition. The
project also has potential pedagogical applications in second language teaching.
Articles are a notoriously difficult part of language for second language
learners to master, yet textbooks of English as a Second Language often devote
little space to a discussion of the English article system. An understanding of
the linguistic factors which underlie acquisition of English articles by second
language learners should have applications for classroom research, which in turn
can feed into the design of instructional materials. Comparisons of second
language learners from different age groups, and from different native language
backgrounds, will allow increased understanding of which aspects of article
choice are particularly difficult for which groups of learners. This project
also provides an opportunity for a graduate student to engage in
research.&lt;br/&gt;