* 0444125
* Phylogeny and Evolution of Cornales:  Integrating Molecules, Morphology, and Fossils
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* JennyQiuyun Xiang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/29/2008
* USD 150,000.00

Recent advances in plant phylogenetic studies revealed that the dogwoods and
close relatives (order Cornales) represent an ancient evolutionary lineage
within the most diverse and highly specialized group of flowering plants, the
Asterid group. The order contains several morphologically diverse families with
excellent fossil records and provides an exceptional system to understand the
evolution and diversification of early asterids. The major goal of the project
is to reconstruct the phylogeny of Cornales using evidence from extensive DNA
sequences, morphology, and fossils. The phylogeny will serve as the basis for
studies of: (1) key morphological transformations among members of the order;
(2) biogeographic origin, intercontinental migration, and radiation of major
cornalean lineages; and (3) pattern and rate of molecular evolution in relation
to morphological differentiation and speciation. The phylogeny will also provide
a framework for a predictive and stable classification within Cornales.
&lt;br/&gt;Plants of Cornales are common tree elements in the forests of
northern hemisphere and are widely cultivated for ornamental and medicinal uses.
They are critically important to forest ecology and many dogwood species have
great importance in horticulture. They also are medically relevant; for example,
Camptotheca acuminata is a close relative of the flowering dogwoods and it
contains a natural anti-cancer drug (camptothecin) that is considered second in
importance to taxol for certain chemotherapy treatments. A robust phylogeny and
predictive and stable classification of the order will provide a basis for
directing horticultural, pharmacological, and other biological studies of these
plants. The extensive gene sequences to be collected in the study will
contribute significantly to the existing molecular datasets of angiosperms and
will facilitate comparative evolutionary studies at higher taxonomic levels.
Furthermore, the project provides training for graduate and undergraduate
students in plant evolutionary biology and systematics. Finally, this project
will add key information to the "Tree of Life" for flowering plants&lt;br/&gt;