* 0444302
* Ways of Making and Knowing: The Material Culture of Empirical Knowledge, London, 2005.
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2005,04/30/2006
* Pamela Smith, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2006
* USD 11,100.00

Ways of Making and Knowing: The Material Culture of Empirical Knowledge A five-
day conference, to be held at several collaborating institutions in London,
11-15 July 2005. Conference organizers are Pamela Smith (Pomona College); Amy
Meyers (YaleCenter for British Art); and Hal Cook (Wellcome Trust Centre); with
partners at several London institutions. Intellectual Merits The aims of this
conference are to build on exciting new work in the history of material culture:
1) to continue to break down the common historiographical dichotomies between
craftskill and scientific knowledge (otherwise given the label .practice and
theory. and other suchphrases), and 2) to showcase some of the most suggestive
new work demonstrating that natural knowledge flowed from an engagement with
natural things, from artisanal practice to scientific analysis. The goals of the
conference will be accomplished by bringing together historians of science and
medicine, art historians, and museum scholars to learn more from one another
through a program that mixes lectures with hands-on demonstrations. The Problem:
From 1450 to the nineteenth century, many changes occurred in the ways in which
knowledge of nature was obtained. New methods of study and new groups of knowers
entered the discussions about natural knowledge. Until the end of the fifteenth
century, natural knowledge was mainly the preserve of scholars trained in the
texts of the ancients, of medicalpractitioners, and of artisans who produced
objects; these groups tended not to engage with one another, but considered
their own kinds of knowledge sufficient. This division began to breakdown in the
Renaissance as artisans proclaimed themselves artist-geniuses and their patrons
began to see a direct connection between artisanal productive abilities and
expertise in natural knowledge; at the same time, especially in medicine,
university curators began to urge learned professors toward making their
knowledge useful. The emergence of the experimental philosophy in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries further broke down the distinction between artisanal
and scholarly knowledge. Experts in the knowledge of nature largely incorporated
into their own epistemology the empirical and artisanal view that knowing came
from making and practicing: that working with natural things, whether by
fabricating objects or by using nature's own products yielded true knowledge of
the natural world. This new pursuit came to be called.experimental. philosophy
and would eventually come to be called .natural science..Yet, for various
reasons that were partially epistemological and partially sociological, many of
the experimental philosophers continued to draw a distinction between
theoretical knowledge and practical knowledge. The view that craftspeople more
or less mindlessly followed a collection of recipes or rules was taken over by
historians of science who then assigned only a minor role to artisans in the
production of knowledge about nature. Recent investigation into the workshop
practices of artisans belies such a view of craft knowledge. A more intensive
examination of workshop practices has made it clear that the methods of
theartisan were neither rote nor fortuitous, but arose from conscious
experimentation and artisanal theorizing. Such investigation has begun to
delineate a vernacular epistemology and a vernacular.science. of matter. This
vernacular understanding of matter appears to be informed by popularmedical and
religious knowledge and practices.The first aim of the conference is thus to
examine the ways in which crafts people and others involved in the production of
material things from the fifteenth to the nineteenth centuryconceived of their
own knowledge and how they employed that knowledge in working with natural
things. Broader Impacts. The conference will not only include scholarly
presentations but also hands-on demonstrations of craft skills and
apprenticeship for participants. Through presentations and demonstrations at the
British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and other popular venues, the
project will reach large and diverse audiences. The PI also plans to organize
walking tours and to distribute pamphlets as a means to engage the public in
this project.