* 0444134
* Collaborative Research:  Plankton Community Structure and Iron Distribution in the Southern Drake Passage and Scotia Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Sarah Gille, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,256,000.00

The Shackleton Fracture Zone (SFZ) in Drake Passage of the Southern Ocean
defines a boundary between low and high phytoplankton waters. Low chlorophyll
water flowing through the southern Drake Passage emerges as high chlorophyll
water to the east, and recent evidence indicates that the Southern Antarctic
Circumpolar Current Front (SACCF) is steered south of the SFZ onto the Antarctic
Peninsula shelf where mixing between the water types occurs. The mixed water is
then advected off-shelf with elevated iron and phytoplankton biomass. The SFZ is
therefore an ideal natural laboratory to improve the understanding of plankton
community responses to natural iron fertilization, and how these processes
influence export of organic carbon to the ocean interior. The bathymetry of the
region is hypothesized to influence mesoscale circulation and transport of iron,
leading to the observed patterns in phytoplankton biomass. The position of the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) is further hypothesized to influence the
magnitude of the flow of ACC water onto the peninsula shelf, mediating the
amount of iron transported into the Scotia Sea. To address these hypotheses, a
research cruise will be conducted near the SFZ and to the east in the southern
Scotia Sea. A mesoscale station grid for vertical profiles, water sampling, and
bottle incubation enrichment experiments will complement rapid surface surveys
of chemical, plankton, and hydrographic properties. Distributions of manganese,
aluminum and radium isotopes will be determined to trace iron sources and
estimate mixing rates. Phytoplankton and bacterial physiological states
(including responses to iron enrichment) and the structure of the plankton
communities will be studied. The primary goal is to better understand how
plankton productivity, community structure and export production in the Southern
Ocean are affected by the coupling between bathymetry, mesoscale circulation,
and distributions of limiting nutrients. The proposed work represents an
interdisciplinary approach to address the fundamental physical, chemical and
biological processes that contribute to the abrupt transition in chl-a which
occurs near the SFZ. Given recent indications that the Southern Ocean is
warming, it is important to advance the understanding of conditions that
regulate the present ecosystem structure in order to predict the effects of
climate variability. This project will promote training and learning across a
broad spectrum of groups. Funds are included to support postdocs, graduate
students, and undergraduates. In addition, this project will contribute to the
development of content for the Polar Science Station website, which has been a
resource since 2001 for instructors and students in adult education, home
schooling, tribal schools, corrections education, family literacy programs, and
the general public.