* 0444301
* Perceived Facial Expressions of Emotion as Motivational Incentives
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* M. Gross, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 03/31/2010
* USD 480,141.00

Past research on the functions of facial expressions of emotion (FEE) has
focused largely on their role in the experience of emotion and as universal
social-communicative signals, but so far no systematic research has addressed
their role as social rewards and punishers. The objective of this research
program is therefore to explore whether FEEs, such as anger, joy, or fear, have
a motivating effect on the perceiver and to what extent their motivating effect
depends on the perceiver's motivational needs for power and affiliation. Based
on existing research, it is hypothesized that FEEs differ in how strongly they
express the sender's dominance (e.g., anger or contempt) or submission (e.g.,
fear) and the sender's friendliness (e.g., joy) or hostility (e.g., anger).
Submissive or friendly FEEs are expected to be pleasurable and have a rewarding
effect on the perceiver, whereas dominant or hostile FEEs are expected to be
aversive and have a punishing effect on the perceiver. In addition, the
rewarding or punishing effects of FEEs are also expected to depend on the
perceiver. Specifically, it is hypothesized that individuals high in power
motivation, who seek to dominate others, experience a submissive face as
rewarding and a dominant face as punishing, whereas individuals low in power
motivation will not show these differences. Similarly, individuals high in
affiliation motivation, who seek to have close, friendly relationships with
others, should experience a friendly face as rewarding and a hostile face as
punishing, whereas individuals low in affiliation motivation will not show these
differences. FEEs' motivating effects on the perceiver are expected to manifest
themselves in their capacity to grab or deflect the perceiver's attention,
influence physiological and psychological indicators of motivational arousal,
have reinforcing and punishing effects on learning, and influence interpersonal
behavior and affect.&lt;br/&gt; These hypotheses will be tested in nine studies
in which participants' needs for affiliation and power will be assessed with
self-report and picture-story methods or experimentally manipulated. In most
studies, FEEs will be presented as pictures, but they will also be enacted by
assistants of the experimenter in two studies. A broad array of methods for
gauging FEEs' motivating effects will be used. They will range from attentional-
orienting, procedural-learning, and classical-conditioning tasks to the
assessment of physiological and endocrine indicators of motivation. In addition,
video-coding of verbal and nonverbal markers of affiliation and power motivation
in social interaction situations will be used in two studies.&lt;br/&gt; The
proposed research will promote teaching, training, and learning, as
undergraduate and graduate students will participate in all portions of the
research process. The research will help to enhance our understanding of human
behavior by charting out how FEEs, which are often displayed and received
outside of interaction partners' conscious awareness, shape the perceiver's
cognitive, affective, physiological, and learning processes and behavior. It may
thus extend and sharpen our knowledge about the often subtle, but powerful role
of nonverbal signals in social interactions.&lt;br/&gt;