* 0444711
* Effects of Habitat Fragmentation on Consumer-Resource Dynamics in Environments Varying in Space and Time
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Philip Chapman, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2010
* USD 250,000.00

In all regions of the world, human activities fragment habitats into spatially
isolated parts. It is clear this isolation can harm populations of animals. In
particular, there is evidence that the number of animals per unit area of
habitat declines as the area of habitat decreases. The reasons why this occurs
are poorly understood. A possible explanation for the effect of habitat area on
population density is that animals in fragmented habitats have restricted access
to variety in the foods they need to survive and reproduce. The proposed work
will test the hypotheses that habitat fragmentation causes reduced population
density by restricting access of animals to diversity in the foods. Researchers
will conduct an experiment where one population of grasshoppers has access to a
wide range of foods that vary in quality over space and time. Another population
of the same size will be divided into subpopulations, each of which will have
limited access to the total range of resources. Researchers will also construct
mathematical models of fragmentation effects on interactions between consumers
and resources.

This work will improve the scientific foundation for decisions on human land-use
world wide. In addition, we will use the project to provide research problems
for interdisciplinary training to graduate students in mathematics, ecology, and
statistics.