* 0444745
* Collaborative Research: Testing Measures of Evolvability: Adaptation and Genetic Constraints in Dalechampia Vines (Euphorbiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2011
* W. Scott Armbruster, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 05/31/2011
* USD 380,000.00

Genetic change is a dominant theme in the evolutiona and diversification of
organisms, yet surprisingly little is known about which traits and organisms are
most likely to undergo major shifts in gene frequency in response to natural
selection and environmental change. Empirical study of change in heritable
traits depends on having an operational measure of potential change that
reflects the ability of a trait to respond to a given external selection
pressure under the constraint of stabilizing or opposing selection on correlated
characters. The investigators suggest that the additive genetic variance
conditioned on correlated traits and scaled by the square of the trait mean,
"conditional IA," is a better measure of short-term change than the traditional
measure, "heritability." They will use these new measures to test hypotheses
about the role of genetic constraints in determining large-scale patterns of
variation in the blossoms of Dalechampia, a neotropical vine. They will use a
combination of artificial-selection and field experiments to document potential
for evolution and patterns of natural selection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will advance our understanding of how organisms evolve in response to
natural selection, with possible applications to understanding response of
plants to climate change, crop breeding, and the origins of pesticide and drug
resistance. The project will train two postdoctoral researchers, one master's
student, and several undergraduate students. It will also promote international
collaboration between the USA, Norway, the United Kingdom, and several Latin
American countries. &lt;br/&gt;