* 0444352
* Structure and Function of Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Vasanthi Jayaraman, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 01/31/2010
* USD 415,000.00

Communication between nerve cells serves as the basis of all brain activity. One
of the fundamental steps involved in signal transmission between the nerve
cells, is the conversion of a chemical signal liberated at the end of one nerve
cell, into an electrical signal at the second nerve cell. This step is mediated
by a class of membrane bound proteins known as ligand gated ion channels. An
important member of this family is the glutamate receptor, which upon binding to
the chemical signaling molecule glutamate undergoes a series of changes that
culminate in formation of an ion channel across the cell membrane that leads to
the generation of an electrical signal. The PI's research is aimed at
understanding the series of events and the role of these in the generation of
the electrical signal. Her laboratory has probed the vibrations of the glutamate
and protein to study their atomic-level environment and hence obtained detailed
insight into the interaction between the signaling molecule glutamate and the
receptor. The PI will now extend these investigations to study the changes in
these interactions in a time-resolved manner, as the protein evolves from the
unbound state to the glutamate bound form. These high-resolution kinetic
structural studies coupled with functional investigations of the protein will
lead to a basic understanding of the role of the specific interactions between
glutamate and the receptor in the formation and closure of the transmembrane ion
channels and hence provide insight into the mechanism by which these proteins
convert chemical signals into electrical signals. As a part of this project the
PI will be training the future scientists, students and postdoctoral fellows, in
cutting edge interdisciplinary research that covers the synergistic areas of
chemistry, biochemistry and neuroscience. The goal of the training is to develop
the student's and fellow's technical and critical thinking and more importantly
reinforce their interest in science.