* 0444188
* CAREER: Algorithmic issues in geometric network optimization, binary space partitions, and metamorphic systems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* Adrian Dumitrescu, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 04/30/2011
* USD 474,918.00

The new variants of known problems (like traveling salesman, binary space
partitions for space subdivisions, and geometric dilation) are being studied in
order to produce new techniques and address key issues in algorithm design and
approximation. Besides that, they are likely to have other implications. For
example, the study of geometric dilation may provide better ways of designing
transportation networks, and efficient ways for upgrading existing ones. The
theoretical study of metamorphic systems is necessary for understanding their
capabilities and for developing algorithms that control them. An important
aspect of this research is advancing the integration of techniques from
different areas --- discrete and combinatorial geometry, geometric graph theory,
graph theory, topology, linear programming --- in the design of geometric
algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research deals with algorithmic questions
from the areas of computational geometry and robotics, grouped in three
directions. The problems in the first category are in the area of geometric
network optimization where the focus will be new variants of the classic
traveling salesman problem that have emerged in the last decade, such as those
with neighborhoods and the angle restricted tour problem. These efforts are
aimed at understanding the differences between various classes of regions, which
make some instances harder to approximate than others. A second research
direction deals with cutting techniques applied to two important problems:
binary space partitions and stock cutting algorithms. A third category includes
fundamental questions generated by the study and analysis of metamorphic robotic
systems, a relatively new research direction in robotics. Two basic capabilities
of metamorphic systems are researched: reconfiguration and locomotion.
Development of such systems is regarded as very promising, due to their
versatility and high degree of fault tolerance. An important aspect of this
research is advancing the integration of techniques from different areas ---
discrete and combinatorial geometry, geometric graph theory, graph theory,
topology, linear programming --- in the design of geometric
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;