* 0444741
* A Mutualism in Context: Costs, Benefits and Conditionality in a Multi-species Ant-plant Symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,07/31/2008
* Maureen Stanton, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2008
* USD 359,999.00

Situations where species each benefit the other are called mutualisms.
Mutualisms are widespread, ranging from humans and their domesticated plants and
animals, to flowers and their pollinators, and even to the bacteria in the
digestive tracts of most animals. Most ecological research on mutualisms has
considered only pairs of interacting species, even though we know that many of
these systems have multiple partners on both sides of the mutualism. For
example, many insects may pollinate a plant species, and many plant species may
be pollinated by a single insect species. We will be examining multi-species
mutualism in a model system-- the whistling thorn acacia trees of East Africa
and the symbiotic ants that protect them. Does the fact that there are several
ant species competing for host trees in this system result in adaptations by the
acacias that encourage more protective ant species at the expense of others
(poorer protectors)? Do tree responses change the "balance of power" among these
ant species, altering their tendency to coexist? How does this balance change
depending on the age of the tree, the richness of the soil, and the abundance of
browsing animals? We will carry out a series of descriptive studies and
controlled experiments designed to answer these questions. These studies will
give us a much more realistic understanding of multi-species mutualisms that
should be broadly applicable to diverse and useful mutualist systems.