* 0444842
* The Evolution and Diversification of a Symbiotic Bioluminescence Signaling System
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* John Sparks, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/28/2011
* USD 330,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. John Sparks of the American Museum of Natural
History to examine the evolution, coevolutionary interactions and biogeography
of the symbiosis between fishes of the family Leiognathidae (ponyfishes) and the
luminous marine prokaryote Photobacterium leiognathi. The fish host is abundant,
economically important, and widely distributed throughout the Indo-Pacific. The
fish harbors a dense population of the bacterial symbiont in an internal
circumesophageal structure, called a light organ, providing the bacteria with
oxygen and nutrients, and uses bacterial luminescence in various displays
associated with predation, anti-predation and sex-specific signaling. Males of
most ponyfish species exhibit greatly enlarged, structurally complex and
species-specific light organs, whereas those of females are comparatively poorly
developed. It is hypothesized that sexual selection for male luminescence
signaling is correlated with morphological diversification of the light organ
system (LOS) and speciation in ponyfishes. Although the evolution and functions
of a sexually-dimorphic bioluminescent system based on species-specific male
signaling are well documented in fireflies, in vertebrates these systems are
poorly understood. Ponyfishes provide an excellent system in which to address
these questions. The evolutionary relationships of ponyfishes will be
reconstructed using DNA sequence data and phenotypic features of the fish's LOS,
and examined in light of symbiont patterns of relationship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide insight into the evolution of
luminescence-signaling systems in fishes, the role of sexual selection in
ponyfish diversification, coevolutionary interactions in a symbiosis in which
the bacterium is acquired with each new generation, and the role of the
symbiosis in the biogeographic distribution of the fish and bacterium. The
project will provide exposure to fieldwork and training to post-doctoral and
student participants in the areas of systematics, symbiosis, ichthyology,
coevolution, and biogeography.&lt;br/&gt;