* 0444067
* Acquisition of a Multi-Anvil Press
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2005,11/30/2007
* David Jenkins, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 11/30/2007
* USD 148,016.00

EAR-0444067&lt;br/&gt;Jenkins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for the
acquisition of a multi-anvil press for the primary purpose of studying
mineralogical reactions and mineral-composition variations relevant to ultra-
high-pressure (UHP) metamorphism. Several projects have been identified that
will be the initial focus of research. First, the upper-pressure stability of
glaucophane, which breaks down to talc and jadeite, will be examined to try to
resolve existing discrepancies in the location of this boundary. This reaction
boundary defines the upper-pressure limit of the blueschist metamorphic facies
and may correspond in pressure to the onset of UHP metamorphism (defined by the
presence of coesite). Second, univariant reactions defining the conversion of
the low-pressure assemblage zoisite + diopside-rich clinopyroxene to the high-
pressure assemblage lawsonite + grossular-rich garnet in the system CaO-MgO-
Al2O3-SiO2-H2O will be investigated to better understand the pressures at which
lawsonite-bearing eclogites occur. Third, the possible expansion of the
stability field of zoisite-bearing eclogites, limited by the reaction 6 zoisite
= 4 grossular + 5 kyanite + coesite + 3 H2O, resulting from the addition of
ferric iron to the above system will be examined. The latter two projects will
help delimit the stability field of zoisite (or epidote) in eclogites from UPH
terranes. This mineral may be an important host for returning water to Earth's
mantle. The multi-anvil press requested in this proposal will support research
on many other projects relevant to UHP metamorphism. The broader impacts of this
proposal are (1) improving the research infrastructure at this institution by
allowing research at pressures and temperatures that were not previously
attainable and (2) by providing undergraduate and graduate students
opportunities to conduct research relevant to planetary interiors. &lt;br/&gt;