* 0444254
* Dynamical Processes of Orographic Cumuli
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Bart Geerts, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 04/30/2009
* USD 460,473.00

This research is part of the CuPIDO (Cumulus Photographic Investigation and
Doppler Observations) project. This campaign, to be conducted in the summer of
2006, intends to describe early cumulus development over the Santa Catalina
Mountains in Arizona at the meso-gamma and cloud scales, with an emphasis on
boundary-layer evolution and the effects of entrainment, detrainment, and
glaciation on individual convective towers that may develop in succession and
culminate in the cumulonimbus stage. This research will utilize an advanced
airborne cloud radar (Wyoming Cloud Radar; WCR) and in situ aircraft
thermodynamic measurements. The project will be collaborative with a University
of Arizona scientist who will apply newly developed techniques in digital
stereo-photogrammetry. The geo-located cloud-edge maps, inferred from the
digital stereo-images, will complement the WCR observations since the cloud base
and the earliest stages of cumulus development cannot be detected by the radar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective is to describe the radar echo and
kinematic structure and evolution of cumuli at an entrainment-resolving scale,
and to merge this description with in situ cloud and thermodynamic data, in
order to gain new insights into the fundamental dynamical processes controlling
the growth and decay of cumulus congestus. In this context, the mountains
provide a natural laboratory, given the regular, repetitive, and geographically
fixed development of cumuli. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The secondary objective
specifically deals with the orographic forcing of cumulus clouds. The spatial
and temporal changes in the environment in which orographic cumuli develop and
decay will be studied in order to gain insights into the synergy between deep
cumulus convection and orographically-induced mesoscale circulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past half-century several field studies of cumulus
dynamics have been conducted by means of aircraft making in situ measurements,
and by means of ground-based precipitation radars. These studies form the basis
of current conceptual representations of entrainment; however, entrainment
remains the least understood factor in cumulus development. Newly developed
technology provides the ability to place flight level observations, collected
while penetrating a cumulus, in the context of radar-derived echo and velocity
field at a resolution of 40 m or better. This combination constitutes a powerful
tool for the study of fundamental cumulus dynamics. In particular, the WCR
reveals entrainment events at various scales in the airflow and echo fields.
Close proximity aircraft data allow assessment of the thermodynamic and cloud
microphysical characteristics of these events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cumulus
convection operates at a range of horizontal and vertical scales and these
scales are not resolved by operational numerical weather prediction (NWP)
models. Thus the simulation of its impact is challenging, and cumulus
parameterization remains one of the greatest uncertainties in NWP models and
general circulation models (GCMs). New generation operational NWP models may
resolve mesoscale orographic circulations, but the effect of cumulus convection
will remain in need of parameterization. Observations of the fine-scale
structure and evolution of cumuli, and the resulting new insights into the
fundamental dynamical processes of cumuli interacting with their environment,
should lead to a more accurate parameterization of the overall effect of cumulus
convection on the resolved scales of NWP models and GCMs.