* 0444238
* Ericaceae in the Central Andes: Bolivia and Adjacent Southern Peru
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* James Luteyn, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 01/31/2008
* USD 275,000.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;James Luteyn&lt;br/&gt;DEB
0444238&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed study area, encompasing the Andes
mountains of Bolivia and adjacent southern Peru, is the least known region in
South America for plants including those in the blueberry plant family
(Ericaceae). This plant family is ecologically dominant in montane habitats, is
a source of food for animals and to a lesser degree humans, and has medicinal
potential through antioxidant properties. By a combination of field work to
collect and observe the plants in their natural habitats, museum studies of
collections from throughout the world, and cutting-edge molecular laboratory
studies, the blueberry family will be taxonomically revised by the Principal
Investigator in colaboration with local Bolivian and Peruvian students, a New
York Botanical Garden graduate student, and colleagues at Wake Forest University
and the City University of New York. Plants totally new to science are expected
to be discovered and described. A hard-copy taxonomic treatment will be
published in book form in an international plant sciences journal. An electronic
version will be disseminated through the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
project has broad impacts for systematic botany, conservation biology, genomics,
phylogenetics, informatics, and species-level studies. It synthesizes all
available data and generates new information about plants in the blueberry
family in Bolivia and southern Peru and sets the stage for future
monographic/evolutionary studies. It enhances understanding of plant
evolutionary history and ecological and distributional patterns of species near
the limits of their range, and suggests directions for additional work in other
lesser known groups of plants. Data is shared with other researchers and
materials are provided to incorporate molecular data at a level of diversity
seldom available. The project enhances and strengthens the infrastructure of
science by providing new collections and equipment to local and international
museums. Through its training component and interactions with scientists, the
project strengthens networks of cooperation and educates underrepresented groups
in Latin America in the latest technological methods. Finally, it will make
specimen data and all other products available to everyone on the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;