* 0444696
* Collaborative Research: Field demonstration of utility of NEES Vibrator to meet EarthScope science objectives for earthquake-hazard and crustal-structure studies
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Simon Klemperer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2005
* USD 17,599.00

The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) is
a Major Research Equipment project funded through the Engineering Directorate of
NSF. One of NEES' major field experimentation and monitoring installations is
the large-scale mobile shakers (seismic vibrators) and associated
instrumentation for dynamic field studies of geotechnical and structural systems
operated at UT Austin by Professors Stokoe, Rathje and Wilson. EarthScope is the
largest Major Research Equipment project ever funded in the Geosciences
Directorate of NSF. As such, it will be the flagship project affecting the
majority of academic geoscientists in the USA for the next decade, and will
advance our understanding of the structure, evolution and dynamics of the North
American continent. &lt;br/&gt;This demonstration project will attempt to
demonstrate the utility of the NEES vibrators in conjunction with the national
seismic instrumentation pool operated by IRIS-PASSCAL, for high-resolution
reflection imaging (for earthquake-hazard reduction and other projects), crustal
deep reflection and refraction profiling (for Earthscope continental structure
projects), and shear-wave crustal profiling to measure anisotropy (for physical
property measurements of fluids in sediments for seismic performance analysis,
up to strain patterns in the deep crust needed to understand the dynamics of the
continents). The demonstration is proposed to be in a geographic area of
existing Earthscope interest, funded for study in the first year of EarthScope
science funding. Our demonstration will address primary science objectives of
Earthscope in ways not possible with existing Earthscope
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USArray component of the EarthScope
experiment is a continental-scale seismic observatory designed to provide a
foundation for integrated studies of continental lithosphere and deep Earth
structure over a wide range of scales. The USArray facility will consist of
three major seismic components, of which one is a flexible component of 400
portable, three-component, short-period and broadband seismographs ("Flexarray")
of 2000 single-channel high frequency recorders for active and passive source
studies that will augment the transportable broadband passive seismic array.
Currently, a major gap in Earthscope planning is that there is no easy access to
active seismic sources. This is a gap that the NEES vibrators can help fill - if
our test is successful.&lt;br/&gt;