* 0444771
* National Science Foundation Alan T. Waterman Award
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Kristi Anseth, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) named Kristi Anseth, 35, to receive the
Alan T. Waterman Award, the foundation's most prestigious for a young
researcher. The award includes a medal and a $500,000 grant over a three-year
period to carry out research or advanced study in the field and institution of
her choosing. Anseth's award is based on groundbreaking work in new biomaterials
that are engineered to help the body heal itself. Unlike synthetic body parts,
such new materials may lead to new treatments for damaged knees, hips and even
heart structures that will contribute to faster healing and a quicker return to
a better quality of life. Anseth started on a fast track toward her Ph.D., and
she hasn't slowed her pace since. An able and focused student, she achieved a
doctorate at CU-Boulder in 1994, just two years after completing her bachelor's
degree at Purdue. A driven researcher, she was the first engineer and the only
woman engineer to become an investigator for the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute. A creative scientist, she combined her knowledge of biology,
chemistry and engineering into an interdisciplinary focus on tissue engineering,
allowing her to find ways to develop new synthetic "scaffolds," or templates to
regulate cell behavior and function, and to promote ways for cells to
proliferate and form natural, but new, living tissues.&lt;br/&gt;The scaffold is
really just re-created tissues, and if you think of it like a building, this is
a framework from which other structures can be formed, Anseth explains. The
scaffold itself is designed to be injected into the body in liquid form. But
when molecules are introduced and then light-activated, a gel-like material is
formed that, when injected, provides the affected area with strength, stability
and flexibility. Anseth's lab was the first to develop light-activated
biomaterials that would degrade and interact with cells, while promoting tissue
regrowth. The hope is that these biodegradable, flexible materials may be
available within a decade for medical procedures that will allow the "injection"
of new body parts into people who suffer from debilitating injuries or diseases
-- without the trauma of major surgery. We still have to answer some questions
about how to make a scaffold structurally and mechanically able to produce
functional cartilage, how to accelerate cartilage formation and control
degradation of the scaffolds, and then fabricate the scaffolds in such a way as
to minimize surgical invasiveness while facilitating their placement during a
procedure, Anseth says. &lt;br/&gt;The Waterman Award, created in 1975, is named
for NSF's first director, Alan T. Waterman, and recognizes demonstrated
individual achievements in scientific or engineering research that place the
awardee at the forefront of his or her peers. Criteria include originality,
innovation and significant impact on the individual's field of science or
engineering. Candidates must be U.S. citizens or permanent residents, and may
not be more than 35 years old, or seven years beyond receiving a Ph.D., by the
end of the year in which nominated. &lt;br/&gt;The $500,000 prize money is
disbursed over a three-year period, with the Director's Office providing the
first year of funding ($166,667) and the Engineering Education and Centers
Division of the Directorate for Engineering providing $166, 667 in year two and
$166,666 in year three.&lt;br/&gt;