* 0444051
* Computational Studies of Dynamical Phenomena in Nanoscale Ferromagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Per Arne Rikvold, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2009
* USD 360,000.00

In recent years, revolutionary progress has occurred in the scientific
understanding and technological applications of materials that derive their
functionality from nanometer-sized particles and/or ultrathin films of one or a
few atomic monolayers. One can now engineer materials at the atomic level and
study the structure and dynamics of individual particles with nanometer
resolution microscopies. These exciting experimental and technological
developments are matched by novel computational algorithms and computer
architectures that make it possible to numerically study dynamic effects in
theoretical models of such materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
This award will support theoretical and computational research to further
develop novel simulation algorithms for hysteresis and thermally driven
magnetization reversal in models of nanoscale ferromagnets. The research will
improve the understanding of dynamical phenomena in real nanoscale ferromagnetic
materials at nonzero temperature over a large range of time scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Improved basic understanding of the
dynamics of magnetization switching and hysteresis in real nanoscale magnetic
materials will result. This will clarify the relations between materials
structure and dynamics and, at the same time, data integrity and read/write
speed in future ultra-high density magnetic recording media and magnetic random
access memories. Students at all levels will be involved with this
project.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, revolutionary progress has
occurred in the scientific understanding and technological applications of
materials that derive their functionality from nanometer-sized particles and/or
ultrathin films of one or a few atomic monolayers. One can now engineer
materials at the atomic level and study the structure and dynamics of individual
particles with nanometer resolution microscopies. These exciting experimental
and technological developments are matched by novel computational algorithms and
computer architectures that make it possible to numerically study dynamic
effects in theoretical models of such
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This award will support
theoretical and computational research to further develop novel simulation
algorithms for hysteresis and thermally driven magnetization reversal in models
of nanoscale ferromagnets. The research will improve the understanding of
dynamical phenomena in real nanoscale ferromagnetic materials at nonzero
temperature over a large range of time scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Improved basic understanding of the dynamics of magnetization switching
and hysteresis in real nanoscale magnetic materials will result. This will
clarify the relations between materials structure and dynamics and, at the same
time, data integrity and read/write speed in future ultra-high density magnetic
recording media and magnetic random access memories. Students at all levels will
be involved with this project.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;