* 0444972
* Testing the Utility of Mitochondrial Genome Rearrangements as Phylogenetic Markers in Ischnocera (Insecta:Phthiraptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Kevin Johnson, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/28/2009
* USD 318,000.00

The methods by which genomic data are analyzed to construct phylogenetic trees
are of vital significance in interpreting conclusions. Consequently, new methods
of analysis need to be tested before they can be accepted. Dr. Cameron and his
colleagues aim to test a range of proposed methods to infer evolutionary
patterns from genomic data collected from numerous species of the largest
suborder of lice, the Ischnocera, using variations (inversions, transpositions,
losses or duplications) in the arrangement of genes. The test system is the
mitochondrial genome of these lice. Mitochondria are the energy-producing
portion of the cell, and their genomes are thousands of times smaller than the
main nuclear genome, making it possible to sequence a large number of species
and hence allowing comprehensive comparisons. Lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera) are a
model system for studying mitochondrial genome evolution because they
have&lt;br/&gt;the fastest documented rate of genomic evolution with the largest
numbers of gene rearrangements. This evolutionary speed makes it possible to
draw a large amount of information out of a small number of species and to
compare this information with evolutionary patterns deduced by other means
(louse anatomy and gene sequences). The dataset which Cameron and colleagues
will collect on louse mitochondrial genomes will provide empirical data on which
analytical methods can be compared.&lt;br/&gt; This study will support a young
postdoctoral investigator working in the laboratory of Prof. Whiting at Brigham
Young University, in the emerging field of comparative genomics. Topics under
study relate to basic biological questions such as how species evolve, how they
diverge from one another, and how they develop new genes. This in turn has
applications in medical research towards understanding the genetic basis of
disease, particularly those affected by mutations in the mitochondrial genome.
By studying genomes smaller and simpler than the nuclear genome, Dr. Cameron and
his colleagues seek to extend the analytical foundations from which comparative
genomics can grow. &lt;br/&gt;