* 0444356
* SGER: Organometallic-inorganic hybrid catalysts for olefin metathesis: sol-gel synthesis in supercritical carbon dioxide
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2006
* H. Henry Lamb, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 01/31/2006
* USD 49,871.00

Abstract

Proposal Title: SGER: Organometallic-Inorganic Hybrid Catalysts for Olefin
Metathesis: Sol-Gel Synthesis in Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Proposal Number:
CTS-0444356

Principal Investigators: H. Henry Lamb

Institution: North Carolina State

The objective of this proposal is to design and synthesize solid catalysts
incorporating quasi-molecular organo-transition metal complexes within a silica
aerogel matrix. Co-condensation of tetraalkoxysilanes with sol-gel
functionalized organometallic precursors will be performed in supercritical
carbon dioxide. Specific topics to be explored include: control of the
nuclearity and 3-D spatial configuration of the active sites, bonding of the
metal centers to the aerogel framework, and hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity of the
aerogel pores. A broad range of powerful spectroscopic techniques will be used
to characterize the catalysts, including NMR, XAFS, and DRIFTS. The catalysts
will be examined for activity and selectivity in the metathesis of terminal,
internal, and functionalized olefins.

Olefin metathesis has important applications in the synthesis of fine chemicals
and pharmaceuticals, and there are new opportunities related to the conversion
of biorenewables. The project will provide an excellent educational experience
for a female graduate student. Dissemination of the results will be through
journal publications and presentations at national meetings. The ability to
orient functionality will be a major advance and could transform this area of
synthetic catalytic chemistry. The principal investigator has chosen an
important catalytic conversion to examine, and the potential industrial
applications could grow rapidly if the project proves ultimately successful.

