* 0444617
* Collaborative Research:  Transparency: Ultrastructural and Biochemical Specialization in Muscular and Ocular Tissues
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* William Kier, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 02/28/2009
* USD 189,999.00

Transparency is a remarkable and widespread characteristic of many biological
tissues. In addition to occurring in all eyes, transparent tissue is found in
many oceanic animals where it functions as the ultimate form of camouflage.
Remarkably little is known, however, about how this trait is achieved. This
project will investigate the basis of transparency in eyes and muscle using
mathematical models, new microscopy techniques, and biochemical analyses.
Transparent muscle will be analyzed in two different species of glass catfish
and compared with the muscle of opaque fish. The lenses of the eyes of squid and
octopus will also be examined. &lt;br/&gt;This project will provide fundamental
new insights into the structural and biochemical alterations that are used by
animals to achieve transparency. Such insights have important implications for
understanding the costs of transparency in many oceanic species and in the
development and prevention of cataracts and corneal opacities in humans. In
addition, understanding how light travels through tissue is important not only
for transparent tissues, but for non transparent tissues as well, with important
implications ranging from satellite-based analyses of large-scale changes in the
ocean to non-invasive optical methods for the diagnosis and treatment of skin
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;This project also trains female graduate student in
biophysics, a subject with very few women. In addition to the usual technical
articles, the results will be presented in at least one popular science
magazine. Finally, the project will strengthen ties between Duke University and
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, neighboring universities that
interact less than they should. &lt;br/&gt;