* 0444065
* Reconstructions and Representations of Cerebral Cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* David Van Essen, National Institutes of Health
* Interagency Agreement
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 06/30/2009
* USD 250,000.00

Neuroscientists are faced with a torrent of experimental data about the
structure, function, and development of the brain in health and disease. To aid
in coping with this flood, the present project aims to provide the neuroscience
community with (i) a well-integrated set of software tools for visualizing,
analyzing, accessing, and communication information about the cerebral and
cerebellar cortex and (ii) a set of surface-based atlases that provide a
compendium of information about human, monkey and rodent cortex. One objective
is to implement a unified software application (Caret) that will carry out fully
automated segmentation (to capture the shape of the cortex in individual
brains), plus multiple stages of surface-based analysis. These analyses will
include generating cortical flat maps and spherical maps, identifying cortical,
sulci, mapping cortical thickness, and registering individuals to the atlas map.
A second objective is to enhance the Surface management System (SuMS) databases,
by incorporation powerful search capabilities, and by improved methods for
visualizing search results, both online and offline. SuMS will be a distributed
database network that allows local file storage with multiple security levels as
well as access to the central SuMS repository. A third objective is to improve
the methods for surface-based registration of one cerebral hemisphere to
another, in order to better compensate for individual variability within a
species and to provide improved methods for making comparisons across species. A
forth objective is to expand the mapping of experimental data from a variety of
sources onto surface-based atalses of human, macaque, rat, and mouse cerebral
and cerebellar cortex. A major focus will be on the development of probabilistic
maps of visual areas in monkey and human cortex. Attainment of these overall
objectives will allow neuroscientists everywhere to access many types of
experimental information about cerebral and cerebellar cortex ith much greater
ease and flexibility than is current possible.