* 0444577
* RUI: Mutagenesis and Mechanistic Studies of the Reactions Catalyzed by Firefly Luciferase
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Bruce Branchini, Connecticut College
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2010
* USD 518,794.00

Light emission by the North American firefly Photinus pyralis is a familiar
example of bioluminescence, the emission of light by a living organism. This
fundamental process by which living organisms convert chemical energy into light
has many potential laboratory and medical applications, including the use of
firefly luciferase as a reporter of gene expression and regulation. This
research will address the relationship between the structure of firefly
luciferase and its role in the catalysis of two sequential reactions that result
in the emission of light. Mutant luciferases will be made by recombinant DNA
techniques and evaluated to examine the effects of mutations on each reaction.
This approach may also provide evidence to the occurrence and role of
fundamentally important conformational changes in the luciferase structure. The
results of this project should enhance the basic understanding of firefly
bioluminescence, as well as the larger adenylate-forming enzyme superfamily,
which includes firefly luciferase and many non-bioluminescent proteins.

Broader Impacts: This research will be carried out at Connecticut College, a
liberal arts college with an established record of effective research training
of undergraduate students. Students will engage in collaborative research with
faculty and those who make substantive contributions to the project will become
co-authors of manuscripts and present their results at scientific meetings. All
participants will be involved in modern mainstream bioluminescence research and
will contribute positively to increasing the numbers of well-prepared graduates
for entry into graduate programs and professional scientific careers.