* 0444347
* Role of a LRR-RLK in Regulating Ethylene Biosynthesis and Anisotropic Cell Elongation in Roots
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Joseph Kieber, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 08/31/2009
* USD 412,000.00

How cell regulate their expansion is central question in modern biology. In
plants, asymmetric cell expansion is a primary determinant of the size and shape
of organs. However, very little is known regarding the molecular mechanisms
underlying the regulation of cell expansion in plants. A pair of receptor-like
kinases from Arabidopsis, called AIK1 and AIK2, has been identified that
directly interact with ACC synthase, the enzyme that catalyzes the rate-limiting
step in the biosynthesis of the plant hormone ethylene. Genetic studies have
revealed that these AIK genes play an important role in regulating cell
expansion in root cells. Ethylene promotes radial expansion of plant cells, and
the radial swelling phenotype in the aik1/aik2 double mutant was found to be
dependent on ethylene. This, coupled with the observation that these proteins
directly interact with ACC synthase, suggests that these AIK genes are involved
in the interaction between ethylene and directed cell expansion. This
interaction will be further explored by precisely delineating the effects of the
AIK mutations on the growth characteristics of the root and by determining if
these genes directly regulate features of the cell involved in directing cell
elongation, such as the cell wall. The role of ethylene in the aik mutant
phenotype will be explored using genetic and biochemical approaches. Finally,
additional targets of these AIK kinases will be sought using a simple
interaction screen in yeast. This research will shed light on how plants
regulate cell elongation, which is crucial to understanding the development of
plant form.The proposal will also provide interdisciplinary training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in diverse areas including
cell biology, plant physiology, molecular genetics, and biochemistry.