* 0444471
* Evolutionary and Ecological Aspects of Plant Selenium Hyperaccumulation
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Elizabeth Pilon-Smits, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2008
* USD 459,206.00

Summary

Selenium hyperaccumulation is the intriguing phenomenon that certain plant
species accumulate extraordinary concentrations of this toxic element (up to
0.6% of dry weight), even from low-Se soils. The goal of this project is to
obtain insight into why plant Se hyperaccumulation may have evolved, and the
consequences of this trait for other species in hyperaccumulator habitats. The
overall hypotheses are: (1) Se significantly affects interactions between
hyperaccumulator plants and herbivores. Se protects plants from general
invertebrate and vertebrate herbivory due to Se-mediated deterrence and toxicity
(based on preliminary results). On the other hand, specialist Se-tolerant
herbivores may have evolved that in turn accumulate Se, affecting higher trophic
levels. (2) Selenium is essential for the capacity of hyperaccumulator plants to
compete with nonaccumulator species, since hyperaccumulators are only found on
Se-rich soils. These hypotheses will be tested using the two hyperaccumulator
species, Astragalus bisulcatus and Stanleya pinnata, in comparison with related
local nonaccumulator species, using a combination of manipulative field
experiments, field surveys, and laboratory studies. The specific objectives are
to determine: (1) whether Se protects hyperaccumulator plants from invertebrate
and vertebrate herbivory in the field; (2) the relative effectiveness of
different Se forms in protecting plants from invertebrate herbivory; (3) the
plasticity of Se hyperaccumulation in response to herbivory and Se; (4) Se
tolerance and accumulation in invertebrate herbivores and how herbivore Se
accumulation affects the next trophic level; (5) how hyperaccumulator plants
affect growth of neighboring nonaccumulator plant species, and their competitive
interactions in soil with or without Se. The emerging research area of metal
hyperaccumulation ecology promises to reveal exciting biological phenomena. This
study will shed light on the evolution and ecology of Se hyperaccumulation in
plants, a fascinating physiological process that is still poorly understood.
This study will extend our knowledge of hyperaccumulation across the biological
hierarchy from molecules to ecosystems: from Se-related gene expression in
response to herbivory and the effectiveness of different selenocompounds on
herbivory to the study of hyperaccumulator-herbivore-predator interactions. Se
accumulation in plants also has substantial economic consequences and
applications. Hyperaccumulating "locoweeds" cause significant losses in
livestock and may also affect endangered wildlife. Selenium is an environmental
pollutant, and phytoremediation offers an attractive cleanup strategy for the Se
problem. On the other hand, Se is an essential nutrient and powerful anti-
carcinogen, and Se-enriched diets have been shown to improve human and animal
health. A better understanding of the factors controlling plant Se accumulation
may help develop plants with altered Se accumulation or tolerance. Such plants
may be useful for Se phytoremediation or as fortified foods. Knowledge of how
plant Se accumulation affects growth and survival of invertebrates, and
identification of Se-specialist feeders may be used to control both populations
of invertebrate pests and of Se-accumulating "locoweeds". The project will train
graduate and undergraduate students as well as high school students.

