* 0444713
* Correlating cardiac thermal performance limits with transcriptome profiles during thermal acclimation of the intertidal porcelain crab, Petrolisthes cinctipes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Jonathon Stillman, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 167,853.00

Correlating cardiac thermal performance limits with transcriptome profiles
during thermal acclimation of the intertidal porcelain crab, Petrolisthes
cinctipes&lt;br/&gt;Jonathon H. Stillman&lt;br/&gt;University of Hawaii at
Manoa&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the plasticity and limits of physiological
responses to changes in temperature is a key component to understanding how
global climate change will impact species distribution and abundance patterns.
The aim of this project is to combine functional genomics and cardiac physiology
to study the physiological responses of intertidal zone porcelain crabs to
environmentally relevant temperature changes. Marine intertidal zone organisms
experience changes in habitat temperature over both long (e.g., seasonal) and
short (e.g., daily) time scales. This research will characterize physiological
acclimatization to seasonal changes in habitat temperature and physiological
stress responses following acute temperature changes during a low tide period,
both of which are important components of the thermal responses of organisms in
their natural habitat.&lt;br/&gt;Four specific questions will be addressed: 1)
What genes are involved in setting cardiac thermal performance limits?, 2) Does
thermal acclimation influence responses to acute thermal stress?, 3) What gene
expression and thermal physiology changes occur during acclimation to
fluctuating temperatures?, and 4) Does response to acute thermal stress vary
across seasons? To answer question #1, crabs will be sampled during a one-month
acclimation to three temperatures (6C, 14C, and 22C). Sampling will consist of
in vivo determination of upper and lower thermal limits of cardiac function
(CTmax and CTmin, respectively), and analysis of heart tissue transcriptome
profiles using a custom microarray consisting of 13,824 cloned P. cinctipes
cDNAs. To answer question #2, crabs acclimated to those three temperatures will
be exposed to an acute heat, cold, or control stress and transcriptome profiles
during recovery from those stresses will be analyzed. To answer question #3,
crabs will be acclimated for one month to a thermal regime that includes a brief
daily exposure to extreme heat or cold (-1C and 30C), after which time CTmax,
CTmin and transcriptome profiles will be analyzed during four cycles of the
acclimation. To answer question #4, crabs will be sampled from their natural
habitat across the seasons of one year and CTmax, CTmin, and transcriptome
profiles of field and stressed crabs will be measured during each season.
Statistical analysis of transcriptome profiles using microarray ANOVA will
reveal which genes have significant changes in expression in each of the four
experiments. The data generated in this project will be made publicly available
on the Stanford Microarray Database.&lt;br/&gt;This research will generate novel
hypotheses in fundamental areas of animal physiology, namely the molecular bases
of thermal limits, eurythermality, and thermal acclimation. The results of this
work will directly inform comparative functional genomics studies of temperature
adaptation in porcelain crab congeneric species from a range of thermal habitats
across a wide range of biogeographic regions. Thus these data will contribute to
our understanding of how global temperature change influences species range
distributions.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students from Hawaiian and Pacific
Islander underrepresented minority groups will be recruited to work on this
project through the University of Hawaii's Haumana Minority Access to Research
Careers (MARC) programs. Benefits to graduate and undergraduate students
involved in this research include the development of laboratory and professional
skills, and exposure to the "mainland" scientific community at professional
meetings and during summer field-work at the Oregon Institute of Marine
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;