* 0444413
* Collaborative Research: ST-HEC: Scalable, Interoperable Tools to Support  Autonomic Optimization of High-End Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Sally McKee, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 10/31/2008
* USD 356,670.00

Extremely large scale systems offer a new challenge to application designers.
Current software development techniques do not scale well in execution
efficiency on these systems or, more importantly, in the amount of time the
programmer spends writing, debugging, and tuning the software. To realize
extreme-scale computing, we must increase programmer productivity. To that end,
we require three advances in the programming paradigm for these systems. First,
the application programmer must interact with the development environment at a
level higher than processes or execution threads. Tools must support these
interaction modes and more abstract application views. Second, system monitoring
functions must exist to provide feedback to the application programmer on
overall system performance. Monitoring an extreme-scale system must include some
degree of automation and must be able to infer overall performance from a small
set of monitoring points. Feedback must be compressed to highlight performance
issues at the high abstraction level the programmer requires. Finally, many low-
level optimization decisions must be automated by incorporating a new generation
of compiler optimizations targeting global program behavior, and these must be
intimately integrated with the monitoring system. These advances are described
collectively as autonomic performance optimization.

Our proposed research addresses these requirements by developing new tools and
extending current tools to manage large software projects. We will extend our
prior work on the Tau framework of performance instrumentation and analysis
tools to the scale used by these HEC applications. To do this, we will
incorporate a new framework for monitoring representative "skeletons" that can
provide information to the programmer about total system performance by using a
simpler model that matches the execution profile of the full application.
Performance modeling of the skeleton is achieved by placement of profile
monitors at strategic points in the system. We will utilize advanced machine
learning techniques to determine the placement of these monitor points, as well
as to synthesize the resulting large quantity of performance information into
the proper form for the application designer. Finally, we will automate some
critical low-level design decisions by feeding profile data directly to the
compiler and dynamic code translator. The optimizations developed target data
layout, data duplication throughout the system, and dynamic data movement.
Optimizing data management will decrease average access latency for memory
references, reducing congestion on the inter-processor and inter-cluster
networks while freeing the programmer from making detailed data placement
decisions.

The intellectual merit of this proposal is in the new paradigm of autonomic
performance optimization as a framework for the integration of performance
methods and tools for HEC systems. The broader impact is both technical and
societal. Ultimately, we strive to enhance the computational tool infrastructure
used to solve Grand Challenge scientific computing problems. However, we believe
this must be done in association with the evolution of large-scale computing to
use introspective, autonomic platforms and systems. Our work will enable
practitioners to more easily build efficient, scalable applications, to solve
very large and complex problems, and to do so more quickly than is currently
feasible. The significant increase in the productivity of applications writers
will not only enhance the development of scientific applications important to
our national infrastructure, but will also open HEC to important economic and
societal applications where computing is advancing science and technology.

