* 0444598
* Transport and Biochemical Events Associated With Metabolic Regulation of the Squid Nerve Na+/Ca2+ Exchanger
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Luis Beauge, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 07/31/2010
* USD 195,000.00

The Sodium/Calcium counter-transport is a ubiquitous structure that reversibly
exchanges Sodium for Calcium across cell membranes. This system is conspicuously
regulated by intracellular ions and metabolism. Among ions, Sodium and Protons
are inhibitory while Calcium stimulates. Regarding metabolism, ATP antagonizes
ionic inhibition while, in squid nerve, phosphoarginine (PA) stimulates by
promoting the binding of Calcium to its transporting sites. Stimulation by ATP
requires a low molecular weight Soluble Cytosolic Regulatory Protein (SCRP);
stimulation by PA seems related to another membrane bound protein known as Small
Neurofilament. Ionic and ATP regulations take place on a large intracellular
region of the exchanger protein. In contrast, PA modulation is likely to occur
in other yet unspecified place/s. The experimental evidence indicates that the
chemical reactions related to ATP and PA modulations are different. However, the
investigators recently found that ATP protects against the inhibition in PA
modulation following cellular acidification (increase in Proton concentration);
this may represent a link between the two modulators paths. This project will
individualize and characterize the interrelationships between ionic and
metabolic regulation of the squid Sodium/Calcium exchanger by using three
experimental preparations: (i) squid axons under internal dialysis, essentially
an "in vivo" preparation that permits complete ionic and biochemical control of
intra- and extra cellular environments; (ii) squid nerve membrane vesicles, an
excellent model to perform parallel transport and biochemical assays and protein
isolation; and (iii) squid axoplasm, as a source for proteins isolation.
Specifically the research aims to: (i) establish if ATP protection against
proton inhibition of PA modulation takes place via the path for ATP regulation
or is an independent ATP effect; (ii) identify and functionally characterize the
SCRP required for ATP regulation; and (iii) identify and characterize the
structures related to PA stimulation. Regarding the broader impact of the
project it must be emphasized that it provides an excellent opportunity for
training and education of young scientists and fostering of cooperation between
American and Latin American scientists.