* 0444600
* Role of MAPKKKa-Mediated Cell Death in Plant Disease Resistance and Susceptibility
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Gregory Martin, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2009
* USD 480,854.00

Role of MAPKKKa-mediated cell death in plant disease resistance and
susceptibility&lt;br/&gt;Gregory Martin, Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Localized cell death occurs in leaves of both
disease-resistant and disease-susceptible plants upon attack by disease-causing
organisms. In resistant plants, rapid cell death (&lt;6 hrs) is referred to as
the 'hypersensitive response' and is thought to inhibit further spread of the
pathogen. In susceptible plants, host cell death occurs over the course of many
days and manifests as disease symptoms referred to as 'specks', 'spots', or
'blights'. The extent to which host cell death is either a consequence or a
cause of disease resistance and susceptibility is a central unresolved question
in the study of plant pathogen interactions - in part because the molecular
mechanisms underlying pathogenesis-related cell death are largely unknown. To
investigate host cell death, this project will investigate both resistance and
susceptibility in tomato to bacterial speck disease caused by Pseudomonas
syringae pv. tomato. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central focus of the work will be
a gene that encodes MAP kinase kinase kinase (MAPKKKa). When expression of this
gene is interfered with the plant does not develop cell death during a disease-
resistance response. Unexpectedly, it was found that silencing of MAPKKKa also
interferes with cell death associated with bacterial speck disease. These
observations indicate that the host plays an active role in promoting the
formation of disease symptoms and that MAPKKKa acts as a molecular switch
governing cell death associated with both resistance and
susceptibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to further define the
molecular mechanisms underlying the role of MAPKKKa in host cell death. The
objectives are: &lt;br/&gt;1) Identify and characterize host proteins that
function upstream of MAPKKKa; &lt;br/&gt;2) Investigate the extent to which host
disease resistance and susceptibility pathways share the same signaling
components; and &lt;br/&gt;3) Examine the role of MAPKKKa-mediated cell death in
host responses to biotrophic and necrotrophic
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three areas where this research will
have broader impact: 1) Undergraduate students and high school students will be
trained as part of the NSF-supported Plant Genomics Summer Research Program
hosted by the Boyce Thompson Institute; 2) The PI and members of his lab will
continue their involvement in several outreach programs including the New
Visions high school program; and 3) Deeper understanding of the role of host
cell death during pathogen attack will facilitate the development of new
strategies of disease control thereby lessening dependence on
pesticides.&lt;br/&gt;