* 0444518
* Data-Model Fusion at AmeriFlux Sites: Towards Predictive Understanding of Seasonal and Interannual Variability in Net Ecosystem Exchange
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Yiqi Luo, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2009
* USD 260,001.00

To understand carbon fluxes between the land and the atmosphere, scientists have
widely employed the so-called eddy-flux method to quantify land carbon
sequestration. The eddy-flux measurements at hundreds of sites across the world
all have showed strong year-to-year variation (i.e., interannual variability) in
the strength of the terrestrial carbon sink. This project seeks to determine the
underlying causes of the seasonal and interannual variation (SIAV) in net
ecosystem exchange of carbon dioxide as measured by many long-term
micrometeorological sites that make up the AmeriFlux and the Fluxnet eddy-flux
networks. While previous efforts have focused on developing a mechanistic
understanding of observed seasonal and interannual variability in net ecosystem
exchange of carbon dioxide at single sites, far less work has attempted to
identify a more general description or model for seasonal and interannual
variability based on data from a broad range of ecosystems. This project will
use multiple approaches, including data processing, statistical analysis,
process-based modeling, and inverse analysis to examine the direct and indirect
effects of climatic variation on ecosystem processes, to elucidate general
patterns of variability in net ecosystem exchange of carbon dioxide across
ecosystem types, and to develop a process-based model for predicting seasonal
and interannual variability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research lie in the synthetic nature of the work, given the large investment the
world is making in eddy flux data, and given the potential for these data sets
to substantially improve our knowledge of the global carbon cycle and to inform
policy making. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;