* 0444632
* NITRIC OXIDE, SYNAPTIC PLASTICITY, &amp; FEAR MEMORY FORMATION IN THE AMYGDALA
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Glenn Schafe, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* J. Steven de Belle
* 02/29/2008
* USD 331,473.00

The formation of memories in the brain is thought to involve the strengthening
of connections between brain cells. To accomplish this strengthening, brain
cells need to communicate with each other via chemical signals. The major aim of
this project is to investigate the contribution of one such chemical signal:
nitric oxide. The role of nitric oxide signaling will be investigated in a
behavioral paradigm called fear conditioning. In this paradigm, an animal comes
to learn to fear an initially emotionally neutral stimulus or object after it
has been presented together with the presentation of a noxious or an aversive
stimulus. Fear conditioning is known to involve alterations between brain cells
in the amygdala, a specific region of the brain's temporal lobe. This project
will use biochemical techniques to examine nitric oxide signaling in the
amygdala during and after fear conditioning. Other experiments will employ
behavioral and electrophysiological recording techniques to examine the role of
nitric oxide and its targets in the formation of fear memories in the amygdala.
Collectively, these experiments will add further to our understanding of the
brain mechanisms underlying learning and memory in the amygdala. Further, the
projects will provide an ideal training opportunity for undergraduate and
graduate students in a number of different neurobiological techniques, leaving
them well prepared for advanced study in the Neurosciences.