* 0444921
* Sediment Transport by the Laurentide Ice Sheet: Testing the Bed-Deformation Hypothesis Using Till Microstructural Characteristics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Neal Iverson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2010
* USD 207,032.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Vast sheets of till were deposited at the bases of
Pleistocene ice sheets, but the mode of transport of this sediment is uncertain.
A leading hypothesis attributes sediment transport to shear deformation of
subglacial till, resulting in high till fluxes and landforms emblematic of
glaciation, such as drumlins and moraines. Shearing of weak, subglacial till may
have also helped instigate fast flow of ice sheets and consequent climate
change. Although till microstructural characteristics provide a high-resolution,
temporally-integrated record of deformation, their relationship to strain
magnitude has been essentially unknown. The result is that magnitudes and
patterns of deformation necessary to test the bed-deformation hypothesis have
not been extracted from the geologic record.&lt;br/&gt;We have studied the
evolution of till microstructural characteristics as a function of shear-strain
magnitude with a ring-shear device that shears a large till specimen to high
strains (&gt; 100). Results indicate several quantitative indices of shear
strain: particle-fabric strength and microshear orientation measured optically,
clay-mineral fabric strength measured with x-ray texture goniometry, and fabric
strength defined by orientations of maximum magnetic susceptibility.
Calibrations of these indices to strain magnitude provide tools previously
unavailable for interpreting origins of basal tills.&lt;br/&gt;Support is
requested to apply our calibrations to three tills that we have studied
experimentally and that are thought to have sheared beneath the Laurentide Ice
Sheet: the Batestown Till of the Lake Michigan Lobe, the Horicon Till of the
Green Bay Lobe, and the Douglas Till of the Lake Superior Lobe. The first of
these has been modeled as an archetype for the bed-deformation hypothesis; the
second has been sculpted into drumlins.frequently attributed to bed deformation;
the third has an unusual microfabric signature. These tills will be densely
sampled along multiple vertical profiles. Microstructural characteristics will
be measured to determine magnitudes and patterns of deformation. Three criteria
will be met if the bed sheared pervasively to at least moderate strains: the
maximum shear strain detectable with microstructural characteristics (20-40)
should be indicated over most of the till thickness; micro-shears should be
visible (after etching of carbonate) indicative of subglacial rather than
englacial deformation, and till surrounding large clasts should contain
microstructural elements deflected symmetrically by clast rotation. These data
will provide the most complete geologic test, to date, of the bed-deformation
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will benefit other
disciplines and provide a vehicle for education and outreach. Owing to the
potential influence of bed deformation on fast glacier flow, this project will
impact efforts to model ice sheet-climate interactions. It could also benefit
other fields, in which anisotropy of sheared granular materials is commonly a
central issue, including structural geology, petroleum geology, and geotechnical
engineering. Also, this research will support the education of three graduate
students: 84% of the project.s direct costs will provide stipends, tuition,
travel, and research support for these students. Results of the work will be
integrated into undergraduate teaching. In addition, as we have demonstrated
with our research beneath the Svartisen Ice Cap, this project can serve as a
platform for emphasizing to nonscientists the role of glaciers in Earth.s past
and modern environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;