* 0444657
* Metal-Rich Compounds of the Early Transition Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* John Corbett, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2007
* USD 380,999.00

Synthetic explorations together with physical characterization will be pursued
for new horizons and unexpected chemistry and materials among the chalcogenides
of the lanthanide metals with or without either late transition or post-
transition metals. The ternary condensed cluster phases appear to be especially
stabilized by strongly bound, late transition metals as interstitials within
nominal clusters of the early metals. Some of the cluster-interstitial
combinations also afford insights into local interactions present around
impurities in enigmatic intermetallic and pure metal systems. Pioneering
explorations for new and defining examples of aperiodic quasicrystals and their
crystalline approximants will utilize expertise and experience in synthesis and
cluster chemistry. New insights into their compositions and electronic
stabilities via band calculations will be exploited. Physical properties of the
new materials will be defined by crystal structure studies, electronic
conductivity, and magnetic susceptibility measurements coupled with parallel
extended-Huckel or DFT (band) calculations. These studies afford advanced
training for students at all levels on the frontiers of research in new
materials, structures and properties in solid-state chemistry. Sixty percent of
the researchers in the last few years have been women.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program, at the forefront of
solid-state chemistry in the discovery and development of new materials,
utilizes creative synthetic explorations to uncover totally new and
unprecedented solid compounds, structures and, potentially, properties. These
insightful studies provide new horizons for what is possible in chemistry, and,
later, regarding properties and applications. Present efforts feature highly
reduced mixed metal compounds as chalcogenides (Sulfur, Selenium, Tellurium) as
well as the syntheses and structures of new quasicrystalline phases and their
close relatives. The latter are well ordered but lack conventional periodicity.
Successful discoveries often involve highly specialized techniques, conditions,
and exotic containers that are not widely employed. Participating undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students thus get valuable training, experience, and
insights into advanced methods and concepts in solid-state chemistry. Sixty
percent of these in recent years have been women. Students trained in these
areas of synthesis and characterization of new materials exhibiting new
phenomena compete very favorably in the job market because of relevance to
advanced technologies such as electronics and photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;