* 0444639
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Host Community Diversity, Species Composition, and the Spread of Generalist Plant Pathogens
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Alison Power, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 03/31/2008
* USD 430,000.00

Pathogens with multiple hosts are of increasing importance for human health,
domestic animal production, and wild animals of conservation significance. The
proposed research will explore the influence of the diversity of host
communities on the spread of two generalist plant pathogens, one transmitted by
insect vectors and one directly transmitted by plant contact. Field experiments
will be used to test hypotheses about how species interactions and community
structure influence pathogen prevalence. This project extends previous research
to examine the spread of two generalist viruses in diverse plant communities. By
using an easily manipulated and controlled model system to investigate disease
dynamics of pathogens with multiple hosts, this research will test a number of
predictions from epidemiological theory that cannot be readily addressed with
animal or human systems. This work also has direct application in agricultural
production, where a number of economically important plant pathogens have
multiple hosts that include both wild and crop species. The viruses in this
model system are agronomically important pathogens. Information on the potential
of wild grasses to serve as important reservoirs of virus for crops will be of
direct utility to disease control programs. Understanding the dynamics of
disease spread and the effects of community diversity on disease prevalence will
aid in designing new, more sustainable approaches to disease management that may
be applicable to agricultural, animal, and human hosts. This research will
provide training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
students, including underrepresented minority students, from ecology, plant
pathology, natural resources, and agricultural science.

