* 0444335
* Chlamydomonas  Resource Center
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2005,03/31/2010
* Paul Lefebvre, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 03/31/2010
* USD 1,048,398.00

Project Summary &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award renews support for a
collection of 2300 strains of the unicellular green alga consisting of mutants
of C. reinhardtii and closely related species. Chlamydomonas is an excellent
model system for studies of photosynthesis, flagellar biogenesis and function,
signal transduction, and other aspects of cell biology. The recent completion of
the genome sequence of Chlamydomonas will likely accelerate the adoption of this
organism as an experimental tool. The collection, now called the Chlamydomonas
Resource Center (formerly, the Chlamydomonas Genetics Center at Duke
University), serves as the central repository to receive, catalogue, preserve
and distribute wild type and mutant cultures of C. reinhardtii and other
Chlamydomonas species in which extensive genetic analysis has been done. It also
serves as the resource center to disseminate information on this organism to the
international scientific community. Given its ease of culture and striking
flagellar motility, Chlamydomonas is also an ideal organism for laboratory
exercises for high school students and college undergraduates. Thus, the Center
also provides materials and advice for students and teachers interested in
adopting Chlamydomonas for classroom and individual science projects. In
addition to live cultures, the Center also maintains and distributes molecular
reagents useful for research on Chlamydomonas, including genomic and cDNA clones
of Chlamydomonas nuclear, chloroplast and mitochondrial genes, and cDNA
libraries. A web site [http://www.chlamy.org] provides descriptions of all
cultures in the collection, historical information and reference material on
genetic loci and mutant alleles, genetic and molecular maps, an address
directory, and an extensive bibliography. &lt;br/&gt;