* 0444398
* Role of Gap Junctions in the Regulation of Cell Migration
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Sandra Murray, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2007
* USD 110,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project incorporates cutting-edge techniques for the
identification of gap junctions and measurements of cell migration. Several
types of adrenal cells will be studied that exhibit a wide variation in gap
junction expression, either because of the initial phenotype of the cell or
through experimental stimulation/inhibition of second messengers within the
cell. In these studies, the influence of altered surface gap junctions on the
regulation of cell migration will be explored in depth. The hypothesis that gap
junctions play a pivotal role in cell migration will be addressed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Migration will be studied in cultures of adrenal cells
that either have or do not have gap junctions (Specific Aim I). Cells will be
treated with specific cAMP antagonists, agonist or diluent, and their migration
characteristics will be assessed. Migration will be assayed using the following
techniques: (1) time lapse imaging of the nuclear displacement or cell leading
edge displacement of cells prelabeled with membrane permeable dyes; (2) counting
the number of cells moving from a wound edge into a denuded area; and (3)
counting the number of cells migrating in a silicon template
compartmentalization chamber, in a microfluidic chamber, or through a Boyden
chamber filter. A combination of time-lapse video microscopic and
immunocytochemical techniques will be used to identify and elucidate the role of
gap junction dynamics in cell
migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infrastructural Contributions/Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laboratory will continue to serve as a resource
for the training of undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral fellows,
visiting professors from minority institutions, and for mentoring high school
students and (shadow program) teachers. Past NSF research funding has provided
for the exposure and training of students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty in
areas of cell biology, endocrinology and signal transduction. Through seminars
and workshops presented both nationally and internationally, information has
been, and will continue to be, provided to members of the scientific community
from a number of disciplines. High school students will continue to develop
research projects and present at city and state science fairs. Recently, two
undergraduate students won first place awards at national meetings, and others
will be encouraged to follow in their path. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;