* 0444589
* RUI: Surveys of Podostemaceae (riverweeds) in Latin America
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* C. Thomas Philbrick, Western Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 02/28/2011
* USD 413,000.00

0444589&lt;br/&gt;Philbrick&lt;br/&gt;A four-year survey of species of the
flowering plant family Podostemaceae (riverweeds) in Latin America will be
conducted (the common name "riverweed" is unfortunate because these plants are
native in Latin America, not weedy, and play important ecological roles in
tropical aquatic systems). Riverweeds usually are highly modified, at times
almost algal-like plants with reduced flowers and fruits, and occur only in
rapidly moving waters and waterfall areas, areas that are among the most
detrimentally impacted of tropical aquatic habitats (for example, from dam
building, siltation and pollution from agriculture). It is clear that some
riverweeds are being driven to extinction. The ability to assess the extent of
the extinction threat, however, is severely hampered by the present poor
taxonomic understanding of these plants. Distinctions between species (and even
genera) are poorly understood. The proposed project is central to addressing
this problem. Field surveys will provide the specimens necessary to build
taxonomic understanding of the family in the Americas. Field surveys will occur
in southern Mexico, all of Central America, Venezuela, and northwestern Guyana,
in collaboration with Mexican colleague Dr. Alejandro Novelo and several other
specialists. These countries represent the areas of greatest diversity of
riverweeds in the Americas. Insight gained from field collections will allow two
fundamental questions to be answered. First, which of the large number of
reportedly endemic (occurring in only one location) species are truly
distinctive, versus artifacts of prior poor taxonomic understanding? Second,
which species are incorrectly recognized as endemic because of inadequate
documentation of overall geographic distribution? Clarification of conservation
status in riverweeds will only be possible when these questions can be answered.
&lt;br/&gt;This project represents the first concerted attempt to deal with the
taxonomic disarray represented in riverweeds throughout Central America and
northern South America by addressing taxonomic concepts at both the species and
genus levels. The project will also contribute broadly to the study of
riverweeds by providing Internet access to specimen databases that will include
geo-referenced and taxonomic determinations. The proposed collecting and
research will strengthen and diversify undergraduate research and training at
Western Connecticut State University. Undergraduates will serve as research
assistants for the project. As many as 20 undergraduate students over the
duration of the project will be challenged as they become involved in a wide
range of field and laboratory components of the project, with exposure to ideas
and methods in the fields of conservation biology and systematic biology. The
strong international component of the RUI program will allow undergraduates to
gain invaluable experience conducting research in Latin America, working closely
with Latin American colleagues. In furtherance of these goals, the Americas
Program of the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering is providing
co-funding for this project. Dr. Philbrick, the Principal Investigator, will
integrate the results of this project directly into three undergraduate courses,
and thereby strengthen undergraduate education. Students should gain
understanding of the importance of basic research for addressing problems of
natural resource conservation, an issue of fundamental importance in modern
societies. &lt;br/&gt;