* 0444915
* Molecular basis of Arabidopsis susceptibility to Pseudomonas syringae infection
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Sheng He, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2009
* USD 560,000.00

In the co-evolution between plants and microbial pathogens, most plants have
developed sophisticated immune responses to ward off the majority of (but not
all) potential pathogens. When a plant fails to defend and the pathogen carries
appropriate positive virulence factors, disease occurs. In the past two decades,
significant efforts have been invested in studying how plants defend against
pathogens at the molecular level. In contrast, little is known about how a plant
fails to defend and ultimately succumbs to infection by virulent pathogens.
&lt;br/&gt; The long-term goal of this project is to contribute to the
understanding of the molecular basis of Arabidopsis susceptibility to bacterial
pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (Pst) DC3000. Research on susceptible
plant-pathogen interactions in the past two decades (mainly from the pathogen
side) has revealed a wealth of information about intricate mechanisms used by
pathogens to attack host plants. It is now clear that the majority of bacterial
pathogens use a specialized protein secretion system-the type III secretion
system-to actively 'inject' toxic effector proteins into the host cell.
Mutations affecting this protein secretion system eliminate the ability of Pst
DC3000 to infect Arabidopsis, suggesting a crucial role of type III effector
proteins in modulating Arabidopsis susceptibility. Recent research provides
exciting evidence that some type III effector proteins function as inhibitors of
various forms of host immunity. For example, effector HopPtoM has recently been
shown to inhibit salicylic acid-mediated host basal immunity and, directly or
indirectly, to promote host cell death in Arabidopsis. However, the precise
mechanisms by which the type III effector proteins modulate host immunity and
other host cellular processes are not understood and remain a fundamental
question in biology. Molecular genetic, cell biological, genomic, and transgenic
experiments described in this grant will identify and characterize Arabidopsis
cellular targets of effector HopPtoM. &lt;br/&gt; Understanding HopPtoM-mediated
suppression of plant immunity and promotion of host cell death likely has broad
implications for understanding bacterial pathogenesis in diverse plants. HopPtoM
is functionally redundant to another effector, AvrE. Effectors of the HopPtoM
and AvrE families are widespread in P. syringae strains and/or other plant-
pathogenic bacteria. Most importantly, mutations in the HopPtoM/AvrE families of
type III effectors often result in drastic loss of pathogen virulence.
Elucidation of the mechanisms by which HopPtoM functions to inactivate the host
defenses and to promote host cell death will therefore represent a significant
step forward in our understanding of the molecular basis of plant susceptibility
to bacterial pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research also has a broader
impact on society. This project will provide training of undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral scientists; it will broaden the participation in
research of underrepresented groups; it will enhance the PI's teaching
activities; and it will enable timely dissemination of knowledge through
publications in scientific journals and presentations at regional, national and
international conferences and to legislative officers. The basic knowledge
gained from this project will provide a foundation for invention of novel
strategies for controlling plant diseases, thus improving food quality and
yield, reducing use of hazardous chemicals, and increasing national biosecurity
and food safety. &lt;br/&gt;