* 0444291
* Modeling Molecular Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Carlos Camacho, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2009
* USD 471,693.00

The objective of this project, jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, is to model the early
molecular recognition events responsible for the specificity of protein-protein
interactions and predict protein interactions. Based on the observation that
diffusion accessible states have a definite attraction for their binding site
prior to docking, the specific aims of this project are: &lt;br/&gt;(1) To
develop and make public a suitable set of proteins to benchmark specific and
non-specific interactions, detecting the broad minima of the free energy
landscape and most likely set of possible binding sites by using validated
docking techniques; and (2) to model the relevant interactions between proteins
and develop a semi-rigid full-atom Brownian Dynamics platform to evaluate the
time scale that two proteins take to move apart from local minima on the free
energy landscape of partially desolvated encounter complexes. Preliminary
results indicate a sharp separation in the escape time between the binding site
and other incidental local minima. Simulations will incorporate flexibility by
periodically adjusting side chains to their local environment using a molecular
dynamics generated ensemble of pre-calculated conformations. This method will be
implemented as a web-server to automatically evaluate the likelihood of any two
proteins to interact based on estimates of the escape time from relevant free
energy minima. The main idea of this project is to circumvent the bound complex
and use the dwelling time, or stickiness, as an estimate for whether or not two
proteins physically interact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In vivo, proteins may
encounter many potential binding partners. However, a striking set of specific
and non-specific interactions encoded in the protein structure tolerates binding
only to a unique substrate. Non-specific binding is prevented by keeping random
encounters between proteins to last no more than a few nanoseconds, while
molecular recognition is triggered when the dwelling time associated with the
broad free energy minimum that characterizes the binding site is long enough for
induced fit interactions to latch the complex. Despite these insights, to date
there is no in silico approach to predict the high affinity complexes. Any
progress in this fundamental problem is bound to bring about a better
understanding of how proteins work cooperatively in a cell, promoting
breakthroughs in every aspect of the biological sciences. The structural
genomics revolution along with technologies that predict protein interactions
will make it possible to simulate biological processes in silico. &lt;br/&gt;