* 0444172
* Designing Viruses for Studies of Liquid-Crystals and Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2007
* Seth Fraden, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2007
* USD 411,996.00

The long term goals of this project are to understand the phase behavior of
macromolecular suspensions that are either partially or totally composed of
liquid crystalline forming molecules. The property of matter that two particles
cannot be in the same place at the same time leads to the concept of excluded
volume, a region of space that one molecule prevents the other from entering and
is a function of the particles' shape, mutual orientation, and separation.
Reducing excluded volume gives molecules more freedom of motion and thus
increases entropy. Consequently molecules are driven to undergo phase
transitions that have molecular configurations which minimize excluded volume.
In order to reveal the role of entropy in phase transitions "entropic
surfactants" will be synthesized consisting of molecules composed of two parts
that separately have a tendency to phase separate, but which are bound together
forming a block co-polymer. The blocks will be filamentous virus, a long, thin,
semi-flexible polymer that forms liquid crystals and DNA, a flexible polymer too
long to form liquid crystals. The phase behavior of this system will be studied,
as well as the phase behavior of mixtures of the shape amphiphiles with the
individual components. Entropy is the dominant feature controlling the phase
behavior of these charge stabilized colloids and this system can be
theoretically modeled with high precision. The entropic surfactants in this
study share features with three important classes of materials, surfactants,
block co-polymers and liquid crystals, which self-assemble into complex
structures. Understanding the self-organization of these materials is a basic
goal of nanotechnology and soft matter research. This work will serve as a
foundation for theory, simulation, and experimental study of microphase
separation in general. The students involved with this project will receive
training in both theory and experiment, which will prepare them for productive
careers in biophysics and nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second law of thermodynamics (entropy increases) is so well established that the
US patent office does not accept applications that violate its principles.
Entropy is often associated with disorder, and consequently it is counter-
intuitive that structured phases occur as a result of maximizing entropy. The
objectives of this project, involving a collaboration with Wellesley College,
are to create molecules, denoted "entropic surfactants", that self-assemble into
complex structures driven by entropy. Understanding the self-organization of
these materials is a basic goal of nanotechnology and complex fluids research.
Graduate and undergraduate students will receive training in the synthesis of
bionanoparticles and will build molecules composed of two parts that separately
have a tendency to phase separate, but which are bound together forming a block
co-polymer. The blocks will be filamentous virus, a long, thin, semi-flexible
polymer that forms liquid crystals and DNA, a flexible polymer too long to form
liquid crystals. The phase behavior of this system will be studied, as well as
the phase behavior of mixtures of the entropic surfactants with the individual
components. Entropy is the dominant feature controlling the phase behavior of
these charged molecules and because of the size, shape, and simplicity of the
interparticle interactions this system can be theoretically modeled with high
precision. This training in both theory and experiment will prepare students for
productive careers in biophysics and nanotechnology. This work will serve as a
foundation for theory, simulation, and experimental study of phase separation
that is applicable to a wide number of fields including nanotechnology,
surfactants, and polymers. &lt;br/&gt;