* 0444649
* Traditional Jambi Malay
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Peter Cole, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2009
* USD 197,585.00

&lt;br/&gt;A research team consisting of Dr. Peter Cole, Dr. Gabriella Hermon,
&lt;br/&gt;and Dr. Uri Tadmor, assisted by Ms. Yanti Jotika, a graduate student
&lt;br/&gt;in linguistics, will conduct linguistic fieldwork on Traditional
&lt;br/&gt;Jambi Malay, an endangered Malay variety spoken in Jambi Province in
&lt;br/&gt;southeast Sumatra, Indonesia. Malay-Indonesian is a major world
language, perhaps the fourth most widely spoken language in the world. Yet there
are almost no thorough scientific descriptions of vernacular Malayic languages
&lt;br/&gt;and Malay-Indonesian dialects. Grammars of Malay-Indonesian as well
&lt;br/&gt;as most theoretical works on the language are almost entirely based
&lt;br/&gt;on the quasi-artificial standard language. Most native speakers of
Malay live in Sumatra, many more than in Malaysia, yet there is not even one
thorough grammatical description of a Sumatran Malay dialect. Traditional Jambi
Malay is an ideal choice because Jambi is widely considered to be original locus
of Melayu (the Malay-Indonesian term for 'Malay'), and is thus the key to
understanding the complex diasystem of hundreds of Malay dialects. The
linguistic field work will be carried out in two villages, Mudung Laut and
Tanjung Raden, where &lt;br/&gt;Traditional Jambi Malay still exhibits many
features lost in the &lt;br/&gt;koineized urban variety spoken in Jambi City.
The results of the project will include a general description of the language,
documentation of the language in the form of a computerized database of texts
linked to digital recordings in a variety of genres, and theoretically oriented
studies based on the data. An automatically generated Jambi Malay-English-
Indonesian glossary will also be produced, which will serve as the basis for a
Jambi Malay dictionary in the second stage of the project. Finally, the
investigators will prepare two locally published volumes, one of folk stories
and the other autobiographical sketches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
the project include first and foremost the &lt;br/&gt;documentation and
description of an endangered language (an important &lt;br/&gt;priority for
linguistics around the world), as well as the training &lt;br/&gt;of a speaker
of that language as a field linguist. The project will &lt;br/&gt;also create
cultural materials for use by the speakers of the &lt;br/&gt;language. The
project involves cooperation between U.S. scientists &lt;br/&gt;and scientific
institutions abroad: The director of the Jakarta &lt;br/&gt;Field Station of the
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary &lt;br/&gt;Anthropology is a co-PI on the
project. The project also plays a &lt;br/&gt;role in the training of American
graduate students with regard to the &lt;br/&gt;importance of work on endangered
languages and contributing to the &lt;br/&gt;preservation of the linguistic and
cultural heritage of a &lt;br/&gt;marginalized community. Equally important is
the role of the project &lt;br/&gt;in training international graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;