* 0444096
* Collaborative Research:  SGER:  Development and Tribological Evaluation of F-DLC Films for Magnetic Recording Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Frank Talke, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2005
* USD 38,000.00

The main objective of the proposed one-year exploratory collaborative research
is to develop, characterize, model and optimize fluorinated diamond-like carbon
overcoats for application as wear-protective overcoats in magnetic recording
disk drives. The main focus of the Southwest Research Institute team will be to
develop a thin and pinhole-free overcoat with "self-lubricating" properties.
Since present-day disks use per-fluorinated hydro-carbon lubricants for wear
protection of the carbon overcoat, our approach will be to develop hard
coatings, DLC-like in nature, which simulate the behavior of fluorinated
hydrocarbon lubricants without the need for applying the lubricants topically on
the DLC coatings. It is the intent of this research to develop a deposition
process so that an extremely thin (~1nm) hard, dense and self-lubricating film
can be obtained. The University of California at San Diego team will investigate
and optimize the tribological properties of the above films by performing
start/stop and load/unload tests and optimizing the tribological properties of
these films. Other advanced methods of wear evaluation will be used such as
surface reflectance analysis and nano-hardness measurements in the presence of
ultra-sonic wave excitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advancement of magnetic
storage using conventional technologies to reach areal densities of the order of
1Tbpsi is becoming increasingly more difficult. Serious problems are encountered
in reaching a magnetic spacing of 5nm, which is required for achieving a storage
density of 1Tbpsi. A thin wear-protective carbon overcoat that is self-
lubricating and does not require a topically applied lubricant film of 1 nm in
thickness is of utmost importance in achieving the magnetic spacing requirement
of 5 nm. If successful, the impact of this research on the magnetic recording
industry will be enormous.&lt;br/&gt;