* 0444954
* Workshop on Community Finite Element Models for Fault Systems and Tectonic Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Thomas Jordan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 07/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

EarthScope and associated activities will provide a wealth of data
&lt;br/&gt;from a wide range of disciplines about how Earth.s crust deforms on a
wide range of &lt;br/&gt;spatial and temporal scales. Interpreting these data in
terms of the underlying processes &lt;br/&gt;requires model-based inference. In
order to gain better understanding of earth processes, &lt;br/&gt;as well as to
address adequately the high quality data that are increasingly becoming
&lt;br/&gt;available from geodesy, paleoseismology, stress measurements, and
seismology, it is &lt;br/&gt;crucial that substantial effort be devoted to
improving our models. While in the short &lt;br/&gt;term (important for siting
of instruments, and guiding development of more sophisticated
&lt;br/&gt;approaches), we can make significant progress with relatively simple
models; ultimately &lt;br/&gt;a large-scale computational effort is needed in
order to do justice to the data. We plan a &lt;br/&gt;three-day workshop at Los
Alamos, Aug. 16-19, 2004, with formal discussion periods, but &lt;br/&gt;also
with significant time to conduct hands-on work. The main objective will be to
address the issues relating to meshing complex geologic problems. This workshop
is open to all interested members of the EarthScope modeling community; by
holding it at LANL, we can take advantage of local expertise in meshing and
solving large FEM problems.