* 0444525
* Mesoscale Air-Sea Coupling in Tropical Cyclones Isidore and Lili
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* Lynn Shay, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 04/30/2011
* USD 668,290.00

The long-term goal of this research is to improve understanding of how mesoscale
ocean processes modify the near surface wind structure of tropical cyclones
through air sea interactions. Of particular importance are the interactions
occurring as tropical cyclones pass over warm oceanic features off the Atlantic
and Gulf coasts of the United States. Understanding lower boundary effects is
not only important from a research perspective, but also has far reaching
consequences with respect to forecasting the surface wind field and intensity
changes for landfalling storms. The main research theme involves the physical
effects of oceanic vertical mixing and advection on heat, moisture, and momentum
fluxes in the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) as tropical cyclones encounter
mesoscale ocean features. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research objectives
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Improve pre and post storm ocean heat content
estimates (OHC) using in situ and satellite derived fields.&lt;br/&gt;2. Examine
the forcing by warm ocean features on enhanced surfaces stresses, fluxes and
surface waves in the ABL embedded within the direct forcing region, and the role
of the ocean mixed layer (OML) feedback on the ABL.&lt;br/&gt;3. Quantify the
roles of mixing and horizontal advection of mass, heat, and salt by analyzing
their budgets in the OML, focusing especially on the effects of
precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;4. Document the variability in the atmospheric
environment such as equivalent potential temperature and wind shear relative to
the storm and upper ocean variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During Hurricane
Isidore and Lili (in 2002), the Principal Investigator and collaborators were
able to collect one of the most comprehensive ocean atmosphere data sets to date
under strong hurricane forcing conditions. These observations included
measurements of upper ocean current, temperature and salinity profiles along
with simultaneous atmospheric temperature, moisture and wind profiles.
Additionally, the large scale atmospheric variability was observed using several
hundred atmospheric sondes released from a research aircraft from the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the
research objectives, the Principal Investigator will utilize a combined
observational and numerical approach using the aforementioned data and the
HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model (HYCOM). An important aspect of this research will
be to develop a set of consistent metrics in order to assess the performance of
the ocean model in simulating the upper ocean response to TC forcing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this research eventually could
lead to improvements in forecast models that could lead to better intensity
forecasts for tropical cyclones.