* 0444987
* Bird Predation, Forest Insects, and Growth of Cottonwoods:  Bottom-up and Top-down Influences on a Trophic Cascade in a Threatened Habitat
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Thomas Kolb, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2009
* USD 250,000.00

A trophic cascade occurs when a predator eats enough herbivores (plant-eating
animals) to improve plant growth or to alter the structure of the plant
community. Cascades have been documented in oceans and in places where wolves
have been reintroduced. Although it is widely believed that forest birds benefit
trees by eating insect pests of these trees, there are several reasons why birds
might not drive a trophic cascade. For instance, plants might compensate for
eaten leaves by rapidly producing new leaves, or birds might eat the same amount
of insects as would have died due to other causes (weather, insect predators,
starvation). In this research, investigators will test the hypothesis that
predation of insects by birds benefits plants under some circumstances and will
identify the conditions that affect the strength of the trophic cascade. The
investigators will study the effects of insectivorous birds on cottonwood trees
in the Southwestern United States. Cages will be built around whole trees to
exclude birds from trees with high and low genetic susceptibility to insect
pests. This will be the first study of its kind to measure growth responses of
adult trees, and the first to measure seed production. By excluding birds from
trees during different seasons, the study will determine how trees would respond
to declines in resident birds (present year-round) or migratory birds (spring
and summer only). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By comparing the effect of birds to that
of insecticides, the study will document the relative effectiveness of birds in
insect control. The project will provide training for one PhD student and at
least two undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;