* 0444725
* Molecular Investigation into the Role Played by Tobacco and Arabidopsis NCAPP1 Genes in Plasmodesmal Function
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,12/31/2008
* William Lucas, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald A. Berkowitz
* 12/31/2008
* USD 651,138.00

During the process of evolution, biological systems developed ever-increasingly
sophisticated control systems to regulate the complex processes underlying
cellular, developmental and physiological programs. The functioning of complex
animal and plant tissues and organs required the development of a network of
signaling pathways. Present day signaling systems can be divided into two
categories. The first involves signaling molecules that act within the cell in
which they are expressed; i.e., these molecules are said to be cell-autonomous
in behavior. The second group involves signals that act beyond their sites of
production; i.e., these signaling molecules act in a non-cell-autonomous manner
and can involve hormones, chemical compounds, proteins and RNA molecules. Such
signals can move to neighboring cells by secretion, followed by diffusion
through the extra-cellular space; this pathway is common to all organisms.
Alternatively, in the plant kingdom, these signals can move between cells
through specialized structures termed plasmodesmata. The architecture of the
plasmodesmata creates cytoplasmic channels through which these signals can move
without exiting the cell. Here, it is important to note that the structure of
plasmodesmata allows for the movement of proteins and RNA molecules. Signaling
around the body of the organism occurs by passage through the plant vascular
system. Here again, the movement of proteins and RNA is facilitated by the
special properties of the plasmodesmata. The importance of these signaling
pathways and signaling molecules is well-supported by published works; however,
few studies have provided explicit information on the nature of the essential
components. In addition, little is known about the manner in which trafficking
of non-cell-autonomous signals is regulated.&lt;br/&gt;Solutions to these open
questions are now possible through work that developed biochemical methods for
the identification of plasmodesmata proteins that regulate the cell-to-cell
trafficking of non-cell-autonomously functioning signaling molecules. The first
gene identified using this approach was NON-CELL-AUTONOMOUS PATHWAY PROTEIN-1
(NCAPP-1). The present proposal describes experiments aimed at further
characterizing the NCAPP-1 gene family. This work will involve three objectives:
(a) establishing the role played by the NCAPP-1 gene family in the cell-to-cell
signaling pathway; (b) isolating and characterizing proteins that interact with
NCAPP1; and (c) employing an inactive form of NCAPP-1 to test whether transport
of proteins through plasmodesmata plays a role in the integration of
physiological and developmental processes at the whole-plant level. These
studies should provide important insights into the way these proteins can
influence protein delivery to neighboring cells. This knowledge would allow
scientists to more fully understand the signaling networks operating at the
cellular, tissue and whole-plant levels. Such progress would have direct bearing
on the areas of integrative and developmental plant biology, by establishing an
experimental basis for future studies on whole-plant signaling. Finally, these
studies should provide new perspectives on the path taken by the plant kingdom
during its evolution from single cells to complex, supracellular, organisms.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research project would be used to train junior
scientists within the area of integrative plant biology. The importance of these
scientists to our society would be two-fold. First they would serve as trained
teachers who can educate society in the areas of the biological sciences and
biotechnology. Secondly, and of equal importance, these scientists could apply
this knowledge to the development of new controls over plant processes,
including the way nutrients are shared between the various plant organs. Such
applications could well have major ramifications in terms of agriculture and
animal/human nutrition/health.&lt;br/&gt;