* 0444247
* Exploring the Mechanism of HMG-CoA Reductase With Time-Resolved Laue Diffraction
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2010
* Cynthia Stauffacher, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2010
* USD 944,728.00

The goal of this project is a multifaceted investigation of the molecular
mechanism of the enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA)
reductase from the bacterium Pseudomonas mevalonii. This enzyme catalyzes the
interconversion of HMG-CoA and mevalonate, a reaction at the root of the pathway
leading to synthesis of active isoprenoids, including such biologically
important molecules as steroid hormones, farnesyl pyrophosphate and cholesterol,
as well as components of signal transduction networks. Using the structures of
the two type members of this enzyme family, the human (Class I) and P. mevalonii
(Class II) HMG-CoA reductases in binary and non-productive ternary complexes, a
catalytic mechanism has been proposed that can now be investigated in molecular
detail. With the discovery of a slow substrate for this enzyme, one can produce
crystalline complexes that can provide a series of snapshots of trapped
intermediates along the reaction pathway. Initial experiments with these
complexes have shown that the P. mevalonii reductase is active in the crystal,
which opens the possibility of observing the structural changes during catalysis
using time-resolved Laue diffraction. This project will use these approaches to
study the underlying structural principles of the mechanism of HMG-CoA
reductase. The project will combine crystallographic and kinetic techniques to
investigate the mechanistic puzzles of this multistep enzyme reaction.

Broader Impacts: The research efforts will be coordinated with educational
outreach to undergraduate and high school students. The project provides an
outstanding opportunity for training of undergraduate students. In addition,
there will be a strong involvement in a collaborative research effort with local
high schools. As Director of the ISEF accredited Regional Science and
Engineering Fair, the P.I. works closely with three local high school teachers
who teach an advanced research class. These collaborative high school research
programs teach the basics of science and scientific research at the high school,
and then match students with researchers at Purdue for more advanced studies.
The P.I. works closely with these teachers to look for appropriate laboratory
matches, has hosted high school researchers in the laboratory and accompanies
the teachers and student winners to the state and international fairs. These
activities will continue in the future.