* 0444726
* REVSYS: Classification of Loxandrini and Species-level Revisions of Feronista, Australian Loxandrus and New World Oxycrepis and Stolonis (Coleoptera: Carabidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Kipling Will, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Scott D. Snyder
* 02/28/2009
* USD 131,080.00

This project will develop a classification and monographically revise species
and higher-level groups of a tribe of beetles distributed in Australia, and the
Americas. Over 100 new species are expected to be described in these taxa. The
study will combine morphological and molecular analysis to produce taxonomic
hypotheses, generic and species (re)descriptions and diagnoses, full
illustrations for internal/external features, species range maps, habitat data,
identification keys for genera and species in both internet/CD based and
traditional printed forms, internet accessible specimen data and genus/species
web pages. All Australian loxandrine species will be revised and described and
tools for identification will be provided for non-specialist. This group of
beetles will then be available for consideration in conservation planning.

The focus taxa of this study are a group of Australian Carabid beetles and this
work will be the first major carabid clade in Australia to undergo cladistic
analysis and modern classification. Australia is essential to our understanding
of worldwide distribution patterns and these beetles are a good model taxon for
such studies. In terms of evolutionary significance, this study will investigate
reproductive biology and predator avoidance by chemical defense. Using the
phylogenetic hypothesis and ecological information, the history of how defensive
compound changes have occurred in this lineage will be brought to light.

This revisionary syntheses in systematics proposal for loxandrine carabid
beetles will bring together data for specimens from major collections worldwide
and then return to these collections sorted, identified and databased specimens.
Distributional and life history data, and web-based and standard published tools
for identification will be made available to all biologists. Monographic
revision of these genera and the tools to identify specimens will allow non-
systematist to identify these taxa and assess their occurrence in both
ecological and historical terms. This will be a significant advance for a set of
taxa presently completely unavailable for study.

The project integrates graduate and undergraduate students throughout by
training them in field studies, specimen collection, preparation, insect
morphology, sequence acquisition, data collection and phylogenetic analyses.
Undergraduates will gain experience working in laboratory facilities and museum
collections and will learn basic identification and insect morphology. Graduate
students will be fully integrated into museum research, specimen collection,
dissection, morphological and sequence analyses and development and
implementation of web resources.

