* 0444349
* The Acquisition of Dialect Phonology by non-English Language Background Speakers
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2005,07/31/2007
* Dennis Preston, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2007
* USD 199,131.00

How do learners of English or speakers with other language backgrounds adapt to
the varieties of American English that they hear around them after moving to a
local area? Do they simply copy the local variety of English spoken by the
people most like them in age, sex, status, and so on? Or do they acquire a
variety that is more like that of other immigrants who speak their native
language, both from their own and previous immigrant generations? Or do they
acquire some more general variety of American English, one not specifically
identified with the region to which they have moved? How does their native
language background influence these possibilities? With National Science
Foundation support, Dr. Dennis Preston will study the pronunciation of English
by speakers of Lebanese Arabic, Mexican Spanish, and Polish who have moved to
urban areas in Southern Michigan. Tape recordings of their speech designed to
elicit vowel pronunciations of those items that are typical of a changing
pronunciation pattern among local native speakers will be made and analyzed
acoustically. One group, Mexican Americans in Benton Harbor, MI, will also be
investigated to determine the degree to which African American pronunciation is
acquired by them in a city which is more than 90% African American. The degree
to which each speaker studied participates in acquiring local speech will be
correlated with their sex, age, and integration into local networks.