* 0444553
* Chemical Signals and the Risk of Sperm Competition
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2010
* Michael Ferkin, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 04/30/2010
* USD 240,234.00

Sperm competition occurs when two or more males copulate with the same female
and their sperm compete to fertilize the female's available eggs. For most
species of mammals, sperm competition is prevalent among males. The aim of this
proposal is to examine how the persistent occurrence of sperm competition has
modified the physiology, morphology, and copulatory behavior of males in
mammals.&lt;br/&gt;A major hypothesis throughout the proposal is that male
mammals use chemical signals to assess the presence of nearby male conspecifics
and respond to particular risks of sperm competition. Experiment 1 will test
whether copulatory behavior and sperm investment are modified in relation to
different risks of sperm competition. Specifically, do male voles alter their
sperm investment by adjusting the number of sperm they allocate in each
ejaculation? Alternatively, do males alter their sperm investment by adjusting
the total number of ejaculations? The main hypothesis in Experiments 2 to 5 is
that when a risk of sperm competition initially inexistent arises, males will
resume copulation with the same female to increase their sperm investment.
Experiments 6 and 7 will examine whether male body size affects the outcome of
sperm competition. Do larger and smaller males have different or similar sperm
investment strategies? Do larger and smaller males respond differently to the
same risk of sperm competition? Does a larger male sire more offspring than a
smaller male when they have simultaneous access to the same female and both
copulate with her? This proposal will be the first in which different risks of
sperm competition will be experimentally manipulated by using odors from
conspecifics. Thus, for the first time an association is presented between
olfactory communication and sperm competition theory. This approach is
ecologically relevant. Most mammals rely on olfactory signals for same-sex
competition and for attracting mates. Most importantly, the experimental
approach introduced in this proposal may be applied to many other animal taxa to
expand current knowledge on sperm competition and sexual selection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will employ several
undergraduates including women and those from under-represented groups. Students
from UMEB and BRIDGE programs have worked on this project in the past and will
in the future. Several prior students have won competitions for best poster and
presentation at conferences. One current under represented student recently won
a university wide competition for undergraduate achievement. The research
synthesizes physiology, behavior, and evolution questions and has already drawn
the attention of the media with popularized versions of the project in Science
News and on several internet sites.&lt;br/&gt;