* 0444271
* Micro-Geomechanics Across Multiple Strain Scales - An International Workshop
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* J. David Frost, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2006
* USD 76,501.00

The field of geotechnical engineering, as it is practiced worldwide today, is
dominated by continuum based soil mechanics theories, design procedures and
analyses. Recent advances in experimental and numerical techniques have provided
exciting opportunities for a micro-geomechanics approach to complement and
perhaps replace in some cases, the more traditional continuum approach
underpinning the practice of geotechnical engineering. It has become evident
through the various micro-geomechanics studies undertaken over the past two
decades that there are clear instances in which the insight gained through
either experimental or numerical micro-geomechanics studies can lead to better
understanding of material behavior and ultimately the ability to design and
analyze even more complex systems involving particulate materials.

This workshop on "Micro-Geomechanics Across Multiple Strain Scales" will be held
in Cambridge, England in December 2004. The purpose of the workshop is to
provide an opportunity for individuals from academia, government and industry to
exchange information and identify a strategy for future research and
understanding in this important field. The estimated attendance for the proposed
workshop is 50 persons representing a wide range of technical backgrounds and
career stages from around the world. The academic participants will be selected
to include a combination of senior, intermediate and junior level faculty. This
is considered to provide an optimal group of attendees from the perspective of
developing a long-term research vision for the field. Additional participants
will be selected from those responding to an open solicitation to attend the
event. The process to identify these additional invitees will seek to yield a
diverse group of workshop participants. Preference will be given to individuals
who are from under-represented groups including women faculty, early career
academicians, and advanced graduate students. In selecting these additional
individuals, effort will also be made to broaden the number of institutions with
delegates at the workshop and to ensure that a broad range of technical
expertise and interests are represented. It is anticipated that 30 US
participants will receive support to attend the workshop. The two and a half day
workshop agenda will include: short invited presentations by workshop attendees;
moderated discussion sessions with pre-identified discussion leaders; open group
discussion sessions and summary presentations by discussion leaders. The final
workshop session will focus on identifying future research directions. A
workshop web-site will be extensively used in preparing for the workshop as well
as in disseminating the findings of the event to a broader community. A post-
workshop volume will be prepared to document the subject matter of the meeting.
A report paper to be prepared by the workshop co-chairs that will describe
recommendations for future research will be included in the post-workshop
volume. Intellectual Merit: The proposed content of the workshop includes the
state of the art in a broad range of areas of fundamental research: digital
imaging, particulate mechanics, computational modeling and material response
simulation. Developments and understanding from these diverse fundamental areas
will be presented as a basis for evaluating their relevance and importance to
applied research in geomaterial science and engineering. In addition to
facilitating a sharing of current knowledge and developments, it is anticipated
that the workshop can lead to a consensus research agenda and serve as a
catalyst for future collaborative research efforts. Broader Impacts: The
workshop topic creates the opportunity for experts with diverse backgrounds to
meet and discuss an area that resides at the interface of a number of
traditional fields: geotechnical engineering, materials science, geological
sciences, mechanical engineering, mathematics, computer science, medical physics
and imaging. By serving as the initial catalyst for these interactions, the
workshop is expected to have a longer term impact across many fields. While soil
is arguably the most pervasive particulate material in the world, the techniques
and methods that are used to study soils and will be discussed at the workshop
are equally relevant to the study of other particulate and aggregated materials
including concrete, ceramics, metal alloys and biomaterials. Further, the
emphasis on investigating the behavior at multiple scales and understanding the
relationships between observed behaviors at different scales is readily
extendable to both larger and smaller scales and thus directly relevant to many
other current research areas. Aside from the specific research motivated issues
to be discussed, it is hoped that the proposed workshop can also serve to
stimulate new approaches in soil mechanics education. The current teaching of
soil mechanics is still dominated by continuum-based approaches that have
evolved over the past 70 years with the development of the field. It is hoped
that the proposed workshop can lead to some curricular innovation that will
inject new relevance into the field of geotechnical engineering. Many of the
current continuum based approaches have become heavily dominated by empiricism
and this limits the degree to which the knowledge and understanding has
relevance to other fields. By revisiting many of these accepted concepts and
developing frameworks where particulate based approaches can replace some of the
continuum based approaches, it is likely that geotechnical engineering
understanding can find new relevance in many fields including nanotechnologies,
sensors, and visualization..



