* 0444883
* Identifying Genes that Function in a Novel Signaling Pathway that Controls both Cell Adhesion and Initial Cell Fate Specification
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Daphne Blumberg, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 06/30/2009
* USD 359,998.00

A protein sharing homology with anti-coaggulants known to competitively inhibit
integrin receptor binding to fibrinogen has been described in a protist,
Dictyostelium discoideum. This protein, AmpA, functions as a novel signaling
molecule that plays both autocrine and paracrine roles controlling cell adhesion
and cell fate specification during growth and development. Dictyostelium is a
model system extensively used to study cell migration and development. AmpA
functions to reduce cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion, promoting migration
of these cells facilitating their ability to forage for food. During the
developmental phase of the life cycle the expression of the ampA gene is
restricted to a small, but highly motile subset of cells whose migrations are
necessary for proper morphogenesis. AmpA expression is essential for migration
of these cells. It also acts as a lateral inhibitory signal that prevents
adjacent cells from assuming a prespore fate. The simplest model for AmpA
function is that it is a modulator of an integrin like receptor. Integrin
receptors, however, have not been identified outside of metazoan organisms and
there is no obvious integrin receptor that can be identified by sequence
homology in Dictyostelium. The objective of this project is to identify the
adhesion receptor that is modulated by interaction with the AmpA protein and to
identify additional genes that are candidates to function in the AmpA modulated
signaling pathway. Aim 1: will use biochemical and molecular genetic approaches
to identify and characterize the receptor to which AmpA binds. Aim 2: will use a
genetic approach, isolation of second site suppressor mutations, to identify
additional genes that function in the AmpA mediated signal transduction
pathways. Using AmpA as a probe to identify the adhesion receptors that are
modulated by its action and to identify other genes that function downstream in
the AmpA signaling pathway should help to elucidate the nature of cell-substrate
adhesion and its modulation to promote cell migration and provide insight to how
the metozoan integrin paradigm evolved. It should be noted that this project
will involve graduate and undergraduate students, some of whom are members of
under represented minorities. The research experience gained working on this
project will contribute to their scientific education.