* 0444895
* Collaborative Research: Influences of Geology and Tree Species Composition on the Response of Forest Nutrient Dynamics to an Exotic Pest
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Gary Lovett, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2010
* USD 319,306.00

Beech bark disease (an introduced disease complex involving a scale insect and a
pathogenic fungus) initially was introduced into Nova Scotia in 1890 and has
been spreading south and west. This research focuses on beech bark disease
influences on forest tree community composition and on carbon and nitrogen
cycling in northeastern U.S. forests (Catskill Mountains of New York State and
the White Mountains of New Hampshire). Replacement of beech by sugar maple has
the potential to influence forest carbon and nitrogen cycling because of
substantial differences in litter quality between the two species. Sugar maple,
in particular, has unique qualities of carbon and nitrogen cycling. Sugar maples
compete better on soils of moderate to high base status, and the base status is
largely determined by the underlying geology of the forest. The principal
hypotheses in this project are: 1) geologic substrate will strongly influence
the response of the tree community to BBD, and 2) the changes in tree community
composition will have a significant effect on the carbon and nitrogen dynamics
of the forest ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project are numerous. The research involves collaboration between two mid-career
scientists, one of whom is female, and a young scientist. All investigators will
train undergraduate and graduate students over the course of this study. The
lead investigator is well poised to take advantage of the NSF-sponsored Research
Experiences for Undergraduate Programs in place at his institution. This
research has clear connections to policy, conservation, and management
concerning the effects of exotic species introductions. This connection is
strengthened by collaborations with the Nature Conservancy and the Northeastern
Research Cooperative. The relationship between the investigators and TNC and
NERC increase the probability of broad dissemination of the results to policy
makers and NGO's to ultimately benefit and inform society's conservation of
public resources.&lt;br/&gt;