* 0444031
* Gene, enzyme and physiological characterization of maize shrunken-2 and brittle-2 alleles
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* L. Curtis Hannah, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 02/28/2009
* USD 570,000.00

Crop yield is one of the most if not the most important measurement of the
productivity of US agriculture. Intensive and impressive breeding efforts and
improvements in cultural practices have laid the cornerstone for a history of
dramatic yield increases in crops of major importance in this country as well as
the rest of the world. &lt;br/&gt; To aid in continued yield increases, a
biochemical/genetic/molecular approach has been taken that focuses on increasing
the amount of the major component of the seed, starch. This approach focuses on
ways to increase the speed of the slowest step in the synthesis of starch, the
enzyme adenosine diphosphate glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGP). Past efforts have
produced changes in the enzyme that gave rise to increased yield in crops of
worldwide importance. Funds from this grant application will be used to isolate
additional changes that should produce even greater increases in plant yield.
These changes will be placed into corn and resulting increases in yield will be
measured. Goals of this program also include educational activities of the
public concerning genetically modified foods. Specifically, these involve public
lectures, interactions with a particular high school in Florida as well as
interactions with undergraduate students on this campus. &lt;br/&gt; Enhanced
plant yield is important in this country since the number of people is
increasing while the amount of land available for plant agriculture is
decreasing. Worldwide, enhanced plant yield is critical for people presently not
having enough food. The work to be performed should produce real tools for
alleviating this present and future food shortage. It should also alleviate some
of the concerns of the general public concerning GMO foods. &lt;br/&gt;