* 0444590
* Do Differential Responses to Desiccation, Herbivory and Light Determine the Habitat Specializations of Rainforest Trees Along a Rainfall Gradient?
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Phyllis Coley, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 03/31/2010
* USD 329,201.00

Ecosystems provide many services to humankind. Throughout history, forests have
fulfilled many human needs. Forests provide water stores for urban areas. Wood,
from temperate and tropical forests, also plays a vital role in the US and world
economies. Moreover, forests also harbor astonishing biodiversity. These
observations apply especially to tropical forests that, despite their evident
importance, are converted at an unsustainable rate. While it is widely
appreciated that tropical forests display high diversity, it also is true that
sites separated by only kilometers differ considerably in tree (and animal)
species. In order to protect and manage such forests, we must understand the
factors that determine the distributions and abundances of trees. Although the
very complex patterns of distribution of tropical trees have long been
recognized, the factors that determine distribution are not understood. Many
argue that rainfall and drought are important factors, but scientific
demonstrations are lacking. In lowland tropical forests, the principal
determinants of tree distributions probably are drought (rainfall), light
availability in the dim understory and plant enemies (herbivores). In this
project, investigators will evaluate experimentally the relative importance of
these three factors in determining tree distributions across the Isthmus of
Panama. Panama provides an excellent laboratory since the tree species on the
wet, Caribbean side are largely absent on the dry, Pacific side (and vice versa)
and the processes that cause this pattern are unknown. Quantifying the impact of
rainfall, light and herbivores on tree distributions has broad applications for
the protection and management of tropical forests worldwide.