* 0444486
* Reliable and Scalable Software for Linear Algebra Computations on High End Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2008
* James Demmel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2008
* USD 850,000.00

This project aims to address the issue of inadequate software support for High
Performance &lt;br/&gt;Computing by improving two widely used standard
libraries, LAPACK and ScaLAPCK, both &lt;br/&gt;of which provide numerical
linear algebra kernels. &lt;br/&gt;By a combination of algorithmic research, an
on-going user and vendor survey (at &lt;br/&gt;icl.cs.utk.edu/lapack-
survey.html), and anticipation of the demands and opportunities of new
&lt;br/&gt;architectures and modern programming languages, the following key
improvements to the &lt;br/&gt;current versions have been identified.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The use of novel, improved algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;Improved ease of use. &lt;br/&gt;Performance Tuning.
&lt;br/&gt;Improved reliability and support. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;First, new
state-of-the-art algorithms will improve speed, accuracy, and memory efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;Second, improved user interfaces that exploit features of modern
programming languages are &lt;br/&gt;important for better ease of use and also
hide some of the underlying complex, possibly &lt;br/&gt;distributed, data
structures. Third, the performance of both libraries crucially depends on a
&lt;br/&gt;number of machine-dependent parameters whose setting can benefit from
automatic tuning &lt;br/&gt;techniques developed very successfully in the ATLAS
project. Last, there is a huge demand for &lt;br/&gt;ongoing support and
maintenance of both LAPACK and ScaLAPACK, and there is a need for
&lt;br/&gt;installing a formal mechanism for user feedback, for tracking bugs,
for version management, &lt;br/&gt;and facilitated installation. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;LAPACK and ScaLAPACK have been adopted by
many vendors as the basis of their own &lt;br/&gt;libraries: SGI/Cray, IBM, HP-
Convex, Fujitsu, NEC, NAG and IMSL, and the Mathworks &lt;br/&gt;(producers of
Matlab). For this reason, the proposed changes will have a large impact.
&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, recent origin of most of the algorithms described in
this proposal means that there &lt;br/&gt;are not yet any easily accessible
descriptions suitable for education. As part of the project
&lt;br/&gt;documentation, tutorial material will be developed that is suitable
for classroom instruction and &lt;br/&gt;wide educational outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;The development of LAPACK and ScaLAPACK is part of a long and
successful history of &lt;br/&gt;collaboration between the PIs. In addition, for
the current improvements, numerous outside &lt;br/&gt;collaborators have offered
support ranging from software and ideas to help in programming &lt;br/&gt;and
development.