* 0444849
* 2005 Temperature Stress in Plants Gordon Conference, to be held January 30 - February 4, 2005 in Ventura, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2005
* Jian-Kang Zhu, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 12/31/2005
* USD 5,000.00

This purpose of this project is to help support attendance of four graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows at the 2005 Gordon Research Conference on
Temperature Stress in Plants, to be held January 30-February 4, 2005, in
Ventura, California. The organizers are Jian-Kang Zhu, Director of the Institute
for Integrative Genome Biology at the University of California, Riverside, and
Tapio Palva, a faculty member in the Department of Biosciences at the University
of Helsinki. The purpose of this high-profile conference is to foster
interactions and exchange among the world's top leaders in the area of plant
temperature stress. The meeting's modest size (no more than 135 participants)
will be conducive to fostering these sorts of interactions. Student and
postdoctoral participation will be encouraged, offering them an unparalleled
opportunity to interact with one another and with leaders in the discipline. In
addition to advancing knowledge in the field and contributing to student
education, another broader impact is that the Conference will sponsor two
special initiatives: a Diversity Initiative and an Early Career Scientist
Initiative to encourage the participation of plant scientists from 1890 and
other predominantly minority institutions, as well as early career scientists.
NSF support will help fund these initiatives.