* 0444705
* Phylogeny, Phylogeography, and Genetic Differentiation in California Calochortus (Liliaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Thomas Givnish, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 01/31/2009
* USD 449,938.00

The plant genus Calochortus (Liliaceae family, with ca 60 species) has a center
of diversity in California and has undergone striking diversification in flower
form and habitat. Several species are restricted to small areas, and 25% occur
on serpentine soils. An analysis of mutational differences in chloroplast DNA
indicates that Calochortus is composed of seven geographically cohesive groups,
with closely related species often having adjoining ranges. Three of the major
floral forms ("cat's ears," "star tulips," for example) have arisen two to six
times each, and serpentine tolerance has evolved at least seven times. It is
hypothesized that such geographic cohesion and parallel radiations are the
products of restricted gene flow, which should promote genetic differentiation
and speciation at small spatial scales; different lineages may evolve similar
adaptations as they invade different areas independently. To test these ideas,
Prof. Givnish and his students will analyze the relationship of Calochortus
species in the San Francisco Bay Area to each other and to landforms they
occupy, using nuclear DNA variation, studies of incipient mating barriers as a
function of geographic and genetic distance, and reconstruction of past patterns
of migration, hybridization, and gene flow within and among species. Their
objectives are to (1) reconstruct the history of geographic differentiation
within the Bay Area Calochortus and determine whether the species restricted to
serpentine are each other's closest relatives or have instead been derived
independently from one or more of the wide-ranging species; (2) examine the role
of hybridization and introgression in this complex group; and (3) analyze the
pattern of genetic differentiation within a "ring-species" complex that
surrounds California's Central Valley, to identify suture zones (areas of abrupt
genetic differentiation) where expanding and gradually differentiating
populations finally abutted each other.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
bridge traditional concerns of taxonomy, systematics, population genetics, and
historical biogeography by quantifying the spatial scales at which genetic
differentiation and incipient mating barriers arise within species, and relating
these to the geographic and morphological patterns of divergence among species.
Findings will provide the basis for comparative analyses involving other plant
and animal groups in California, including ongoing research on several groups of
plants and amphibians, and a ring-species complex involving the California
valley oak. Data on patterns of genetic variation and differentiation will be of
value to conservation. This project will train two female Ph.D. students in
molecular phylogenetics, phylogeography, population genetics, and plant
systematics. Prof. Givnish will recruit two undergraduates from underrepresented
minorities to assist in data collection and develop senior theses. A web site on
Calochortus evolution will be developed to bring results and new insights to a
broad audience of amateur naturalists, conservationists, and professional
botanists and evolutionary biologists.&lt;br/&gt;