* 0444119
* A New Approach to the Study of Symplastic Phloem Loading
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Robert Turgeon, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 01/31/2009
* USD 512,000.00

The first step in transporting nutrients from leaves to harvestable organs, such
as fruits and tubers, is to load them into the long-distance transport tissue,
the phloem. This is a metabolically active process that creates within the
phloem a very high concentration of nutrient, primarily sugar. Water follows by
osmosis, and since the cell walls are rigid, pressure rises. The pressure, more
than ten times that of an automobile tire, drives long-distance flow, just as
the water pressure in a house drives water along a garden hose. Thus, loading is
the motivating force for movement of nutrients, and is a direct determinate of
agricultural yield. &lt;br/&gt;Two, species-specific mechanisms of phloem
loading are known. In one, apoplastic loading, sucrose exits photosynthetic leaf
cells and enters the cell wall space (apoplast). It is then energetically pumped
into phloem cells by transmembrane transporter proteins. In the second loading
mechanism, sucrose diffuses from its point of origin into the phloem, passing
from cell to cell through narrow pores (plasmodesmata) that join them. It may
seem unlikely that a process based on diffusion could concentrate sugar in
cells. However, the hypothesis of this project is that this second system
operates by "polymer trapping." According to this hypothesis, sucrose molecules
in the phloem are converted to larger sugars, raffinose and stachyose, that are
unable to diffuse back through the plasmodesmata because of their size. Sugar
thus becomes concentrated, and the phloem pressure rises. Many vigorously
growing plants, such as pumpkins, use this system.&lt;br/&gt;The polymer trap
model is supported by several lines of evidence, including a strict correlation
between extraordinarily high numbers of plasmodesmata in the phloem of certain
species, and the transport of raffinose and stachyose. However, further
experimentation has been limited by the fact that none of these species has been
known to be readily transformable with foreign DNA. It was recently discovered
that Verbascum phoeniceum, a raffinose/stachyose plant, can be easily
transformed by standard techniques. Hence, it has become possible to test the
polymer trap model.&lt;br/&gt;First, plants will be genetically engineered to
produce yeast invertase in the apoplast. Invertase degrades sucrose. In
apoplastic loaders, this treatment severely interferes with loading since the
transporter proteins are specific for sucrose. However, a prediction is that
loading will not be compromised in V. phoeniceum since sucrose never enters the
apoplast. In the second set of experiments, sucrose transporter genes will be
down regulated by RNA-interference technology. Again, this treatment abolishes
loading in apoplastic loaders but is predicted to have little affect in V.
phoeniceum, since transporters are not involved. In the third set of
experiments, synthesis of raffinose and stachyose will be down regulated in V.
phoeniceum. The expectation here is that loading will be severely inhibited
because the plant cannot make the sugars needed to trap carbohydrate in the
phloem and there will be no way to generate pressure by
osmosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PI places considerable
emphasis on science writing for the mass media. One of the PI's graduate
students, Sarah Davidson, has begun a non-traditional, program of science
communication within the traditional Field of Plant Biology and in collaboration
with the Communication Department. The intention is to pave a permanent, new
track in graduate school that other students will follow. Other recent articles
from the PI's lab include an entry on phloem transport for MacMillan's reference
encyclopedia "Biology" and a review article on phloem loading for BioScience, a
journal widely read by biology teachers (in preparation).&lt;br/&gt;