* 0444217
* CRB: The Role of Apparent Competition and Patch Geometry in Mediating the Invasion and Restoration of Grassland Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2012
* Omer Reichman, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/29/2012
* USD 365,914.00

NSF Proposal Abstract PIs: Reichman and Orrock Proposal Title: "The Role of
Apparent Competition and Patch Geometry in Mediating the Invasion and
Restoration of Grassland Communities".

Biological invasions occur when non-native species become established in areas
outside of their original range. Biological invasions have profound ecological
impacts and economical costs, causing extinction of native species and shifts in
ecosystem function that are estimated to cost over 138 billion dollars per year
in the United States alone. This proposal will take place in the grasslands of
California, where 9.2 million hectares (almost 25% of the entire state) are
dominated by non-native plants. This proposal will examine whether 1) non-native
plants fuel increases in native consumers that contribute to the elimination of
native plants; and 2) whether landscape-mediated changes in consumer behavior
lead to stronger impacts of consumers on native plants. This proposal links the
biology of invasions, indirect interactions among plants and consumers, and
spatial dynamics to provide novel insight into the forces structuring ecological
communities. Moreover, the work outlined in this proposal has broad applied
value because it may provide simple "rules of thumb" to aid conservation
biologists in prioritizing areas for protection and to guide the design of
restoration efforts. More generally, this work will provide insight into how
processes that change patch geometry affect the overall course of invasions,
which may be critical in contemporary landscapes where fragmentation is changing
patch geometry at unprecedented rates.