* 0444319
* Collaborative Research:    Performance Toolset for Dynamic Optimization of High-End Hybrid Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Danesh Tafti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 10/31/2008
* USD 117,736.00

Current high-end applications usually exploit just a fraction of the theoretical
performance of &lt;br/&gt;large platforms. Interactions among the hardware,
system software, programming interface, and &lt;br/&gt;algorithm are extremely
complex, and the implications for development of hybrid MPI+OpenMP
&lt;br/&gt;Fortran/C/C++ applications are challenging. The emerging generation
of machines will be even &lt;br/&gt;more complex, as will the applications that
exploit them. Typical application development and &lt;br/&gt;tuning scenarios
involve the manual and separate use of compilers and performance tools, and
&lt;br/&gt;program modifications based upon insights laboriously gleaned from
their output. &lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, we intend to raise the quality of the
application development and tuning &lt;br/&gt;process by creating an integrated
environment for program optimization that reduces the manual &lt;br/&gt;labor
and guesswork of existing approaches. We will develop strategies and the
corresponding &lt;br/&gt;interfaces that enable the application developer,
compiler and performance tools to collaborate to &lt;br/&gt;generate optimized
code based upon a variety of sources of feedback, including performance
&lt;br/&gt;data from .offline. development runs as well as from .online.
production runs. We will build &lt;br/&gt;and deploy a flexible, working system
that combines robust, existing, open source software . a &lt;br/&gt;compiler, a
program analysis tool and two performance tools with complementary features -
into &lt;br/&gt;a single, coherent environment for collaborative static and
dynamic application tuning. &lt;br/&gt;Application codes of varying complexity
supplied by our application partner will motivate our &lt;br/&gt;development
work as well as test and demonstrate our results. The result will be a powerful,
&lt;br/&gt;integrated environment that can be used to obtain traditional
performance data via program &lt;br/&gt;monitoring, event tracing and/or the
extraction of hardware counter information, and to obtain &lt;br/&gt;support for
the static or dynamic tuning of an application code. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The proposed environment integrates
several different existing technologies to provide a new &lt;br/&gt;level of
support for optimizing hybrid MPI+OpenMP codes. Support for experimentation with
&lt;br/&gt;the hybrid programming model is provided. The range of information
that may be exploited by &lt;br/&gt;the compiler to optimize code is expanded to
cover many system and application-level &lt;br/&gt;phenomena and a variety of
optimization scenarios. Interactions between tools will facilitate the
&lt;br/&gt;provision of an approach that is able to handle extreme-scale
computations. Integration issues &lt;br/&gt;will be addressed with the goal of
creating a deployable, extensible system. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The tools, ideas, and results of this project will be freely
distributed and made available to the &lt;br/&gt;HPC community, nationally and
internationally. Besides the general dissemination of results, the
&lt;br/&gt;project has strong ties to performance engineering experts at NCSA.
The tools will be installed &lt;br/&gt;on NCSA systems for testing and
evaluation and will be made available to other users. The &lt;br/&gt;research
brings together compiler, performance tool, and application developers,
enriching the &lt;br/&gt;research experience of graduate students to create a
well-rounded IT workforce. The PI is active &lt;br/&gt;in the OpenMP community
and the project team has close working relationships with DOE and
&lt;br/&gt;DOD. New knowledge generated will be integrated into advanced
graduate coursework.