* 0444290
* Conference:  2005 Molecular and Cellular Bioenergetics Gordon Conference to be held June 26 - July 1, 2005 in Meriden, NH.
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2006
* Patricia Kane, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2006
* USD 5,000.00

The 2005 Molecular and Cellular Bioenergetics Gordon Conference is the third
annual conference in this series which was originally held on a biannual basis
and called the Bioenergetics Gordon Conference. The renaming of the conference
and move to an annual basis was based on a significant expansion of scope to
include the rapidly growing area of cellular bioenergetics, in addition to the
traditional focus on structure and mechanism in the electron transport chain and
ATPases. The Molecular and Cellular Bioenergetics Gordon Conference now provides
a unique venue for bringing together a diverse group of investigators that apply
multidisciplinary approaches to a series of basic scientific questions
encompassing bioenergetics. Support is requested to cover travel and conference
fees for participants from US institutions, particularly younger scientists who
might otherwise be unable to attend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The 2005 conference will be the first in the annual series to have a special
focus on cellular bioenergetics. Session topics include how cells regulate and
recognize pH gradients, genomic and proteomic approaches to bioenergetics,
assembly of respiratory chain complexes, and new frontiers in mitochondrial
biology. In addition, there will be several sessions focused on the traditional
content of the meeting, including high resolution structures of bioenergetic
complexes , structure and function of F- and V-type ATPases, and mechanisms of
respiratory chain complexes. The participants at the Molecular and Cellular
Bioenergetics Gordon Conference represent leading scientists drawn from
academics, government, and industry. It is a major goal of the conference to
allow junior scientists, including graduate students and postdoctoral fellows,
to present their research. Consistent with this goal, the Gordon Conference is
organized to maximize the opportunity for presentation and discussion of the
latest findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The potential impacts of
this meeting are several-fold. 1) The Molecular and Cellular Bioenergetics
Gordon Conference is now very definitely a cross-disciplinary meeting, bringing
together leading scientists interested in the structure and mechanisms of
bioenergetic systems and those interested in cell biological processes
surrounding these systems. Recent results have dramatically highlighted the
mutual dependence of these two groups, but in the past they have not interacted
extensively. We anticipate that all participants will have a broader view of
modern problems in bioenergetics as a result of this conference. 2) This meeting
is a superb opportunity for training of younger scientists in the field, such as
graduate students and postdocs. Modern biology is necessarily multi-
disciplinary. By bringing together leading biophysical chemists, structural
biologists, and cell biologists focused on the common problem of understanding
how cells and organisms store and use energy, this meeting provides an excellent
example of how different approaches can contribute to common research goals. As
described above, younger scientists will not be passive observers in this
process, but will be strongly encouraged to participate through presentation of
their own research. 3) This meeting provides an excellent venue for
dissemination of new technologies that might be applied to problems in
bioenergetics. For example, the session on genomics and proteomics will describe
the latest methods for addressing bioenergetic processes from the perspective of
a whole organism or cell-type. These approaches have not been emphasized
previously in this conference.&lt;br/&gt;