* 0444073
* Collaborative Research: Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoenvironments of the Richest, Endemic-Dominated Fossil Assemblage in Cenozoic of Tibetan Plateau (Qaidam Basin, China)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Yang Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/2009
* USD 80,408.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This is a multi-national, multidisciplinary research project
to survey Cenozoic fossils in the northern Tibetan Plateau. Due to difficulties
of access and extreme environments, the vast plateau is little explored and
remains the last frontier for paleontological explorations. Preliminary surveys
in the Qaidam basin, the largest terrestrial basin in the Tibetan Plateau, have
yielded a number of richly fossiliferous localities spanning a long sequence of
strata often more than 5,000 meters thick in continuous exposures. Ranging from
early Miocene (about 24 to 16 million years ago) to Pliocene (about 5 to 2
million years ago), such a remarkably complete record reveals much that was
previously unknown to science. A team of paleontologists, structural and
sedimentary geologists, isotope geochemists, and paleomagnetists is
systematically collecting fossil mammals, fishes, and plants in the Qaidam basin
and studying their paleoenvironments. Combined with paleomagnetic studies, the
fossils help to establish the ages of the rocks in which they are preserved.
Sedimentologic studies on the river, lake, and over-bank deposits also provide
further evidence for the sources of the sediments from the surrounding
mountains, the nature of the paleodrainages, and the evolution of the basin
history. Analyses of carbon and oxygen isotopes preserved in fossil mammalian
teeth provide valuable information about animals' diets (whether they were leave
browsers or grass grazers), environment (whether they lived in a forest or on a
grassland or in a wooded grassland), and regional climate. By integrating the
paleontologic, magnetic, sedimentary, and geochemical data, we hope to achieve a
better understanding of the links between the uplift of the Tibetan Plateau and
the late Cenozoic environmental and biotic changes. Comparisons of faunas from
the southern slope of Tibet in India and Pakistan with the Qaidam faunas to the
north will offer clues of mammalian migrations and geographic barriers as the
high Tibet continued to rise. The new data are particularly relevant in the
current debate over the impact of the rising Tibetan Plateau on climate,
vegetation, and mammalian evolution in the Cenozoic of
Eurasia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;