* 0444163
* Collaborative Research: Detection, Perception and Utilization of Floral CO2 by Manduca sexta
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Robert Raguso, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 12/31/2007
* USD 184,762.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: DETECTION, PERCEPTION AND USE OF FLORAL CO2 IN NECTAR
FEEDING BY MANDUCA SEXTA&lt;br/&gt;John G. Hildebrand and Robert A.
Raguso&lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona and University of South
Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many insects are sensitive to environmental carbon
dioxide (CO2), and it is known to be important for attraction of blood-feeding
species to their hosts, but the behavioral significance of CO2 for insects that
feed on floral nectar is largely unclear. Preliminary studies yielded findings
suggesting that the hawkmoth Manduca sexta (Lepidoptera: Sphingidae) may use
elevated CO2, emitted by newly opened flowers, to help it find unexploited
nectar sources during foraging. The principal goal of the proposed research is
to confirm and establish the roles of floral CO2 in moths' foraging behavior,
and hence pollination of flowers, by investigating ecological, behavioral, and
neurophysiological aspects of the sensory detection of CO2 in Manduca. In
particular, the project aims to discover: (1) the relationship between a
flower's nectar content and CO2 concentration in front of the flower, both
before and after a moth's visit; (2) whether and how Manduca uses floral CO2
during foraging; and (3) how sensory information about CO2 is processed and
integrated with information about floral scent in the moth's brain. The
investigation of foraging behavior in aim (2) addresses, in separate
experiments, whether moths evaluate profitable individual flowers or plant
patches, and whether foraging moths use sensory information about floral CO2 to
increase their nectar intake. We also will test whether moths use floral CO2
alone or in conjunction with floral odor. &lt;br/&gt; To achieve these aims, we
will use a combination of experimental approaches. We will measure behavioral
responses of individual moths, both in the laboratory (for experiments on flying
moths in a tunnel and in a climate-controlled flight arena) and in the field (in
outdoor flight enclosures), to artificial and natural flowers that vary in the
amounts of nectar, CO2, and floral scent that they emit. We will use the
techniques of sensory neurophysiology to record responses of nerve cells in the
olfactory center of the moth's brain, when the moths are stimulated with CO2 and
floral-scent compounds, both separately and together. This approach should yield
insights about the adaptive responses of foraging moths to floral stimuli and
their underlying neurobiological mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt; Among its broader
impacts, this research is expected to be useful to the agricultural community,
as many moths and other plant-associated insects are beneficial pollinators
and/or economically important pests. Manipulation of insect performance via CO2
cues is already used to control blood-feeding insects such as mosquitoes and, on
the basis of this research, may be developed similarly to help control moths in
an agricultural context. This work may also help to assess the consequences for
ecological interactions (food webs, mutualisms) if ambient levels of CO2
continue to increase, as is predicted for global climate change. Importantly,
moreover, participants in the project will profit from its multidisciplinary
approach and gain experience with a range of methods and technical challenges.
Involvement of two undergraduate students is planned. Both collaborating
laboratories have records of supporting and training minority students and will
continue to do so. The undergraduate student in the South Carolina laboratory
will be chosen from the state-wide SC Alliance for Minority Participation in
Research (SCAMP) and will visit Tucson each year to meet with project
participants and participate in outreach activities. Research findings will be
disseminated in written and oral form at scientific conferences and through
institutions targeting the public, e.g. the Arizona-Sonora Desert
Museum.&lt;br/&gt;