* 0444818
* Investigating Interactive Properties of Disordered Protein Regions
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Lilia Iakoucheva, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2008
* USD 380,138.00

The recent recognition that numerous proteins and protein regions perform
functions while lacking folded globular structure has opened a new perspective
on protein structure-function relationships. This project focuses on
understanding the role of unstructured proteins and protein domains in protein-
protein interactions. The main objective of this project is to determine whether
intrinsic protein disorder is involved or possibly even required for protein-
protein interactions involving multiple binding partners. The hypothesis that
will be tested is that proteins with multiple binding partners interact with
their partners via natively disordered regions/domains. A combined approach
using computational and experimental methods is devised to achieve these goals.
First, a computational analysis that includes disorder predictions on proteins
with multiple interacting partners from the C. elegans interactome will be
performed. In addition, the algorithm for predicting disorder-to-order
transition mutations in these proteins will be developed. Second, prediction-
guided and domain-guided approaches will be used to select the targets for
experimental verification. Third, site-directed and deletion mutagenesis of
predicted disordered regions followed by a high-throughput yeast two-hybrid
(Y2H) screening using known binding partners (derived from the large-scale C.
elegans interactome mapping project) will be carried out. Finally, a database
that contains all C. elegans interaction domains together with their respective
partners defined in this study will be assembled and
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary nature of this project
will advance knowledge, stimulate scientific exchange, and integrate research
and education across two scientific fields - biology and computer science. Data
analysis and the development of a database of interacting protein domains will
provide excellent research and training opportunities to high school students,
graduate students, and postdoctoral research associates in the new and largely
unexplored area of intrinsic protein disorder.&lt;br/&gt;