* 0444244
* WCR: Upper Tropospheric Water Vapor over the Tropical Atlantic Ocean: Climatology, Variability, and Response to Deep Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Richard Johnson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 01/31/2009
* USD 379,252.00

In this project the PI will analyze and diagnose upper-tropospheric humidity
over the tropical Atlantic Ocean. Relative and specific humidity data from the
Measurement of Ozone and Water Vapour by Airbus In-Service Aircraft project
exist for 10 years since September 1994. Measurements have been made on frequent
flights, mostly twice weekly, from Central Europe to locations in South America
at levels within the dominant outflow layer of deep convection over the tropical
Atlantic Ocean. The data, nearly continuous over 10 years, will be used for the
analysis of tropical upper tropospheric water vapor over the Atlantic
Intertropical Convergence Zone and the adjacent subtropics. Specific attention
will be given to the dominant modes of variability of humidity on time scales
varying from less than a week to inter-annual and beyond, up to 10 years. Flight
level moisture fluxes, using co-measured wind velocities, will be computed and,
together with the humidity information, compared with reanalysis products. The
temporal and spatial variability of upper-tropospheric humidity will also be
related to that of the underlying sea surface temperature. Diagnostic studies
will be undertaken to test specific hypotheses concerning upper tropospheric
humidity over the tropical Atlantic and measurements of ozone, a quasi-
conservative tracer on the time scale of convective transport, will be used to
deduce sources of water vapor. Specifically, the following hypotheses will be
tested: that high values of observed upper-tropospheric humidity over the
equatorial trough zone are directly related to local vertical transport by deep
convection, that the water vapor distributions over the subtropical Atlantic are
predominantly controlled by large-scale vertical motion, and that the observed
intra-seasonal variability in the upper-tropospheric humidity over the tropical
Atlantic is directly linked to the Madden-Julian Oscillation. A post-doctoral
research associate will be involved in the research.