* 0444017
* Young Star Dynamical Mass Ratios Down to and Across the Substellar Boundary
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Lisa Prato, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 06/30/2009
* USD 187,964.00

Having a broad picture of star formation is necessary for understanding both
the past and future evolution of our Galaxy. Do star forming regions share
global properties, such as initial angular momentum distributions in molecular
cloud cores? The frequency, distribution, and properties of young binary stars
supply key information. This project is furthering our general understanding of
star formation by studying the closest young binary systems in nearby star
forming regions. These systems, the spectroscopic binaries, are particularly
useful because their radial velocity variations may be measured very precisely
and hence their mass ratios and ultimately masses may be accurately determined
free of assumptions. The use of high-resolution, infrared spectroscopy for these
measurements ensures the identification of even the faintest and lowest mass
secondaries in spectroscopic systems. The focus of the proposed projects is on
the lower and less well-understood end of the main-sequence. Mass ratio
distributions of low-mass spectroscopic binaries will inform us about global
characteristics of star formation in different star forming regions. The future
determination of absolute masses based on these mass ratios will be crucial for
developing accurate models of the formation and evolution of low-mass and
substellar objects.

Broader impacts: Broad dissemination of results takes the form of publication in
refereed journals, press releases, and posters and talks presented at national
conferences, enhancing the scientific and technical understanding on the part of
the investigator, colleagues, and graduate students. Public access to unique
data sets and software applicable to a variety of astrophysical data will be
made available on the web.