* 0444049
* Sequence Dependence of Polyproline II Helix Formation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Anne-Frances Miller, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2009
* USD 412,318.00

The overall goal of this project is to determine the effects of surrounding
sequence upon the propensity for protein residues to adopt the polyproline II
(PII) helical conformation. It has been hypothesized that protein unfolded
states possess significant PII helix content. The experiments outlined in this
project are designed to test this hypothesis and to provide data concerning the
formation of other secondary structures. This will be achieved by determining
the effects of surrounding blocks of alanine, glutamine, serine, leucine and
valine residues upon the conformational properties of central guest residues,
and by determining the role of electrostatics in PII helix formation. Data will
be collected using circular dichroism spectroscopy (CD) and NMR. The CD data
will be analyzed using singular value decomposition, which will provide
information on PII helix content and the presence of other secondary structures
in each of the peptides studied. NMR will be used to determine average
conformational properties of guest residues in some of the peptides to be
examined. The use of lanthanide chemical shift reagents will be explored in
order to alleviate resonance overlap in the NMR experiments. At all stages data
collected will be compared to the calculations of Dr. Rohit Pappu at the
Washington University in St. Louis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely
acknowledged that a lack of understanding of protein unfolded states is the
single biggest impediment to understanding the protein folding process. Should
the hypothesis that unfolded states possess significant PII helix content prove
true, then protein unfolded states are significantly more structured than
commonly believed. Data collected in the execution of this project will either
support or refute this hypothesis. In addition, data will be obtained on the
presence of other secondary structure types in protein unfolded states. These
data will provide the beginnings of a comprehensive picture of the ensemble of
protein unfolded states. In addition, data collected will prove useful in the
understanding of biomolecular interactions mediated by PII helices. The
development of protocols for the use of chemical shift reagents in NMR will make
the study of small, weakly-structured peptides more tractable and will prove to
be of wide general use. The PI plans to have a postdoctoral scholar and several
undergraduate students work on aspects of this project. Where possible,
undergraduates will be recruited from underrepresented groups. The postdoctoral
scholar will receive advanced training in spectroscopy and NMR spectrometry. The
undergraduate students will receive basic laboratory training, training in
spectroscopy, scientific ethics, and in the analysis and presentation of data.
All trainees will participate in the dissemination of knowledge generated. The
PI will incorporate knowledge generated in this project into a graduate-level
course on structural biology. In addition, data will be published in peer-
reviewed journals, and presented at scientific meetings and research
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;