* 0444568
* Carboxysomes:The Role of Microcompartmentalization in Bacterial CO2 Fixation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2005,05/31/2008
* Gordon Cannon, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 05/31/2008
* USD 446,441.00

All cyanobacteria and many chemoautotrophic bacteria contain polyhedral
inclusion &lt;br/&gt;bodies called carboxysomes. These microcompartments, which
consist entirely of protein and are filled with ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase/oxygenase (RubisCO), are thought to be part of a carbon
concentrating mechanism (CCM) that serves to enhance the CO2 fixation efficiency
in organisms that contain them. Although the molecular mechanism by which the
carboxysome provides a catalytic enhancement for RubisCO is not certain, it has
long been a tenet of the CCM hypothesis that a carboxysomal carbonic anhydrase
(CA) rapidly converts cytoplasmic HCO3 - into CO2, the substrate for RubisCO.
Recent work from this laboratory established that a protein component of the
carboxysomal shell is a novel CA that we have term EPSCOR-CA. Its localization
in the carboxysomal shell suggests that carboxysomes function via a mechanism
that is more complex than that predicted by the standard CCM model and might
indicate an expanded role for the microcompartments in autotrophic carbon
assimilation. &lt;br/&gt; Biochemical and molecular biological approaches will
be combined to elucidate structural features of the carboxysome that form the
basis for its function, further characterize the newly discovered carboxysomal
CA biochemically and identify its interactions with other proteins in the shell.
The obligate chemoautotrophic bacterium Halothiobacillus neapolitanus will serve
as a model system for these studies since a) homogeneous preparations of
carboxysomes can be isolated in large quantities from the organism, b) its
carboxysome operon has been cloned, characterized and expressed in Escherichia
coli, c) a substantial number of carboxysome mutants have been created in H.
neapolitanus, d) the bacterium can be genetically manipulated, e) gene clusters
homologous to the putative operon encoding H. neapolitanus carboxysomes have
been observed in both cyanobacteria and other species of chemoautotrophs.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Given the large contribution of
carboxysome-containing organisms towards CO2 fixation and the impact of their
metabolism on the global carbon cycle, one broader implication of the work
proposed will be the elucidation of one of the most basic and central
biochemical processes that control the carbon cycle and influence weather and
climate. The PI will be directly involved in conducting key experiments and will
be the mentor for graduate and undergraduate student research in various aspects
of the research. Students participating in these projects will gain experience
in biochemical and molecular biological research techniques. &lt;br/&gt;