* 0444285
* AAD:  Software Tool for Asynchronous-Algorithm Development
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Ahmed Sameh, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2009
* USD 650,000.00

AAD: A Software Tool for Asynchronous-Algorithm Development

Zhiyuan Li, Ananth Grama, Ahmed Sameh

Department of Computer Sciences Purdue University

Project Summary

Intellectual Merit:

Data communication and memory access latency will continue to be the most severe
performance-limiting factor for high-end computing problems. This proposal takes
the view that, for a wide range of applications, the computation efficiency can
be substantially improved by a fundamental change to the data propagation model
in parallel algorithms.

Many important applications use iterative solvers to solve partial differential
equations (PDEs). In such solvers, each data point is iteratively updated using
the new values of its neighbors. Data values are therefore propagated across the
problem domain over the time steps. Currently, the predominant way to propagate
the data requires the processor to suspend its computation until all data
computed at a predetermined time step have arrived from its neighbors. Such a
rigid model not only incurs a heavy performance penalty due to processor
waiting, but it also severely limits the compiler's ability to transform
programs to achieve more efficient parallel execution and better data locality.
The PIs propose a software tool which supports a new model called the
asynchronous model. Under this model, each data point is updated based on
whatever the most recent values available from its neighbors, instead of waiting
for values computed at a predetermined step. The new model will hence overcome
the difficulties mentioned above. The asynchronous model, nonetheless, may
change the convergence rate of the algorithm. Hence, based on the tradeoff
between the convergence rate and the parallel execution efficiency, the
application programmer should tune the frequency at which the data propagation
is re-synchronized in order to accelarate the convergence. The proposed tool
will make it easy for the application programmer to perform such important
tuning.

Broader Impact:

The success of this project will contribute substantially to the advance of
high-end computing. Moreover, it will also make significant educational and
outreach impact. The PIs plan to use the proposed software tool in Purdue's
educational computational science and engineering (CSE) graduate program.
Students and faculty in this program will use the tool in courses on parallel
computing and performance evaluation, as well as in research projects that can
benefit from fine-tuning performance on high-end parallel computing platforms.
The software developed in this project can also be an effective tool in CSE
education programs elsewhere.

The PIs have a track record of transferring research ideas to industrial labs
and such collaboration will continue to project positive influences on high-
performance computer industries. This project will also further enhance PIs'
ability to engage a broad community of undergraduate students in various
disciplines, through Honor Seminars, special mentoring programs and
undergraduate research opportunities.

