* 0444295
* US-Africa Workshop: Enhancing Collaborative Research on the Environment in SubSaharan Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* David Hartnett, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2006
* USD 160,000.00

Semazzi 0444295 This award supports a PI meeting/workshop for enhancing NSF-
funded collaborative research on the environment in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).
The workshop will bring together 50-60 members of the U.S. scientific community
funded by NSF to work in the SSA region, 20 of their African collaborators,
program officers from the various NSF programs that fund environmental research
in SSA, and representatives from other agencies and groups that support related
work in SSA. The meeting will be the first PI meeting to have such a regional
focus and will be multidisciplinary, involving PIs with awards from several
directorates representing multiple disciplines (e.g. ecology, systematics,
atmospheric sciences, earth sciences, anthropology, geographic sciences, and
environmental engineering). The workshop will feature poster sessions to share
information about ongoing activities, plenary lectures, and working groups on
scientific as well as logistical/operational themes. The Office of International
Science and Engineering is sponsoring this workshop in order to strengthen NSF's
existing investment in this region by promoting and facilitating multi-
disciplinary collaboration, integration and synthesis of results across
hierarchical levels. The workshop will also bring together PIs with experience
in providing research experiences for US students in SSA, thus providing insight
into how to provide more and better such opportunities. Also participating in
the meeting will be a group of African scientists who collaborate with NSF PI's,
thus providing information on the scientific projects that complement African
strengths and interests. Another group of participants will be other agencies
and foundations that fund related work in SSA, enhancing the likelihood of
leveraging NSF funding, particularly in ways that strengthen human and physical
capacity building in Africa and so strengthen the mutual scientific
collaborations. The main part of the workshop will be a three-day meeting
convened at NSF. The workshop participants will work to identify collaborative
scientific research opportunities and areas of synergy, both intellectual and
operational, identify specific partnerships linked with specific mechanisms for
funding, recommend mechanisms for fostering more effective collaboration, and
identify mechanisms for building and maintaining research networks. One working
group will focus on communication and information technology challenges faced by
this community of scholars. To more effectively address this sub-topic, several
IT experts will join the main workshop on its last day and remain at NSF,
working with a subset of the participants on the fourth day to address the IT
challenges. This group will work to recommend methods for enhancing
communication that might include assembling research/personnel directories and
bibliographies, addressing issues of information/data management, sharing
information on IT infrastructure advances and opportunities, and the use of
digital libraries to strengthen international science research and education in
the US and Africa. The results of the workshop will be available in a report to
be available electronically on the worldwide web, and distributed on CDs in
Africa.

