* 0444586
* Databasing Bryophytes from the Southeastern U.S. in the Duke University Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2010
* Arthur Shaw, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 01/31/2010
* USD 412,012.00

A grant has been awarded to Duke University under the direction of Dr. Jonathan
Shaw for partial support of a project to enter accession information for moss
collections from the southeastern United States housed in the Duke University
herbarium into a database, and make that information available on the Worldwide
Web. The southeastern U.S. covers an ecologically diverse geographic region. The
moss flora of the southeastern U.S. is remarkably rich. The region hosts
approximately 635 species, or almost 50% of all the moss species found in North
America. With about 90,000 moss specimens from the southeastern U. S., the Duke
collection is one of, if not the most important resource for documenting the
southeastern moss flora. The project will utilize SPECIFY as the database
software, available from the Informatics Biodiversity Research Center at the
University of Kansas. The specimen database will be linked to phylogenetic
analyses and molecular databases for mosses available at Duke, facilitating
novel approaches to integrating spatial patterns of taxonomic and molecular
biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Duke bryophyte herbarium is utilized by
graduate and undergraduate students conducting research on bryophyte
biodiversity, ecology, and evolution. The herbarium plays a central role in
undergraduate training through a recently funded REU site grant from NSF. Four
graduate students are currently working on Ph.D. degrees in bryology.
Southeastern moss collections are also utilized for several courses taught in
the Biology Department. Utility of the collections will be greatly increased by
the ability to search for specimen records in relation to taxonomic group,
geographic location, and/or habitat type. No published taxonomic summary for the
southeastern mosses currently exists. The Duke University moss collection,
especially the southeastern U.S. accessions, are widely utilized by bryologists
worldwide for floristic, monographic, developmental, and molecular research. The
databasing efforts outlined in this proposal will facilitate the identification
of undercollected areas, biodiversity hotspots, and sites that harbor rare
taxa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The loss of biodiversity is a societal problem. In
order to evaluate biodiversity losses, basic information is needed about what
organisms occur in what areas, and how geographic patterns of biodiversity
relate to ecological and historical factors. Databases such as that proposed in
this project provide the raw data from which ecological inferences can be made.
Well beyond the university community, the Duke bryophyte collection is utilized
by local, state, and regional conservation organizations. The Duke bryology
program organizes an annual H.L. Blomquist Foray which is attended by both
amateur and professional bryologists. Availability of collection information for
southeastern mosses will facilitate interactions between amateurs and
professionals and increased collecting by botanists outside the professional
bryological community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;