* 0444731
* Collaborative Research:  Quantum Dot Nucleation in Glass Microsphere Resonators
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Mark Brongersma, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 267,978.00

This research is a collaborative project with Prof. Risbud from University of
California at Davis to study the laser induced nucleation of semiconductor
quantum dot (QD) nanocrystals in glass microspheres. CO2 laser beam processing
will be used to melt the tip of a glass fiber resulting in microsphere formation
and subsequent nucleation of QDs. Preliminary results show that we can form CdTe
QDs in microspheres (10-200 micrometers diameter) by this method. The main goal
of this research is to investigate the nucleation and growth characteristics to
enable controlled processing and nanostructure formation in the glass
microsphere geometry. The semiconductor quantum dots in the microspheres will be
characterized by electron microscopy (SEM, TEM, HRTEM), small angle X-ray
scattering (SAXS), and ultra-sensitive optical spectroscopies that exploit the
high Q optical resonances of the microsphere. In these optical modes, light can
orbit around the equator of the microsphere for millions of times allowing
multiple sampling and strong interaction with the nanoparticles in the sphere.
We will develop the procedures for using microspheres as "optical microtest
laboratories" and provide general recipes for studying a wide variety of
nucleation and growth phenomena glass microspheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project provides a strong science base to nanotechnologies based on optical
devices made from materials containing semiconductor nanocrystals in glass
microspheres. It also has important practical applications such as ultra-compact
and tunable light sources and lasers. The graduate educational program will
include under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;