* 0444844
* The Impact of Variable Stoichiometry on Predation and Competition: Development of Microbial Experimental Models
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Thomas Chrzanowski, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2009
* USD 332,781.00

The impact of variable stoichiometry on predation and competition: development
of microbial experimental models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;James P.
Grover&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas at
Arlington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will address how variations in the
chemical composition ("stoichiometry") of microorganisms affect their
interactions with other species. In theory, variations in composition of the
nutrient elements carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus, affect competition between
bacterial species, and also affect the relationship of bacterial prey with the
larger microorganisms that consume them. Recently developed mathematical
simulation models of these processes will be tested using laboratory cultures of
two bacterial species and a consumer microorganism. Some specific predictions to
be tested include the proposal that the capability to reduce the cellular
content of a nutrient indicates efficient nutrient use and can improve a
species' competitive ability, the proposal that consumers alter the outcome of
competition between prey species, and the notion that this effect depends on
details of chemical composition and the processing and recycling of nutrients on
the part of the consumer. This project will provide research training for
graduate and undergraduate students, including those recruited from under-
represented groups. It will also provide insights into processes governing
abundances of microorganisms in nature, including some species of "harmful
algae" whose lifestyle includes feeding upon bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;