* 0445867
* Transcriptional Memory in Plants: Dissection of a Mechanism Required for Expression of the FLC/MAF MADS-box Gene Family
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Steven VanNocker, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2009
* USD 430,767.00

An excellent model to study epigenetic mechanisms in eukaryotes is the Polycomb
Group (PcG)-mediated silencing of the Arabidopsis MADS-box floral repressor gene
FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC), and associated initiation of flowering, after extended
growth of the plant in the cold. To better understand the dynamics of FLC
expression, genetic screens were used identify seven genes designated VIP1-VIP7
required for the maintenance of FLC activity in non-vernalized plants. At least
four of these encode proteins related to distinct components of yeast Paf1C, a
transcription factor that associates with elongating RNA polymerase II (Pol II)
and assists in the establishment and/or maintenance of transcription-promotive
chromatin modifications, such as methylation of histone H3 lysine-4 by the
trithorax-related histone methylase Set1. It is thought that, in yeast, H3K4
trimethylation within active genes comprises a 'molecular memory' of gene
transcription. Potentially the Arabidopsis VIP proteins act as a mediator
between transcriptional activity and the maintenance of 'activating' histone
modifications. The goal of this project is to build a mechanistic model for the
activity of the VIP proteins on their targets FLC and the related MAF1, and for
the interaction of this activity with developmental mechanisms of gene
silencing. This project will contribute to our knowledge of plant development,
transcriptional elongation, and epigenetic mechanisms in eukaryotes. The
research will provide training opportunities for postdocs, graduates,
undergraduates, and high-school students, including members of minority groups
under-represented in science. Training in protein-related techniques such as
those described here will be especially valuable to the plant research
community, where such techniques have not yet been widely used.