* 0445353
* The Bio- and Phylogeography of Sympatric Speciation in Rhagoletis
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Jeffrey Feder, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 02/28/2009
* USD 458,300.00

The intellectual and scientific focus of the research centers on how new species
of Rhagoletis pomonella fruit flies form. Speciation occurs as genetic barriers
to gene flow evolve between populations that cause them to become reproductively
isolated from one another. Traditionally, speciation has been thought to require
that populations be completely geographically isolated by physical barriers to
movement (e.g., mountain ranges, large rivers, oceans). By precluding
individuals from moving between populations, geographic isolation results in
genetic changes occurring independently between populations which, over time,
can accumulate to the point that the populations evolve into reproductively
isolated species. The apple maggot fly, Rhagoletis pomonella, has been argued to
be a possible exception, however. As early as 1864, Benjamin Walsh hypothesized
that certain insects that specialize on attacking specific plants could speciate
without geographic isolation ("in sympatry") in the process of them shifting and
ecologically adapting to new host plants. In particular, Walsh cited the shift
of Rhagoletis pomonella from its native host plant hawthorn (Crataegus) to
introduced, domesticated apple trees in the United States - an event that
occurred in the 1850's - as a real time example of his idea of sympatric
speciation in action. Subsequent genetic studies have confirmed Walsh's
hypothesis that the apple and hawthorn-infesting forms of Rhagoletis pomonella
are partially reproductively isolated "host races", potentially in the first
stages of diverging into new species. An important factor responsible for the
divergence of the apple and hawthorn flies is that apple and hawthorn trees
fruit at different times of the year, resulting in the one-generation per year
life cycles of apple and hawthorn flies having to be offset in order for them to
be able to attack apple vs. hawthorn trees. Recently, an interesting twist to
the Rhagoletis story has been discovered. Some of the genes responsible for the
difference in the life history of apple and hawthorn flies in the United States
may have originated over a million years ago in an isolated population of
hawthorn-infesting flies in Mexico. These genes were introduced into the U.S. in
the distant past during a period when the Mexican and US hawthorn-fly
populations came into contact (perhaps 500,000 years ago), and very recently
these genes helped facilitate the shift to domesticated apple following the
planting of apples in the US by European colonists. Thus, geographic isolation
and gene flow may act in conjunction with ecological specialization to help
trigger "sympatric" speciation events (i.e., the introduction of apples into the
U.S. provided hawthorn flies with a new ecological niche - a temporal resource
island - that they were able to take advantage of, in part, because of the
genetic variation they possessed due to past gene flow from Mexico). The current
grant proposal will test this biogeographic hypothesis thorough an extensive
analysis of DNA sequences of genes located throughout the genome of Rhagoletis
flies. The research will involve a survey of flies collected throughout Mexico
to determine the extent of the geographic range of Rhagoletis flies in the
country and pinpoint possible sources of gene flow into the U.S. in the past. In
addition, the genetic analysis will indicated whether certain genes and genomic
regions have characteristics that made them more or less prone to have moved
into the US fly population (e.g., whether or not the genes reside within
inversions - stretches of chromosomes that have different linear orders of genes
along them - that have been hypothesized to retard gene flow between species).
In this manner, the research will resolve the genetic history underlying the
recent shift and formation of the new form of apple-infesting Rhagoletis
pomonella.

The broader impacts and societal benefits of the research are multifaceted. The
project will integrate science training and educational activities at the local,
community, University, and international levels. The study will involve the
participation of a Post-Doctoral associate and graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students in various aspects of the work ranging from field and laboratory
research to class modules designed to give high school students and educators
hands on experience with molecular genetic techniques and analysis. The funding
provided by the current proposal will also expand and strengthen the Population
Biology program at the University of Notre Dame at a critical stage of its
development. In addition, the proposed research represents an international
collaboration between researchers at Notre Dame and two distinguished Mexican
colleagues, Dr. Martin Aluja and Dr. Juan Rull, at the Ecological Institute in
Xalapa, Veracruz. Drs. Aluja and Rull have received parallel support from
CONACyT to fund the collaboration. Finally, the proposed Rhagoletis research has
significant applied, as well as basic, scientific implications. Rhagoletis
pomonella is a major economic pest of apples, and related species attack
cherries, blueberries, and several other crops. The question of the extent and
host range of Rhagoletis pomonella in Mexico has important implications
concerning the import and export of fruit between the two countries, as well as
how new populations of pest species form and can be controlled. The impact of
the proposed research is therefore ranges from new basic and applied scientific
findings, to educational and societal benefits.