* 0445178
* SGER:  An online registry for unique sample identification in the solid Earth Sciences (SESAR)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* W. Christopher Lenhardt, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2006
* USD 134,770.00

&lt;br/&gt;An online registry for unique sample identification in the solid
Earth Sciences&lt;br/&gt;(SESAR)&lt;br/&gt;We request support for an initial
one-year project through a Small Grant for Exploratory&lt;br/&gt;Research to
respond as quickly as possible to the urgent need for unique
sample&lt;br/&gt;identifiers in the development of a Geoscience
Cyberinfrastructure. We will build&lt;br/&gt;a web-based digital registry for
solid earth samples that will provide for the first time a&lt;br/&gt;way to
uniquely name and identify samples on a global scale.&lt;br/&gt;Establishing
such system will have a wide-ranging impact on sample&lt;br/&gt;and data
management, especially with respect to sample sharing and data
integration.&lt;br/&gt;Through the ability to track a sample through its
history, the system will facilitate our&lt;br/&gt;ability to build on previously
collected data on samples as new techniques are developed,&lt;br/&gt;thus
solving a long standing major problem in the geosciences in which samples
lose&lt;br/&gt;their "identity" as their names get changed as aliquots are
passed from one investigator to&lt;br/&gt;another. The unique identifiers will
also dramatically advance interoperability among&lt;br/&gt;information systems
for sample-based data, opening an extensive range of new&lt;br/&gt;opportunities
for discovery and for interdisciplinary approaches in
research.&lt;br/&gt;Building a system that will provide the means for uniquely
naming&lt;br/&gt;solid earth samples will have a dramatic impact on the future
of the Geosciences. Several&lt;br/&gt;major existing and emerging data and
information management projects that handle&lt;br/&gt;sample-based data, such as
CHRONOS, EarthChem, SedDB, PaleoStrat - to name a few&lt;br/&gt;- are seriously
hampered in their potential to link disparate data for samples and
develop&lt;br/&gt;interoperability among the systems by the inability to
uniquely identify samples, and thus&lt;br/&gt;this system is an important
response to a rapidly developing need. The Solid Earth&lt;br/&gt;SAmple Registry
(SESAR) will allow wide ranges of sample-based data types to be&lt;br/&gt;linked
and integrated, thus leading to new interdisciplinary approaches in research.