* 0445661
* Development and Evolution of Beetle Horns
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Armin Moczek, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2007
* USD 394,988.00

PROJECT SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Two proposed research examines the developmental
origins and subsequent evolutionary diversification of one of the most diverse
classes of phenotypic traits: horns and horn-like structure in beetles. In
particular the proposed research has three major aims: (1) First, it will
complete a first characterization of the gene network that patterns horn
development in beetles. (2) Secondly, using a comparative approach it will
explore how modifications of the regulation of horn development have contributed
to the dramatic diversification of horned beetles on three different levels: (i)
alternative horned and hornless male morphs within species, (ii) sexual
dimorphism, and (iii) interspecific diversity in location, size, and number of
horns. (3) Lastly, the proposed research will develop RNA interference
approaches for future studies of functional relationships between putative horn
patterning mechanisms and horn phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT &amp; BROADER IMPACT OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research directly addresses one of the most significant unresolved questions in
evolutionary biology: how do novel complex phenotypes originate and diversify.
At the same time the hypotheses framework and experimental design build firmly
on 10 years of research by the PI on the behavioral ecology and evolutionary
physiology of horn development in beetles. The proposed research will thus make
a novel contribution to the field of evolutionary developmental biology, and at
the same time facilitate an integration of the evolution of developmental
processes with the behavioral, physiological and ecological mechanisms that
guide such evolution in nature. Lastly, the proposed research aims to develop
working RNAinterference protocols for future studies on the evolution and
development of beetle horns. As such the proposed research will contribute a
tool previously unavailable to scientists, yet paramount for future functional
analyses of developmental evolution in these organisms. The proposed research
will be carried out in large part by graduate and undergraduate students and
provide additional training and research opportunities to high school students.
The PI is strongly committed to use the proposed research as an opportunity to
continue and expand his initiative to integrate underrepresented groups into
research and training in his new lab at Indiana University. Apart from timely
publication in peer-reviewed journals results from this proposal will be used as
exemplars in a graduate course on the Evolution and Development of Phenotypic
Plasticity as well as an undergraduate course in Insect Biology.&lt;br/&gt;