* 0445181
* Survey of Basal Foraminifera
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Susan Goldstein, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2009
* USD 386,250.00

This proposal investigates the diversity of basal Foraminifera (forams),
abundant single-celled marine organisms that play important roles in Earth's
ecological economy. Previous studies focused on conspicuous, hard-shelled
forams, but a full understanding of their role in ancient and modern
environments requires new information on earlier-evolving, soft-bodied species
(allogromiids) which dominate many settings. This study will use morphological
and DNA-based methods to sample allogromiid species richness in diverse habitats
along the eastern US coast, and from samples collected by collaborators from
sites worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;This effort further advances the NSF partnership in
Planetary Biodiversity Inventories of worldwide, species-level diversity. Our
findings will clarify the evolutionary history of forams and provide a much
improved guide to living species based on both their appearance and DNA
identification. The new tools developed will help drive advances in
environmental surveys, especially in monitoring the response of marine biota to
environmental change. The research team also has a long history of providing
content to K-12 educators through mentoring high school scholars and sponsoring
teacher workshops. Finally, the web-accessible database to be generated will
assist marine biologists and educators alike, who currently have no effective
identification or teaching tools for these important organisms.&lt;br/&gt;