* 0445650
* Induction of Plant Resistance by Elicitors of Trichoderma virens
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Charles Kenerley, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2009
* USD 438,574.00

There is a large group of filamentous fungi that inhabit the soil where they
form close associations with plant roots. This association can lead to the
induction of a systemic resistance response by the plant host towards pathogens.
However, the compounds produced by these soil-inhabiting fungi that initiate
this response are largely unknown. Two candidate compounds include proteins
(called peptaibols) that alter host membrane structures and hydrophobic proteins
that are involved in adhesion or host surface recognition. The cloning and
characterization of one gene that encodes for production of peptaibols and
another gene the encodes for a hydrophobic-like protein from the biological
control fungus, Trichoderma virens, are the basis for an approach to test
whether these compounds are critical for the induction of plant resistance. The
approach is to apply synthesized peptaibols, purified hydrophobic-like protein
from T. virens, or genetically modified strains (disrupted or over-expressing
the target genes) of T. virens to cotton seedlings in a unique hydroponic
system. These treated seedlings will then be challenged by a plant pathogen.
Such a tripartite system will provide a mechanism for analyzing the interaction
that defines induced plant resistance. An understanding of the host response to
these inducing compounds will also contribute to defining how avirulent fungi
such as T. virens have developed as commensals rather than plant pathogens. As
these two genes are novel to a group of fungi that colonize and interact with
numerous plant species, defining their function in the life cycle of T. virens
will greatly enhance our understanding the role these fungi play in maintaining
ecosystem health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents a significant
opportunity for training undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral
research scientists in the complex, but intriguing area of microbe-plant-
pathogen interactions. Undergraduate students selected from the BioEnvironmental
Sciences program will participate in research employing contemporary techniques
in fungal and plant molecular biology and digital imaging as they develop
independent research projects. A new course being developed by the PI will
provide an introduction to undergraduate research and internships to enhance the
BioEnvironmental Sciences curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;