* 0445949
* Ovarian Follicle Selection Mediated by Release from Inhibitory Map Kinase Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Alan Johnson, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 01/31/2009
* USD 470,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;In reproductively active vertebrate females that ovulate a limited
number of eggs each ovulatory cycle, it is the rate-limiting process of ovarian
follicle selection that ultimately determines the number of competent follicles
eventually capable of being fertilized. Vertebrate follicle selection currently
represents an incompletely defined process by which an undifferentiated follicle
is activated to undergo final differentiation in preparation for ovulation,
whereas the likely fate of those follicles not selected is follicle death. In
the hen ovary, the ovulation of a single follicle per day requires an existing
preovulatory hierarchy which normally consists of a limited number of fully
differentiated follicles. This follicle hierarchy is maintained by the daily
'selection' of a single follicle from a small group of undifferentiated
(prehierarchal) follicles measuring 6 to 8 mm in diameter. The novel hypothesis
of the research proposed is that the selection of a single, prehierarchal
follicle per day into the preovulatory hierarchy is first dependent upon the
release of the follicle granulosa layer from inhibitory signaling, and
subsequently dependent upon an increased sensitivity to Follicle-Stimulating
Hormone. A central hypothesis tested herein is that the release from inhibitory
Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase signaling is prerequisite for follicle
selection in the avian ovary. Furthermore, it is proposed that such MAPK
signaling is promoted by the local production of one or more members of the
epidermal growth factor (EGF) family of peptides. &lt;br/&gt;The present project
describes experiments using the hen ovary model system to study endocrine, novel
paracrine and autocrine factors, together with their associated membrane
receptors, that tightly regulate follicle selection and subsequent
differentiation. Collectively, results from the study will determine critical
cellular and molecular processes that define follicle selection (and by
implication reproductive potential) in a vertebrate species. Interpretations of
these data are predicted to pertain to all groups within the Sauropsid lineage
(e.g., oviparous reptiles, crocodiles and birds) in which the establishment of
an ovarian follicle hierarchy is prerequisite for egg laying. The PI has
established a record of providing teaching and research training to graduate and
undergraduate students of diverse backgrounds, and is committed to the
professional development of female students. The PI is an ongoing participant in
the Department's REU Summer Fellows Program that serves under-represented
populations, and he routinely incorporates his related research expertise into
his academic lecture and laboratory curricula.&lt;br/&gt;