* 0445540
* Zinc Finger Proteins and Functional Specificity of Hox Patterning
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,04/30/2009
* James Mahaffey, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Ann Burdsal
* 04/30/2009
* USD 461,000.00

Though it has been more than twenty years since the cloning of the Drosophila
Hox complexes, scientists are still uncertain how they control animal body
patterning. hox genes encode sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins that specify
body pattern by controlling downstream or 'target' genes. Different Hox proteins
(or combinations of them) are expressed in different segments, and, therefore,
each segment expresses a specific set of target genes, which leads to segment
specific morphological features. However, in vitro all Hox proteins bind to
similar, relatively simple DNA sequences with a core consensus of TAAT.
Surrounding bases can influence binding strength, but there appears to be little
specificity or, more appropriately, selectivity, in the DNA binding properties
of different Hox proteins. There is evidence that this is true in vivo as well,
so it is difficult to resolve how individual Hox proteins can have such specific
developmental roles while having similar, rather nonspecific DNA binding
properties. Previously, genetic evidence was obtained that the partially
redundant C2H2 zinc finger proteins Disconnected (Disco) and Disco-related
(Disco-r) are cofactors for the Hox proteins Deformed (Dfd) and Sex combs
reduced (Scr) during development of the embryonic maxillary and labial gnathal
segments, respectively. As specific cofactors, the encoded zinc finger proteins
establish the domain in which only certain Hox proteins can function. However,
these genes appear to have another role. They establish the general gnathal (or
post-oral) segment type. Since there are other zinc finger-encoding genes, such
as teashirt (tsh) that have similar properties, this model of zinc finger/Hox
partnerships appears to govern development throughout the embryo. The work
described here will evaluate this model further and provide excellent training
opportunities for undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students in the
fields of genetic and genomic studies of developmental mechanisms. The
experiments will: (1) determine the biochemical properties of the zinc finger-
Hox partnership. The DNA binding and protein-protein interactions will be
examined and it will be determined if the zinc finger and Hox proteins have
cooperative interactions during DNA binding. (2) There are indications that the
N-terminal arm of the homeodomain may be important for determining which Hox
protein functions with which zinc finger protein (Disco or Tsh). This will be
tested by altering the amino acid sequence of this domain and determining
whether or not this changes the ability to function with Disco or Tsh. This
question addresses Hox functional specificity. (3) The final goal examines the
control of development by specific Hox-zinc finger identities. Ectopic
expression of Hox and zinc finger proteins will be used to generate embryos that
develop with approximately a single segment type (maxillary vs labial; gnathal
vs trunk) throughout the whole embryo. The differences in gene expression will
be compared using microarray gene expression profiling. Hox genes control body
patterning in all metazoans, so understanding how this is accomplished is
paramount to understanding how animal body patterns have arisen and changed
throughout animal evolution. Further, genes encoding zinc finger transcription
factors are the most abundant class in animal genomes. They have been implicated
in many developmental and disease conditions. This study provides an opportunity
to learn about the interactive nature of transcription factors during gene
expression. Further, this will provide an opportunity for students at many
levels to experience an interactive research program that relies on many
different disciplines: genetics, cell biology, biochemistry and genomics.