* 0445470
* Heart Morphogenesis in the Ascidian, Ciona Intestinalis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Michael Levine, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2008
* USD 420,000.00

Scientific merit. The detailed visualization of the earliest stages of heart
formation in the Ciona embryo has the potential to reveal insights that have
been missed in the more complex vertebrate systems. Dr. Levin has recently found
that the definitive heart arises from a single pair of cells, the B7.5
blastomeres, at the 110-cell stage of embryogenesis, just before the onset of
gastrulation. These cells specifically express two regulatory genes, Tbx6 and
Mesp, which encode T-box and bHLH transcription factors, respectively. B7.6
divides to produce two daughter cells. The anterior daughter cell expresses only
the Mesp regulatory gene and thereby forms the heart. In contrast, the posterior
daughter cell expresses both Mesp and Tbx6, and consequently, this cell forms
the anterior-most tail muscles. These "A-cells" have a number of properties
related to the ventricular regions of vertebrate hearts, although they do not
form components of the definitive heart. The anterior daughter cell migrates
into the head and undergoes an asymmetric division before embarking on the
differentiation pathway leading to the heart. In contrast, the posterior
daughter cell remains in the tail and forms A-type muscle cells. He will perform
a detailed analysis of the genes required for the anterior migration and
asymmetric division of the heart progenitors. He has recently produced mutant
tadpoles that should facilitate the identification of genes required for heart
migration and division. For example, the overexpression of Tbx6 causes the
anterior daughter cells of the B7.5 blastomeres to arrest and form supernumerary
A-cells, while overexpression of Mesp causes the opposite phenotype: ectopic
migration and division of the presumptive A-cells, which form a second heart.
There is every indication that the initial stages of heart formation in
vertebrates depends on the same type of directed cell migration and asymmetric
division seen in the Ciona tadpole.

Broader impact. Heart disease is a major cause of death and suffering in human
populations. To gain insights into the basis of heart disease this study will
investigate the earliest phases of heart development in a simple organism, the
sea squirt or Ascidian, Ciona intestinalis. Ascidians represent the simplest
chordates--the animal phylum that includes vertebrates such as ourselves. The
Ascidian tadpole represents a simplified version of vertebrate tadpoles. The
early tadpole is composed of just 1,000 cells. The ascidian heart is simple, but
nonetheless represents the evolutionary forerunner of multi-chambered vertebrate
hearts. Despite its simplicity, the ascidian heart possesses an intriguing
property not seen in vertebrates: it has a reversible beat. The single-chambered
heart exhibits rhythmic beating in one direction for several minutes, then stops
and reverses direction for a few minutes before once again changing direction.
Many millions of dollars have been invested in understanding various aspects of
heart development during the embryonic development of different vertebrates,
including zebrafish, frogs, chickens, and mice. However, the complexity of these
organisms (the developing heart is composed of many hundreds-even thousands-of
cells) precludes a detailed understanding of the earliest stages of heart
formation. The simplicity of the Ciona tadpole permits the visualization of the
earliest events. There is no other relative of vertebrates that possesses such a
simple heart. It is initially composed of just 8 cells that are easily
visualized using simple microscopy.

