* 0445213
* Evolutionary Biogeography in the Lowland Reptile and Amphibian Fauna from New Guinea
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Allen Allison, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 01/31/2010
* USD 501,370.00

What forces cause biodiversity to increase or decrease over time? Why do some
regions of the planet have greater numbers of species than others? These are
some of the most important questions in environmental biology. This project will
study the underlying processes responsible for both the production and
maintenance of biodiversity on the island of New Guinea, one of the most diverse
regions of the planet. The research will sample DNA from several amphibian and
reptile species with diverse ecological and life-history patterns. Molecular
genetic techniques will be used to test hypotheses about how past changes in
climate and geological processes shape biological
diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad significance of this research is
that it integrates research and education at both the national and international
levels, acts synergistically to advance scientific knowledge, creates
partnerships with seven national and international museums and universities,
promotes conservation, and enhances scientific and educational opportunities for
a broad spectrum of people. The research uses the results of two recent
comprehensive conservation priority-setting workshops and innovative digital
mapping and modeling methods to provide a much stronger scientific foundation
for conservation planning than is currently available. This research will help
to ensure that conservation efforts preserve both genetic and species diversity.
Education will provide local scientific capacity-building and help foster better
international relations in the Pacific Rim.&lt;br/&gt;