* 0445789
* Collaborative Research: A Depositional and Paleoecological model of Neogene Reef Development in the Dominican Republic: Integrating Taxonomic and Chronostratigraphic Databases
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Ann Budd, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 04/30/2008
* USD 102,421.00

This study represents an important first step in constructing the
chronostratigraphic framework needed for regional correlation and environmental
interpretation for shallow marine benthic communities in the tropical Western
Atlantic between 6 and 1 Ma. The research provides a stratigraphic and
environmental framework for evaluating faunal turnover and community change. It
addresses questions including: (1) if/how did reef communities change over time
during an episode of turnover which shaped the development of modern Caribbean
reef ecosystems, and (2) if/how were these changes related to changes in the
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New data on benthic foraminifera are being
combined with information on sedimentary features to interpret depositional
environments. The resulting stratigraphic and environmental framework is used to
assess patterns of temporal and spatial variation in both reef coral and free-
living coral communities and their environmental correlates. The project also
explores the relationship between community change, speciation, and extinction
in order to better understand the ecological processes involved as new species
were added to communities and extinct species were
removed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shallow marine benthic communities in the area
were profoundly altered by biotic turnover associated with the closure of the
Central American isthmus and the onset of Northern hemisphere glaciation.
Changes in taxonomic composition and community structure are well documented in
corals and mollusks and in many other marine organisms. These events were
responsible for shaping the composition and structure of modern-day shallow
benthic communities in the Caribbean region. The causes of turnover are
controversial and poorly understood, in part because most evolutionary studies
are not performed within the context of a rigorous stratigraphic and
environmental framework. High-resolution chronostratigraphy is needed for
determining the timing of evolutionary events, and for reconstructing regional
changes in ocean circulation and sea level that affected environmental factors
such as nutrients and temperature. As part of this work, the group is revising
the systematics of one of the most important ecological dominants, the
Stylophora, which became extinct in the Caribbean at the end of the
turnover.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By adding new data types to the Neogene Marine
b(I)ota of Tropical America (NMITA) taxonomic database at the University of Iowa
and linking NMITA with CHRONOS, the project provides information to the
paleontological community. Specifically, the team are developing an integrated
chronostratigraphic model for a classic, richly fossiliferous sequence extending
from ~6-3 Ma, the Cibao Valley of the northern Dominican Republic. The sequence
contains more first occurrences of reef corals than any other known Caribbean
sequence (37 of the 91 recorded species first occur) and is therefore critical
for understanding speciation events during turnover.