* 0445067
* Polyhydroxybutyrate/Polyphosphate Complexes as Conductive Cores of Ion Channels
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2005,10/31/2008
* Rosetta Reusch, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 10/31/2008
* USD 510,000.00

Intellectual merit. The premise of this research is that complexes of two
ubiquitous homopolymers, poly-(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate and polyphosphate
(cPHB/polyP), form the conductive cores of protein ion channels. It has
previously been shown that cPHB/polyP complexes, isolated from bacterial plasma
membranes or prepared from the synthetic polymers, create cation-selective ion
channels in planar lipid bilayers. This project will examine the putative
modification of intrinsic cPHB/polyP channel selectivity by polypeptides of the
Streptomyces lividans potassium channel, KcsA. Phosphates have a divalent
negative charge above pH 7.0 and a monovalent negative charge below pH 7.0;
accordingly, cPHB/polyP complexes are highly selective for divalent cations
above pH 7.0, display no preference at pH 7.0 and become selective for
monovalent cations at pH less than 7.0. KcsA demonstrates similar cation
selectivity in planar bilayers at room temperatures; the channels prefer
divalent cations at pH 7.2, but are highly selective for K+ at pH 6.8. However,
at temperatures above 26 C, KcsA is highly selective for K+, regardless of pH.
The hypothesis is that KcsA undergoes a thermal transition that results in the
placement of basic residues at the ends of the intracellular strands of KcsA
polypeptides close to the end units of polyP; the effect of the positive charges
on these residues on selectivity of polyP would be comparable to that of a
lowered pH. In this project, mutants of these basic residues will be prepared by
PCR site-directed mutagenesis; the proteins will be overexpressed in E. coli and
purified by affinity chromatography. The cation selectivity of these mutant KcsA
channels in planar lipid bilayers will then be compared to that of wild-type
KcsA to test the hypothesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. This proposal
offers a novel mechanism for ion transport. Moreover, the cPHB/polyP channels
are putative vehicles for DNA transport and they may serve as nanosensors for
cations, pH or temperature. Postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students
from Michigan State University and other institutions are participants in this
research. In addition, a web site will be developed to provide information about
cPHB and polyP and their complexes at both elementary and advanced levels in
order to foster a greater understanding of the important structural and
metabolic roles of these fundamental cell constituents among students,
scientists and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;