* 0445286
* The evolution of novel traits in the acoustic communication system of Neoconocephalus (Orthoptera, Tettigoniidae)
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Sarah Bush, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 04/30/2010
* USD 443,155.00

A central question of biology is how new traits evolve when there are no obvious
precursors among relatives or ancestors. Acoustic communication, with its great
diversity of signal traits, serves as a model system to study this question.
Because acoustic communication functions in the context of reproduction, it has
been widely assumed that female preferences for particular attributes of male
signals are responsible for shaping male signals and for driving the
diversification of signals among different species. Models based on this
assumption require that males and females are tightly linked, such that a
gradual shift in the preferences of females will be paralleled by a
corresponding shift in the signals of males. Recent studies indicate that this
linkage might not be as tight as expected, however, and that female preferences
and male signals may evolve independently of each
other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that genetic drift
(i.e. evolution due to chance events) plays a stronger role in signal evolution
than has been previously acknowledged and could account for the lack of parallel
evolution between males and females. According to this hypothesis, males, rather
than females, lead the way in the divergence of signals between species. The
project includes five species of katydids that all exhibit a new call trait
(double pulse rhythm, in which the pulses of the call are grouped into pairs)
and five closely related species with the older call trait (single pulse rhythm,
in which pulses are evenly spaced). The aims of the project are 1) to determine
the evolutionary relationships among the species in this group of insects, 2) to
analyze the call patterns of males, in order to look for geographical
differences and to identify species that are in the process of evolving the new
call pattern, and 3) to identify the attributes of male calls that females use
for recognizing males of their own species. Call recognition will be determined
using a walking compensator, or spherical treadmill, that measures the
attractiveness of different male calls to listening females. By comparing the
patterns of males calls with the set of attributes used by females to recognize
those calls, it will be possible to identify the evolutionary mechanisms
responsible for the diversification of signals among
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The number of species included in this project
places it among the largest comparative studies of the evolution of
communication. This project will provide a better understanding of the evolution
of new traits, and of the patterns that emerge between males and females in
communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this study
include the training of undergraduate and graduate students in comprehensive,
multi-approach research. The infrastructure developed for this project will also
be used for instruction in both informal and formal course settings.
Furthermore, the walking compensator, which is among the most powerful tools for
behavioral analysis, will be maintained and made available to other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;