* 0445626
* Mechanism of Plant Cell-To-Cell Communication
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Jung-Youn Lee, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 04/30/2009
* USD 450,000.00

This project focuses on how cells communicate directly with each other to
survive and develop as multicellular organisms. Plants have evolved a unique
system to exchange molecular information between cells by producing specialized
intercellular bridges termed plasmodesmata. A significant body of evidence now
supports the concept that plasmodesmata establish a unique control system by
allowing a special class of proteins, including transcription factors and RNA
molecules, to pass through fields of cells. These findings suggest a crucial
role that plasmodesmata may play in controlling developmental and physiological
processes in plants. However, very little is known as to what molecular players
are involved and how they control the exchange of information across cellular
boundaries. The overall hypothesis is that the transport of information
molecules through plasmodesmata is a highly selective and regulated process
involving protein phosphorylation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the first step
toward testing this hypothesis, a protein kinase, plasmodesmal-associated
protein kinase (PAPK) has been identified that might function in regulating
macromolecular trafficking. The investigators believe that PAPK will serve as a
key molecular handle to dissect the mechanisms involved in this process and will
pursue the following specific research objectives using a multidisciplinary
approach:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Determine the sequence element of PAPK that
is required for plasmodesmal targeting. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Identify proteins that
are involved in the targeting of PAPK to plasmodesmata. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Assess
the role of PAPK in controlling macromolecular trafficking between
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The new discoveries resulting from
this project could provide an important insight into elucidating cell-to-cell
communication mediated by plasmodesmata. This will open the door for the
dissection of the mechanisms and players by which the spread of viral infectious
materials and exchange of information molecules involved in orchestrating
developmental programs are controlled. As plasmodesmal function is essential for
both cell-to-cell communication and long-distance signaling in plants, insights
provided from this project could lead to development of new agricultural
technology. It will also be possible to gain a fundamental insight into how
different organisms including humans have independently evolved to meet the same
goal of survival as multicellular organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's
educational goals can be summarized as: (i) training students to become
scientists who are capable of crossing multiple disciplines and (ii) increasing
the participation of minority students in modern plant biology which applies
biological, biochemical, cell biological and genetic technologies. The PI is
committed strongly to training both undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented groups. The PI will co-ordinate with the staff of a university-
wide program, the University of Delaware McNair Program, to interest minority
students in internships, research, and scientific seminars and to provide
mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;