* 0445137
* The Design, Diversity, and Performance of Viscous Capture Threads Produce by Araneoid Orb-weaving Spiders
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Brent Opell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen J Tonsor
* 08/31/2009
* USD 235,000.00

This project examines the design and function of viscous capture threads that
are found in orb-webs produced by over 4,000 species of spiders. These sticky
threads are formed of small adhesive droplets suspended on elastic fibers.
Studies determine: 1. What adhesive forces contribute to droplet stickiness, 2.
How these forces are recruited by fibers in a manner that resists crack
propagation, 3. How droplet size, plasticity, and spacing optimize thread
adhesion, 4. How well threads with different droplet profiles hold insect
surfaces of different textures, and 5. How well orb-webs with different capture
thread characteristics retain insects. This is done by: 1. Measuring how threads
that have different droplet features stick to surfaces of different widths and
textures, 2. Developing models that describe thread performance, 3. Conducting a
survey and comparative analysis of the features of threads and orb-webs produced
by many spider species, and 4. Measuring the time that insects are retained by
orb-webs that have different capture thread features. These complementary
approaches explain how viscous thread operates as an integrated adhesive system
that recruits the compound adhesion of discrete units and resists crack
prorogation, a set of serious challenges to both natural and manufactured
adhesive systems. The principles and insights from these studies will help
materials scientists develop new products and applications. These studies also
show how capture thread design enhances prey capture by orb-weaving spiders and
how it may facilitate prey specialization. These are important issues, as
spiders are key predators in natural ecosystems and are receiving increasing
attention as agents of biological insect control. Educational exercises are
developed that involve grade school and high school students in field and
laboratory studies that use microscopes, digital cameras, computer program, and
simple, homemade instruments to collect and analyze data on the features of
spider orb-webs and their threads.