* 0445613
* RNA Tertiary Structure Determination by NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Samuel Butcher, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2010
* USD 519,126.00

The overall objective of this project is to investigate the structural basis of
RNA tertiary assembly in the solution state. Thus far, RNA tertiary structure
has been elucidated for a number of RNAs in X-ray crystal structures, but not in
solution. In other words, most NMR structures of RNA are helical secondary
structures that are not assembled into higher order (tertiary) structure. For
Aim 1, the NMR structure of the 31 kDa tetraloop receptor RNA complex will be
determined. This is a ubiquitous helical packing motif that mediates tertiary
structure formation of many large, catalytic RNAs. For Aim 2, the dynamic
motions and ion binding involved in the assembly of the tetraloop receptor
complex will be investigated. For Aim 3, the objective is to develop a combined
ESR (electron spin resonance)-NMR approach for the structural studies of large
RNA complexes. For Aim 4, NMR structures will be determined for two RNA assembly
motifs for which no X-ray or NMR data exist. A key strategy for the success of
this work relies on the rational design of RNA constructs. RNA motifs that
mediate tertiary structure formation will be phased one helical turn apart to
form homodimers, with dissociation constants that are ~100,000-fold lower than
those of the individual tertiary interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is an interdisciplinary effort involving personnel with advanced training in
molecular biology, biochemistry, biophysics, and chemistry. Collaborative
interactions involve multiple universities, institutes and resource centers.
These interactions enhance the vigor of the research and teaching efforts of all
participants, increase the opportunity for dissemination of new technology and
research methods, and expand the impact of this program to a national scope. The
training of graduate and undergraduate research assistants will be an integral
aspect in the execution of the proposed research. Moreover, and consistent with
the previous efforts of the PI, this research will continue to involve
undergraduates and women, and will strive to recruit members from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;