* 0445231
* Comparative and Historical Yukatekan Maya
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Charles Hofling, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 04/30/2009
* USD 101,971.00

Hofling abstract 0445231&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fifteen hundred years ago the
Classic Maya civilization flourished in the lowland forests of Mexico and
Guatemala. They developed the most sophisticated writing system to appear in the
New World and recorded their history on stone monuments. Today their
descendants, the Yukatekan and Ch'olan Maya, continue to live in much the same
territory. This research centers on the Yukatekan branch of the family, which
includes Itzaj, Mopan, Lakantun, and Yukateko Maya, with the aim of creating a
comparative etymological dictionary. Dr. Hofling has compiled substantial
digital databases for each member of the family, but additional information is
essential. Fieldwork will focus on Mopan and Itzaj Maya, both endangered
languages spoken in northern Guatemala. Itzaj is chosen because it is the most
critically endangered languages of the family, with only a couple of dozen
elders who still speak it. Mopan is chosen because it is the least documented
and most divergent member of the Yukatekan branch of the Mayan language family.
This project is designed to expand our knowledge of the vocabularies of these
languages based on three seasons of fieldwork in Guatemala. The results will be
expanded databases and dictionaries of Itzaj and Mopan, produced in a tri-
lingual Maya-Spanish-English format, as well as an etymological dictionary
showing the history of words in each of the Yukatekan languages over the past
millenium. The dictionary will be an important tool for tracing the linguistic
and cultural history of Yukatekan speakers and provide critical information for
the decipherment of the Mayan hieroglyphic script.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mayans
in Mexico and Guatemala have been engaged in efforts to document and revitalize
their languages and cultures for more than a decade. They are deeply interested
in preserving their languages and learning more about their cultural heritage.
Similarly, Latin American immigrants to the United States want to learn about
and preserve their cultural patrimony. The products of this research should be
of interest and use to these audiences in addition to professional
anthropological and linguistic audiences. In addition to its importance as a
description of linguistic history, it will provide a link between the
hieroglyphic inscriptions of the Classic Maya and the languages spoken by their
descendants today.&lt;br/&gt;