* 0445596
* Development and Use of an Innovative TASSEL Tagging System to Identify "Green Genes"
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2008
* Susheng Gan, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 12/31/2008
* USD 444,280.00

PI: Susheng Gan, PhD, Cornell University

Leaf senescence is an integral part of leaf development that involves a massive
operation of programmed cell death. During senescence a leaf loses its
photosynthetic capability. Leaf senescence thus limits crop yield and reduces
the postharvest storage and shelf life of many vegetables. Nutrients such as
vitamin C and proteins are also degraded during leaf senescence. In addition, a
senescing tissue becomes more susceptible to pathogens, some of which may
produce toxins. However, the mechanisms underlying leaf senescence are not well
understood. The objective of this project is to utilize a newly developed
innovative functional genetics approach called TASSEL (transposon-associated,
senescence-specific enhancer-linked) activation tagging to identify senescence-
suppressing genes or "green genes". In the TASSEL system, four copies of a
senescence-specific enhancer are placed between the ends of the maize transposon
Ds. In the presence of transposase, the senescence enhancer-laden Ds element
transposes to different sites within the plant genome. At the onset of
senescence, the senescence-specific enhancers will activate plant genes adjacent
to the Ds insertion site. If the activation of a gene is sufficient to inhibit
senescence, the affected cells will remain green, giving rise to a "green
island", while the rest of the leaf becomes yellow. The activated "green genes"
will be cloned from "green island" tissues using various molecular tools. Genes
identified in tobacco plants can be readily used to identify orthologs in
important crops including other members of the Solanaceae (tomato, pepper,
eggplant, potato) and can be immediately used to manipulate senescence for
agricultural improvement. Therefore, this research will have a profound impact
on food production and safety. Most importantly, this research is an important
educational platform for training young plant biologists. It will be integrated
into a graduate-level course called "Plant Senescence" at Cornell, and one
graduate student and one postdoctoral associate will be directly involved in the
research.