* 0445752
* MorphologyNet: A Digital Library of Interactive, 3D Visualizations of Anatomy
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Jennifer Leopold, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2009
* USD 664,054.00

University of Missouri-Rolla is awarded a grant to enhance MorphologyNet
(http://www.morphologynet.org), a digital library of realistic, 3D interactive
and customizable images of anatomy. Reconstructions in MorphologyNet illustrate
all tissues and structures (including soft tissues) as separate objects, and
thus they can be manipulated just as a real biological object, including
rotation in all planes simultaneously, and "dissection" of tissues and
structures. Users can customize the color, texture and opacity of images to make
them more realistic. MorphologyNet imports OBJ files, allowing nearly any
researcher to contribute 3D reconstructions of anatomy to the depository; thus
it is a worldwide community-based resource. All images are available on the web,
the user-interface is simple to use, and no proprietary software is required.
This award funds enhancements to MorphologyNet including generating additional
3D reconstructions and animations to augment the foundational data set, creating
an object-oriented database for storage of images and associated materials,
further enhancing the user-friendly interface and applet for access,
manipulation, and analysis of images, and developing a collaborative network of
contributors and users representing all taxonomic groups and promoting
contribution to and use of the site. The project will include training of
undergraduate and graduate students; developing an accessible and easy-to-use
educational resource; building an interactive library of 3D visualizations that
will facilitate anatomical research; promoting communication among researchers
by providing a digital library for accession of research results (but allowing
them to retain ownership); and facilitating further integration of biological
sub-disciplines by integrating anatomical data with other data sources.