* 0445140
* The Evolution of Trade-offs: Experimental Evaluation of Novel Quantitative Genetic Predictions
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* Derek Roff, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 04/30/2011
* USD 642,576.00

Evolution is characterized by changes over time in all aspects of the biology of
organisms. Limited resources and shared underlying genetic and developmental
pathways generate trade-offs among traits. The extent to which such trade-offs
constrain the direction and rate of evolution is a central question in modern
evolutionary biology. The investigators address this question using the
mathematical framework of quantitative genetics. They use the well-characterized
trade-off between reproduction and flight capability in the sand cricket as a
model system, and use artificial selection in the laboratory to force evolution
of the component traits. The experiment will provide the first quantitative and
mechanistic evaluation of the joint evolution of traits involved in a key life
history trade-off, and will significantly advance our understanding of the
process of evolution at the organismal level.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In addition
to providing research and technical training for many graduate and undergraduate
students, this project will create significant new biological infrastructure in
the form of a new set of replicated selected lines. These will be made widely
available through the newly created "Integrated Research Program in Experimental
Evolution" (IRPEE) and will provide the framework for new research projects in
fields as diverse as behavioral ecology, physiology, morphometrics, and
evolutionary genetics. The availability of these evolved lineages will also
support international collaborations, including current collaborations with
researchers from Finland, France and Chile. &lt;br/&gt;