* 0445429
* Amphiphilic Proteins & Peptides
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* David Eisenberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2010
* USD 866,611.00

One of great achievements of 20th century science was the determination of the
structures of thousands of soluble proteins and several membrane proteins. As we
move into the 21st century, scientists realize that some of the most important
states of proteins are the aggregated states, including amyloid and prion
states. Protein aggregates frequently contain one type of covalent protein
molecule. The nature of the self-complementary bonding that leads to aggregation
is the topic of this research. Designing, creating, controlling, and destroying
protein aggregates is the long-term goal of this research. The tools of X-ray
diffraction and biochemistry will be used to characterize natural and designed
protein aggregates, all of which self-assemble through protein self-
complementarity. Domain-swapping, a particular type of protein self-
complementarity will be a special focus of the work. In domain swapping, one
domain breaks its non-covalent bonds with the core of the molecule, and into its
place is swapped the identical domain from the other monomer, forming a tightly
associated, long-lived dimer.

Broader impacts: The wider impact of the project includes the introduction of
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to the concepts and
experimental tools for studying protein design and the characterization of
protein aggregates. Understanding self-complementarity of proteins has
implications for protein design, materials science, medicine, evolution, and
cell biology.