* 0445738
* Relationships of Metacognition nd Suggestibility in Middle Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2005,11/30/2009
* Maggie Bruck, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 11/30/2009
* USD 400,001.00

The study of suggestibility in young children became an important field of study
because of the practical problems involving the accuracy of children's reports
in the legal arena. A substantial amount of research in the past 15 years has
demonstrated the interviewing conditions that produce the most accurate as well
as the least accurate reports from young children. There has been, however, less
success in identifying the cognitive, emotional, or social characteristics that
make some children more suggestible than others; this may be due to the fact
that the characteristics that predispose children to be influenced by suggestion
change with age. Supported by funds from the National Science Foundation, Dr.
Maggie Bruck will address these issues. This project examines the development of
metasuggestibility (awareness that a person's report or memory of their personal
experiences can be tainted by another person's statements or suggestions) in
middle childhood and the degree to which this metacognitive skill is related to
children's suggestibility. Although research has primarily focused on the
suggestibility of preschool children, a few recent studies have included older
children (middle childhood 6-11 year olds), producing the surprising finding
that these children also show relatively high rates of suggestibility (although
lower than those of preschoolers). The present research focuses on this age
group to examine age-related mechanisms that underlie suggestibility, testing
the idea that these mechanisms change as a function of development. Study 1
involves three major components: (1) To measure metasuggestibility, children
view a filmed skit in which a child actor gives inaccurate answers to an adult's
suggestive questions; the children are then asked to explain why this actor
produced the inaccurate reports. (2) Relationships between metasuggestibility
and children's performance on other metacognitive skills (detection of logical
inconsistency, beliefs about memory, and understanding of others' minds) are
analyzed for developmental changes. (3) The relationship between children's
actual performance when interviewed suggestively and their performance on the
metasuggestibility task is examined. Study 2, an intervention study, explores if
metasuggestibility training decreases children's suggestibility. The major aim
in both studies is to examine whether children must first realize that
suggestive questions can distort memory in order to actively resist misleading
questions.

This research will broaden the focus of suggestibility research from preschool
to middle childhood. By so doing, it overcomes an incorrect assumption that one
should not be concerned about memory distortion among older children. It will
examine whether children with low levels of metasuggestibility are also the most
suggestible children, as well as examine if training children to be aware of
suggestion in interviews can reduce their own suggestibility. The results of
these studies will have important implications for constructing scientifically
validated interviews that produce the most accurate reports from children and
for constructing instruments to detect children who are prone to suggestive
factors. These instruments can be adapted for use in schools, mental health,
medical, and forensic contexts.