* 0445479
* RUI: Cell-cycle Regulation of LAMMER-related Kinases
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2013
* Zhaohua Tang, Claremont McKenna College
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2013
* USD 352,000.00

The long-term objective of the project is to study important molecular targets
for deciphering the regulatory mechanisms of cell life and death, and to gain
new knowledge about how a cell functions as a basic unit of life. Protein
kinases are enzymes that catalyze the reactions to add a phosphate group to a
protein, thereby regulating the function of the protein. Protein kinases are
encoded by one of the largest gene families in the genome of various living
organisms including mammals, and through reversible phosphorylation of
substrates they mediate signal transduction pathways that control virtually
every aspect of cell function and survival. The goal of this project is to
investigate the regulation of Schizosaccharomyces pombe fission yeast Dsk1 and
Kic1 protein kinases during the cell cycle. Dsk1 and Kic1 belong to a newly
emerging class of dual-specificity protein kinases, the prototypes of which are
featured with the "LAMMER" signature motif. These LAMMER-related kinases are
conserved throughout evolution and are implicated in the regulation of cell
growth, death, and differentiation during development including neurogenesis.
Although critical, the regulation of these kinases in response to external
signals and internal cues for cell survival and function remains unclear. The
project aims to build upon the earlier work on Dsk1 and Kic1 by the Principle
Investigator and to gain a better understanding of their functions in cell
growth and proliferation. This study will fill the gap in the in vivo
investigation of the kinase families and shed light on the biological roles of
the kinases, which are fundamental to all living organisms. Besides the
scientific impact, implementing the research activities will contribute a unique
perspective to the scientific environment in undergraduate colleges. The project
will directly involve over 25 undergraduates every year in research and
incorporate part of the project into the Cell Biology and other courses in the
Molecular Biology Program, thus engaging students with project-based
laboratories and promoting the integration of research and science education.
This project will also provide opportunities for students to experience the
excitement of current biology and stimulate students' interest in biological
research. Moreover, this project will contribute to the diversity of future
scientists in biology by encouraging underrepresented minority and women
students to participate in research.