* 0445362
* Mutants of Tetrahymena With Altered Responses to External ATP and GTP
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Todd Hennessey, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 06/30/2010
* USD 439,500.00

External ATP and GTP are depolarizing chemorepellents in Tetrahymena. These
repellents may serve as cytoplasmic indicators to enable these free swimming
eukaryotic cells to avoid lysed (broken open) cells and whatever caused those
cells to lyse, acting like a "blood in the water" signal. Purinergic receptors
are known to be involved in detecting cell lysis in many vertebrate cell types,
with ATP acting as the primary cytoplasmic indicator for cell lysis by way of
both ionotropic P2X and metabotropic P2Y type ATP receptors. The hypothesis to
be tested is that there are two distinct pathways for purinergic reception in
Tetrahymena, one requires a metabotropic ATP receptor pathway and the other uses
a novel ionotropic GTP receptor. Knockout mutants in any part of the ATP
response pathway should not affect GTP responses if they are separate pathways.
The objectives are to use a combined forward and reverse genetics approach to
identify the roles of both the novel and the characterized members of the
proposed pathways for these responses. For the forward genetics approach,
swimming assays will be used in behavioral mutant screens to obtain mutants with
alterations in their responses to ATP or GTP. The mutagenesis procedure will
take advantage of a novel antisense ribosome library, which provides for both
random disruption of functional gene products and the ability to identify the
gene sequence in the rDNA which is responsible for the phenotype. This has been
used to identify many interesting mutants and the gene products responsible for
their phenotypes. Gene sequences for at least 2 different behavioral mutants of
Tetrahymena have already been identified by this approach (called B6 and 413)
and both have altered swimming responses to external GTP. A reverse genetics
approach will involve using these (and other) antisense mutant sequences to
identify the full-length sequences in the Tetrahymena Genome Database and then
using that sequence to a design vectors for producing stable gene knockouts.
Knockout mutations will also be made in other genes suspected to be involved in
ATP or GTP responses (like protein kinase C, protein kinase A, the ecto-ATPase,
tyrosine kinase and the putative ATP receptor we call TP2Y) and the mutants
tested for their responses to ATP and GTP. This work will provide insights into
novel mechanisms involved in purinergic reception and a simple model system for
understanding chemosensory transduction and adaptation pathways. The project
will provide hypothesis-driven research experience to graduate and undergraduate
students as well as to interested high scholl students, their teachers and
collaborators in small liberal arts colleges.