* 0445971
* Developmental Evolution of Avian Digit Homology
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* John Fallon, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2009
* USD 434,790.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ever since the discovery of the dinosaur
affinities of birds, a discrepancy has persisted between the developmental and
the phylogenetic evidence regarding the identity of digits in the bird wing. The
preponderance of phylogenetic evidence demonstrates that the three permanent
fingers of birds are digits one, two and three, while the embryological evidence
demonstrates that these fingers develop from the anlagen that, in other animals,
develop into digits two, three and four. Recent results from the laboratory of
Dr Fallon, University of Wisconsin, shows that there is a gene expression
signature which can distinguish between digit one and digit two, and which
supports the hypothesis that the fingers of birds are in fact digits one, two
and (by inference) three. Specifically the expression of Hoxa-13, Hoxd-13, and
Hoxd-12 is seen in all digits posterior of digit one, while digit one does not
express Hoxd-12. This grant funds a collaborative effort between a developmental
biology lab (Dr Fallon, University of Wisconsin) and an evolutionary biology lab
(Dr Wagner, Yale University) to follow up on this result. The goal of this
project is to validate the inference from gene expression pattern to digit
identity by using both experimental as well as comparative data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives: 1) test whether the expression patterns of
Hoxa-13, Hoxd-13, and Hoxd-12 are causally relevant for the development of digit
morphology. 2) Determine whether the association between Hox gene expression
patterns and digit identity, as described by Dr's Vargas and Fallon, is
conserved among major groups of tetrapods and in the face of natural variation
in digit number. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet objective 1 Dr Fallon will study
the effect of Hoxd-12 misexpression in the digit one anlage as well as knockdown
of Hoxa-13 and Hoxd-13. To meet objective 2, Dr Wagner will study the expression
of Hoxa-13, Hoxd-13, and Hoxd-12 in alligator, frog and lizard embryos including
two species which have lost digit one during evolution, Hemiergis peronii and
Chalcides chaldices (skinks). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: while
the identity of bird digits can be seen as a subject of limited importance, the
persisting disagreement among major scientific disciplines about a matter of
scientific fact raises concern. Unresolved high profile controversies like this
can have a corrosive effect on the disciplinary integration of evolutionary and
developmental biology. For that reason the proposed project seeks to resolve
this issue with a combined developmental and evolutionary approach seeking a
convergence of evidence between them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The
broad impact of this proposal is measured in two ways: (1) by employing a highly
interdisciplinary approach for evaluating a complex problem in evolutionary
developmental biology; and (2) by providing a wealth of research and educational
resources. These training opportunities include postdoctoral training and new
summer traineeships for teachers.&lt;br/&gt;