* 0445410
* RUI:  Phylogeography of Hawaiian Schiedea:  A Multigene Coalescent Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Molly Nepokroeff, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2009
* USD 363,226.00

Drs. Nepokroeff and Wallace at the University of South Dakota plan to examine
both phylogenetic and phylogeographic ("genealogical") relationships in the
endemic Hawaiian plant genus Schiedea. Schiedea represents an excellent model
system for examining species diversification on islands as the genus comprises
one of the largest radiations of plant species (30 or so species) from a single
presumed ancestor, and is one of the most diverse in terms of growth form,
breeding systems, and habitat preferences. Studies of the ecology of pollination
systems in Schiedea have become classic examples of major evolutionary
transitions on islands. The Schiedea lineage is particularly interesting because
it contains many species which exhibit floral dimorphism (separate male and
female plants), the norm in humans and most animals, but rare in flowering
plants. However, relationships among species of Schiedea, and thus number and
order of transitions to floral dimorphism remain poorly resolved. The
investigators plan to examine relationships among the 33 extant species of
Schiedea using six DNA markers from several nuclear and plastid-genome sources.
Additionally, the investigators plan to examine intraspecific genealogies by
sampling populations of several closely related members of the lineage and
analyzing these relationships within a coalescent framework, a newly described
method for examining the history of genes within populations. The approach used
by the investigators will allow for increased, if not complete, phylogenetic and
genealogical resolution among species of Schiedea. Moreover, the approach used
will enable the investigators to assess a number of microevolutionary processes,
such as interspecific gene flow and hybridization, that may have contributed to
species diversification and evolution of floral dimorphism.&lt;br/&gt;Because
plant phylogeography is less well-studied than that of animals, this study will
contribute to the developing field of plant phylogeography. The project will
involve training for one female postdoctoral associate in the emerging field of
statistical phylogeography. Opportunity for undergraduate involvement will be
provided for ten students, who will receive training in laboratory skills, data
analysis, research presentation and manuscript preparation. The University of
South Dakota serves a predominantly rural community, with many first-generation
college students and a high proportion of American Indian students, including
one current Honors Biology major who will be pursuing independent research on
Schiedea. In furtherance of these research and educational goals, co-funding
from the NSF program for EPSCoR helps support this project. Lastly, over half of
the 33 species in the Schiedea lineage are federally endangered or rare and
several have already gone extinct in the wild; indeed Schiedea may contain more
highly threatened plant species that any other lineage in Hawaii. These studies
will result in development of publicly available, online graphical habitat-
suitability models of 14 endangered species of Schiedea, linked to several
existing websites of the Hawaiian flora. In addition to synthesizing genetic
information with landscape level information, such models have the potential to
be used in recovery plans by state agencies, and will provide additional
training to undergraduates in landscape modeling. &lt;br/&gt;