* 0445680
* The Physiological Function of Cardiac Shunting in Crocodilians:  An Experimental Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* James Hicks, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 01/31/2009
* USD 600,948.00

The primary function of the cardiovascular system is to provide adequate oxygen
and nutrients to the tissues, while ensuring the removal of carbon dioxide and
other metabolic waste products. In vertebrates this goal is achieved through
circulatory and cardiac designs that are often represented as an evolutionary
progression from the two-chambered heart of fish to the completely divided four-
chambered heart of birds and mammals. The completely divided four-chambered
heart has evolved at least twice in vertebrates, once in the lineage that gave
rise to mammals and once in ancestral archosaurs, the ancient group of reptiles
that gave rise to modern birds and crocodiles. In crocodilians, the heart is
four-chambered, just like birds and mammals, but retains two aortae (vessels
that transport blood to the body). The left aorta arises from the right
ventricle, alongside the pulmonary artery and consequently this anatomical
arrangement results in the potential for oxygen poor blood to bypass the lungs
and recirculate to the body. This type of blood flow is termed a right-to-left
(R-L) cardiac shunt. This unique circulatory feature of crocodilians has been
known for over 170 years and is often assumed to provide important physiological
benefits. However few, if any, of these benefits have been experimentally
verified. Here the PI will investigate the functional consequences of R-L
cardiac shunting in the American alligator, Alligator mississippiensis, and in
the broad-nose caiman, Caiman latirostris. The physiological functions of R-L
cardiac shunting will be determined following surgical modification of the
heart. The surgical procedure removes the left aorta and permanently eliminates
the capacity for R-L cardiac shunt. In one set of experiments the hearts of
hatchling alligators will be surgically modified and raised under controlled
environmental conditions in the vivarium facilities at UC Irvine. In a second
set of experiments, the hearts of hatchling caimans will be modified and the
animals raised in semi-natural outdoor facilities in Rio Claro, Brazil. Animals
will be measured periodically and at the end of a 12-18 month growth period a
variety of physiological functions will be assessed. A third series of
experiments will determine the physiological functions of R-L cardiac shunting
in older animals. In these experiments, both alligators and caimans will be
collected from the field, the hearts surgically modified and the effects of
eliminating R-L cardiac shunt on a variety of physiological functions will be
determined. The proposed research will form an integrated picture of the
interactive functioning of the cardiovascular system and more importantly will
addresses a notable and unanswered question in comparative biology vertebrate-
what is the physiological function of R-L cardiac shunting in crocodilians? In
addition to the specific scientific goals, the proposed research will directly
contribute to the training of individuals in how to investigate and integrate
complex biological systems. The project will provide undergraduates, graduates
and postdoctoral fellows, a framework within which to think in terms of
biological diversity, evaluate and consider environmental influences, and place
research results within developmental and/or evolutionary trajectories. The
integrative nature of the proposed research and the resulting training of
students and postgraduate researchers will, in general, make a positive and
lasting contribution to the health and strength of physiological sciences- a
health and strength that is required to insure significant advances in the
physiological sciences during the 21st century.