* 0445180
* Estimating Divergence Times and Evolutionary Rates
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Jeffrey Thorne, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 03/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

There are almost as many divergences on the tree of life as there are extant
species. Each of these divergences has a date (or, an interval presumed shorter
in duration than the resultant lineages), and the fossil record is a priceless
source of information about these dates. Although the fossil record is
incomplete, the information that it provides can be supplemented with
information extracted from DNA and protein sequence data. The basic idea is that
molecular sequences should be similar if sequences are derived from closely
related species and should be more diverged if the sequences come from more
distantly related species. In this project, statistical procedures will be
developed for combining fossil evidence and DNA or protein sequence data from
extant organisms in order to estimate time since common ancestry. Special
attention will be given to the fact that chronological rates of DNA and protein
sequence evolution are not constant. Another goal of this project will be to
infer the pattern by which these chronological rates of evolution change over
time. Progress will be made by partitioning the change over time of
chronological rates of molecular evolution into a portion that affects all genes
in a lineage and a portion that affects each individual gene. Improved treatment
of fossil data and handling of gene duplications will also be emphasized. The
statistical procedures to be developed in this project will benefit a wide range
of topics related to both biodiversity and molecular biology. The assignment of
dates to branching events on the tree of life provides a framework for studying
processes such as speciation and the dispersal of pathogens or other species.
The ability to estimate chronological rates of molecular evolution and how these
rates change over time also has diverse applications that include the study of
protein function and functional innovation as well as the assessment of the
importance to evolution of natural selection and genetic drift.&lt;br/&gt;
Training for a graduate student in modern computational biology will be provided
during the course of the research, and both the principal investigator, Dr.
Jeffrey Thorne, and the graduate student will travel to Japan to work with the
eminent statistician Dr. Hirohisa Kishino at the University of Tokyo. Source
code developed as part of the project is made freely available, as has been the
case with previous divergence-time software developed by Dr. Thorne. &lt;br/&gt;