* 0445202
* RUI:The Paradox of Cellular Calcium Homeostasis During Vectorial Transfer: Spatial and Temporal Regulation of Ca Import/Export Proteins Using the Freshwater Crayfish Molting Model.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Michele Wheatly, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 05/31/2010
* USD 462,000.00

Calcium (Ca) is critical to many processes in living organisms. Calcium enters
the body through specialized cells (epithelia, like the gut or gills); from that
point it must be redirected as needs dictate away from regions of low
concentration (cytosol or cell interior) towards regions of high use (for
example biomineralization zones that are extracellular or outside of cells).
Calcium is moved within and between cells across internal and external membranes
through the activity of an array of Ca transporting proteins (Ca channels, pumps
and exchangers). Calcium transporting epithelia present the ultimate paradox,
namely, how can vast amounts of Ca move through the cell while cytosolic levels
are kept low? Using cellular and molecular approaches, the freshwater crayfish
molting model will be used to study how these Ca transporting proteins are
regulated over time (comparing periods of high Ca flux that occur just before
and after molting, with periods of Ca balance during intermolt periods). Spatial
regulation will also be studied by comparing activity of proteins on internal
vs. external membranes. The goal of this work is to better understand how arrays
of different Ca transporting proteins are regulated to achieve cellular Ca
homeostasis. This research will advance the basic understanding of membrane Ca
transport which has the potential to impact many branches of biomedicine. It
will also result in student training at both graduate and undergraduate levels
at two primarily undergraduate institutions and will be translated into the K-12
curriculum that is consistent with National Science Education Standards.