* 0445126
* Intuitive User Interface Development for DARWIN: Digital Analysis and Recognition of Whale Images on a Network
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Kelly Debure, Eckerd College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2010
* USD 237,286.00

Eckerd College receives an award for further development of the DARWIN (Digital
Analysis and Recognition of Whale Images on a Network) project. Marine
mammologists studying the behavior and ecology of wild dolphins often employ
photo identification as a means of associating observational data with
individual dolphins. After the researchers return from the field, the best
photograph of each individual is compared to a catalog of previously observed
and identified photographs of dolphin dorsal fins. DARWIN
(http://darwin.eckerd.edu) is a computer program that simplifies photo-
identification by applying computer vision and signal processing techniques to
automate much of the manual process. The DARWIN system allows a researcher to
query a database of previously identified dolphin dorsal fin images with an
unidentified image of a dolphin's fin. The system responds with a rank ordered
list of database fn images most closely resembling the query image. In this
award the goals are 1) to investigate and incorporate methods for more intuitive
comparisons of dolphin dorsal fns, 2) to more closely emulate the manual photo-
identification process and provide additional tools to augment standard methods
currently in use, 3) to minimize the level of effort required to create a
database of dorsal fn images and query that database to identify unknown
dolphins, 4) to provide additional import and export formats which better match
the needs of the user community, and 5) to evaluate and further enhance the user
interface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this proposal is to
provide members of the marine mammal research community with a powerful tool for
the identification of individual dolphins. The time savings potentially realized
with such a program would enable researchers to spend more time on the
thoughtful analysis of their data rather than on its acquisition, thus helping
to advance understanding of the subject. The software will be developed as well
documented as open source, and to made available at SourceForge to facilitate
its broad dissemination. This project will include significant research
opportunities for undergraduate students and an educational component that
focuses on middle and high school students from under-represented groups through
our participation with the National Youth Sports Program. &lt;br/&gt;