* 0445453
* Model Choice and Model Averaging in Molecular Phylogenetics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2005,06/30/2007
* John Huelsenbeck, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 06/30/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Phylogenetic analysis--an endeavor aimed at uncovering the genealogical
&lt;br/&gt;relationships of organisms--makes strong, though testable,
assumptions&lt;br/&gt;about how molecular evolution occurs. Today, a typical
phylogenetic &lt;br/&gt;analysis is performed by first assuming a particular
model of molecular &lt;br/&gt;evolution, and then finding the best phylogenetic
tree describing the relationships&lt;br/&gt;among the organisms of interest.
Importantly, the phylogenetic tree is&lt;br/&gt;conditioned on the model chosen
in the first step of the analysis. &lt;br/&gt;Usually, the model is chosen from
a small set of candidate models.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will vastly
expand the set of candidate models of &lt;br/&gt;molecular evolution and devise
'automated' ways to simultaneously search for the &lt;br/&gt;best model of
molecular evolution and the best phylogeny. We will use a &lt;br/&gt;variant of
a method called Markov chain Monte Carlo to search among models and
&lt;br/&gt;phylogenies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, the biologist will
not only be able to find the tree(s) &lt;br/&gt;that best explains his/her data
but also find the best model(s) of evolution. We &lt;br/&gt;intend to explore
two different methods for choosing among models. The first &lt;br/&gt;is a
Bayesian method that calculates probabilities of models using Bayes' theorem.
&lt;br/&gt;The second uses information criteria to find a model that is a
compromise between &lt;br/&gt;the fit of the model to the observed data and the
number of free parameters in the &lt;br/&gt;model. We will apply the methods to
alignments of DNA and amino sequences.&lt;br/&gt;