* 0445878
* Structure and Localization of the Flavonoid Multienzyme Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Brenda Winkel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2009
* USD 629,451.00

Interactions between biological macromolecules underlie virtually every cellular
process, including the organization of cooperating enzymes into macromolecular
complexes. Multienzyme systems provide the means to attain high local substrate
concentrations, regulate competition among branch pathways, coordinate the
activities of interdependent pathways, and sequester toxic or volatile
intermediates within the cell. Yet remarkably little is known about the
architecture of any enzyme complex or the molecular mechanisms that direct the
interaction of the individual components. The project will build on previous
work in the Winkel laboratory to characterize the structure and function of the
flavonoid enzyme complex in Arabidopsis thaliana, including the use of small
angle neutron scattering to develop a three-dimensional model of this system.
Several new technologies for studying interaction interfaces will be tested in
an effort to confirm proposed interactions in planta, and to identify factors
that may arbitrate assembly of the complex. The determinants of the recently
discovered differential localization of flavonoid enzymes will also be
characterized. These studies will contribute to a general understanding of how
macromolecular interactions occur with the requisite specificity and flexibility
to effectively mediate biological processes in the crowded and dynamic cell
interior. This knowledge is essential for the effective application of metabolic
engineering to the agronomic and nutritional improvement of plants and for the
bioproduction of valuable metabolites in microorganisms, plants, and
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a training ground in
contemporary molecular genetics, biochemistry, and computational biology for
undergraduates, graduate students, and a postdoctoral fellow. The broader impact
of this work also involves a specific effort to study the outcomes and impacts
of research experiences for undergraduates on the participating students and
their mentors. Some 35 undergraduate students have conducted research in the
Winkel laboratory over more than a decade; this provides an ideal scenario for
studying these experiences in a rigorous and broadly applicable way. An
assessment will be made of the academic and career opportunities that
undergraduates pursue following their research experience, the extent to which
the research experience prepare and/or encourage undergraduates to pursue
academic and career opportunities, and the extent to which research experiences
for undergraduates impacted the mentors.