* 0445216
* REVSYS: Monographing a Model Clade of Ectomycorrhizal Fungi: Laccaria-Hydnangium
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Gregory Mueller, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Scott D. Snyder
* 12/31/2009
* USD 334,727.00

Ectomycorrhizal fungi play critical ecological roles in forests worldwide by
forming beneficial symbiotic relationships with many kinds of trees. These
symbiotic fungi absorb and transfer nutrients and water to the tree; as well,
they reduce the incidence of root pathogens. In doing so they influence forest
composition and succession, and certain of these fungi are routinely used in
reforestation projects. However, many basic questions remain unanswered
regarding the biology of the fungi that form ectomycorrhizae. Species of
Laccaria and Hydnangium have been widely used as model taxa in research on this
symbiotic relationship. Species in this group often form a major component of
the fungal biota in forests dominated by Pinaceae, Fagaceae, Nothofagaceae, and
Eucalyptus. Some species have been used extensively in experimental greenhouse
and field studies of ectomycorrhizae. North American, European, and South
American systematic treatments of Laccaria exist, and relatively much is now
known about various aspects of the groups diversity and biology. However,
knowledge of the group from Australasia is poor, identification tools and a
world-wide taxonomic treatment do not exist, and further understanding of the
biology of the Laccaria - Hydnangium group (e.g., relationships among species
and overall diversity, geographic distribution, and host specificity on a global
scale) remains stalled. This project address these critical questions by: (1)
undertaking fieldwork in Australasia to complete sampling of ecological
diversity, including studies of host tree specificity; (2) developing a rigorous
classification of species relationships based upon DNA sequence data from both
nuclear ribosomal markers and single-copy genes; (3) constructing web-based
species-identification keys; and (4) completing a world monograph for the group
that will be available in hard-copy and over the web. &lt;br/&gt;Collaboration
and training are key aspects of this project. A postdoctoral associate will be
involved with all aspects of the project, and the undergraduate student interns
will gain valuable experience in collections-based research. Collaborators and
their students in Australia, New Zealand, and Papua New Guinea will participate
in field work. The resulting monograph will be produced both in hardcopy and as
a web-based tool with images and descriptive data linked to the phylogeny. Hard
copy quick references (so-called "rapidFungi field guides") and other
identification tools for particular geographic regions will also be produced, as
these are popular and useful for students, citizen scientists, park rangers, and
ecotourists. The data will be integrated into public education programs at the
Field Museum that focus on biodiversity; including inclusion in the museum's
electronic field-trip program.&lt;br/&gt;