* 0445086
* RUI:  Generating the Entangled Bank:  Biogeography and Host Use in a Hawaiian Herbivore Radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Jonathan Brown, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2010
* USD 185,350.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Brown&lt;br/&gt;DEB 0445086.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biologists have long studied island
radiations to understand how both adaptation and geographic isolation have
interacted to generate ecological diversity. The Hawaiian archipelago has been a
productive place to undertake such speciation studies, because its extreme
isolation from continental sources of immigrants and its highly variable
environments have spurred spectacular radiations of the few lineages to have
successfully colonized it. This project investigates the mechanisms and tempo of
diversification of the 26+ species of Hawaiian tephritid flies, which have
likely radiated from a single colonizing ancestor in less than 3 million years.
These insects feed on plant species found only in Hawaii, including most members
of the Hawaiian silversword alliance, a classic model of adaptive radiation;
many feed on the seeds and thus have a direct impact on reproduction of their
host plants, some of which are federally endangered species. In collaboration
with talented undergraduate research students, Dr. Jonathan Brown will undertake
field and laboratory studies to (1) survey likely plant hosts from across the
archipelago to determine the geographic range and mode of host use for all
species; and (2) determine the evolutionary relationships among all the species,
based on information from multiple gene sequences. These evolutionary
relationships will then be used examine the role of geographic isolation vs.
adaptive changes to different host-plants in the speciation process. The results
will provide a framework for future studies of the evolution of behavioral and
morphological traits, e.g., melanin wing patterns, a key trait used to identify
tephritids and some other groups of flies. Understanding the evolution of these
traits will contribute to a better understanding of this diverse family of
insects, which includes many pest species of economic importance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the evolutionary processes that
play out on island archipelagos like Hawaii is important for understanding their
conservation value, especially given current threats to their unique native
species. This research project will also provide several undergraduate students
with summer research experiences that demonstrate the strength of
interdisciplinary research in organismal, molecular, and conservation biology.
Students will be well prepared for these experiences via an NSF-supported core
biology curriculum at Grinnell College that emphasizes research-based learning
and integration across biological subdisciplines. Dr. Brown is committed to
recruiting research students who have participated in Grinnell's New Science
Project, an innovative program designed to encourage under-represented groups to
pursue scientific careers. As in his previous work, students will be full
partners in the gathering, analysis and dissemination of the results of the
study. By providing independent research opportunities within a biology
curriculum centered on skills of inquiry, this project will continue both the
Dr. Brown's and Grinnell College's proven tradition of integrating scientific
research into a broad and meaningful liberal arts education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;