* 0445511
* Collaborative Research: Molecular Design of Thermophilic Alcohol Dehydrogenase for Chiral Synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* Robert Phillips, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/29/2008
* USD 232,544.00

In this collaborative project, the biochemistry and molecular biology of
Thermoanaerobacter ethanolicus secondary alcohol dehydrogenase (TeSADH) will be
investigated. This enzyme has a novel metabolic biochemistry, since
physiologically it synthesizes ethanol in two reductive steps from acetyl-CoA.
This, in part, explains its natural broad substrate specificity. In this
project, TeSADH will be used as a model system to understand the physicochemical
bases for substrate specificity and stereospecificity of enzymes. Genetic
engineering studies of TeSADH will include: 1) Rational design of the small
substrate-binding pocket to determine its role in (S)- versus
(R)-enantiospecificity; 2) Evolving TeSADH by directed evolution from an
(S)-specific enzyme into an enzyme with high (R)-enantiospecificity; and 3)
Changing TeSADH cofactor specificity from NADP+ towards NAD+. TeSADH is uniquely
suited for these investigations because of its high thermostability and its
broad substrate specificity. The effects of the mutations will be evaluated in
terms of substrate specificity, kinetic parameters, and enantiomeric
specificity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The modified enzymes
resulting from this research could be potentially used in preparation of chiral
intermediates in commercial synthesis. The results of the proposed research are
likely to make a significant intellectual contribution to a greater
understanding or the physical biochemical basis of enzymatic stereospecificity,
as well as to provide novel biocatalysts with potential industrial utility. The
project's outreach program includes training multidisciplinary graduate and
undergraduate students, including minorities; disseminating knowledge in courses
at the grantee institutions; and presenting papers at national chemistry,
biochemistry, chemical engineering, and microbiology meetings.