* 0445654
* Thiamine Biosynthesis as a Model for Metabolic Pathway Integration
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Diana Downs, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Burnap
* 02/28/2010
* USD 625,699.00

A fundamental question in biology is how metabolic pathways are integrated to
result in the robust and efficient physiology that is associated with a living
cell. In addressing this question, the long-term goal of this project is to
define the metabolic components and understand the connections that exist
between them in a bacterial cell. In the past 12 years thiamine biosynthesis in
Salmonella enterica has been developed as a model system to probe metabolic
integration. In the course of this work, new metabolic connections have been
defined and lesions in uncharacterized open reading frames have been described
phenotypically. The latter result provides the first step in functional
annotation of genes that have no known or predicted function and contain no
informative sequence motifs. This project will probe the function of YggX, an
open reading frame that was identified in the PI's laboratory as part of past
metabolic work. Based on previous work (both in vivo and in vitro) a working
model has been developed that suggests YggX has a role in iron trafficking in
Salmonella. The function of YggX will be addressed at two general levels. First,
the in vivo function of YggX will be explored in the context of other cellular
components that are involved in maintaining iron homeostasis in the cell.
Second, a high-resolution structure will be determined by NMR, and in vitro
biochemical characterization of the wild type and mutant forms of YggX will be
preformed. This work will contribute to the overall understanding of metabolism
by defining function of the YggX protein in the context of cellular metabolism.
An understanding of metabolism in this context is critical for efforts to
capture and exploit biological processes for the good of mankind.

In a broad context, this work will provide rigorous multi-disciplinary training
to young scientists. High school, undergraduate and graduate students will
participate in the research. Components of this research plan will be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate laboratory courses being designed
by the PI. The PI will present this work in many forums that target general
audiences and continue to actively participate in the recruitment and mentoring
of women and underrepresented groups in scientific research.