* 0445826
* The Genome Properties: Metabolic Reconstruction System
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Owen White, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2009
* USD 674,361.00

The Institute for Genomic Research is awarded a grant to support the development
of the Genome Properties system (www.tigr.org/Genome_Properties). Genome
Properties is a relational database system, which includes a set of tools and
web interfaces for the investigation of the metabolism, phenotypes, qualitative
and quantitative measures, and other biological properties of microbial life. In
particular, Genome Properties will provide: (1) Automatic determination of
biological systems and metabolic pathways, which are made up of protein, RNA or
DNA components. Algorithms have been developed to apply logical rules to
determine, from the set of components identified, whether the processes are
likely (or unlikely) to be active in each of the organisms. (2) Representation
of phenotypes and processes such as optimal growth temperature or pathogenicity,
which cannot be determined by analysis of the genome. These Genome Properties
are set manually and are mapped to traceable literature citations or particular
expert curators. (3) Structures that allow formation of higher-level Genome
Properties by combining disparate data types including the states and values of
other Genome Properties. (4) A user-friendly query and data display system
including multiple data views and facile download of data. This system also
permits comparative analysis between species, and statistical evaluation of
relationships between Genome Properties. And (5), a web- and email-based system
for interaction between the scientific community and Genome Properties curators
to promote the accuracy of the data and the development of new Properties and
structures best suited to the needs of researchers at large. All databases, data
sets and software will be made available on the Comprehensive Microbial Resource
and released as Open Source. The Genome Properties system is being incorporated
into TIGR.s existing microbial annotation pipeline where significant
improvements in annotation speed, accuracy and richness have been realized. The
system integrates research and education in serving as an online encyclopedia of
microbiological data for students and teachers.