* 0445324
* Progressive Nitrogen Limitation in Terrestrial Ecosystems: Empirical Test of a Biogeochemical Paradigm
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Bert Drake, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2009
* USD 800,000.00

Carbon dioxide is released to the atmosphere when humans burn oil, coal,
&lt;br/&gt;and gasoline, and is the major cause of global warming. Increasing
carbon &lt;br/&gt;dioxide in the atmosphere may help plants take it up faster
through the &lt;br/&gt;process of photosynthesis. Will carbon uptake by forests
help counteract &lt;br/&gt;human emissions of carbon dioxide over the next
century, and thereby help &lt;br/&gt;mitigate climate change? Some models
suggest that it might, but these &lt;br/&gt;models assume that plants will be
able to acquire enough nutrients from the &lt;br/&gt;soil, an assumption that
may well be faulty. This research project will &lt;br/&gt;determine how rising
carbon dioxide affects the cycling of nitrogen, the &lt;br/&gt;nutrient whose
short supply most frequently restricts plant growth. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this research will determine whether the initial positive &lt;br/&gt;responses
of plants to increasing carbon dioxide eventually fade away &lt;br/&gt;because
the availability of nitrogen declines. This project will also &lt;br/&gt;examine
how increased atmospheric carbon dioxide may alter the cycles of
&lt;br/&gt;other elements, including the element molybdenum, which is known to
be key &lt;br/&gt;to the ability of ecosystems to accumulate limiting nitrogen.
The findings &lt;br/&gt;will be important for understanding how nitrogen cycling
influences how &lt;br/&gt;much carbon ecosystems might accumulate as carbon
dioxide continues to &lt;br/&gt;rise. The project will contribute to education
and will specifically target &lt;br/&gt;minority students for involvement in
research. The project will develop &lt;br/&gt;critical thinking exercises that
build on the research results, designed &lt;br/&gt;for use in undergraduate
courses. Integration of research and education is &lt;br/&gt;particularly
important in ecosystem ecology and biogeochemistry, because &lt;br/&gt;these
fields of ecology are traditionally underrepresented in undergraduate
&lt;br/&gt;ecology courses, and because these fields have key implications for
policy &lt;br/&gt;decisions surrounding global climate change and carbon
management.&lt;br/&gt;