* 0445200
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Study of Family Violence and STDs/HIV:  Anglo, African American, and Latina Women in Connecticut
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2006
* W. Penn Handwerker, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2006
* USD 11,950.00

Family violence is a significant women's health issue. Prior research does not
yet explain the relationship between a girl/woman experiencing family violence
and subsequent behavior and cognition that result in her increased risk of poor
health. Gynecological problems are especially salient health risks affecting
abused women and include sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), vaginal
infection, fibroids, genital irritation, chronic pelvic pain, and urinary-tract
infections. This dissertation research by a medical anthropologist from the
University of Connecticut, Storrs, examines whether life-history experiences
with family violence and with affection correspond with differing life-history
sexual events and behavioral patterns that place abused women at risk for STDs,
and whether this variation can be explained by resource access theory and/or
social bonding (control) theory. To answer these questions the researcher will
collect life histories of abused women to elicit abuse-generated STD risks. The
project includes a structured survey of abused and non-abused women that
measures STD risks, experiences of violence and affection, STDs/HIV diagnoses,
and indicators of resource access and social bonding theory. &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the new knowledge created by this study will be important for
planners and service-providers concerned with assisting both abused women and
those who aim to prevent STD. Nearly all prior research and existing
policies/programs target either survivors of violence or women infected with
STDs. If abused women, in comparison to non-abused women, are more likely to
contract STDs, they may have unique health needs implying the need to modify
existing intervention services. Identification of the underlying basis for such
differences between abused and non-abused women in social control and/or
resource access theories should suggest specific modification directions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;