* 0445575
* Satellite Conference: Annual Meeting of the Society of Neuroscience on October 25,2004; San Diego, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2005
* Akiko Nishiyama, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 12/31/2005
* USD 3,085.00

This is a request for funds to support a satellite meeting "Glial Meeting"
during the Annual Meeting for the Society for Neuroscience. The PI currently has
funds from NSF (grant #0316893 titled 'Molecular mechanisms of glial progenitor
cell differentiation') awarded to Akiko Nishiyama through the Integrative
Biology and Neuroscience Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds will be used
to support a Glial Meeting, which is listed as a satellite/ancillary meeting to
the 2004 Society for Neuroscience meeting in San Diego. The following
description of the meeting will be printed in the Program: 'There is increasing
recognition that glia is not glue. The Glial Meeting is an informal gathering
for investigators from diverse backgrounds to share new and exciting findings in
glial biology and identify unsolved problems. There will be one or two short
presentations followed by informal discussion and interactions among all
attendees. Light refreshments will be served.' &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It will be
held from 6:30 to 9:00 pm on October 25, 2004, in one of the meeting buildings
in San Diego, CA, in the middle of the week during which the Annual Meeting of
the Society for Neuroscience will be held. This meeting attracts more than
25,000 participants and is an excellent occasion to promote informal interaction
among a diverse group of investigators interested in glial biology. The first
Glial Meeting was held in 2003 and was organized by Dr. Harold Kimelberg in New
Orleans, also during the Annual Neuroscience Meeting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
year, we are fortunate to have Dr. James Goldman from Columbia University who
will present a talk on his recent studies on glial cell migration in living
slices. Dr. Goldman has been studying the development and pathology of various
types of glial cells for a number of years and has been one of the key
contributors to uncovering the origin and migratory behavior of astrocytes and
oligodendrocyte lineage cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will include a
number of minorities and women as participants. Since the organizer is a women
and from a non-white background, the speaker was chosen from a general the
population and was selected on the basis of one with the best scientific
qualifications.&lt;br/&gt;