* 0445967
* A New Approach For Identifying Regulatory Motifs in Groups of Co-regulated Genes
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2011
* Robert Gross, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Dickerson
* 03/31/2011
* USD 803,707.00

Dartmouth College is given an award for further development of the BEAM software
under the direction of Dr. Robert Gross. BEAM (Beam-search Enumerative Algorithm
for Motif finding) is a new kind of motif finding program that is simple to use,
accurate, and very robust to noisy data. It does not require the user to input
any information other than a list of genes, yet BEAM outperforms other programs
in finding non-degenerate candidate regulatory motifs. BEAM is a pattern-driven
program that employs a pruned search strategy. This results in a reduction of
the search space by several orders of magnitude compared to a complete
enumeration of all possible motifs. A search tree that focuses only on the
highest scoring submotifs at every motif length is likely to identify the
biologically relevant motifs. The highly efficient approach allows BEAM to
utilize computationally demanding objective functions in addition to the
standard over-representation. The research in this award is aimed at expanding
BEAM into a suite of programs that can find additional types of regulatory
motifs - those containing ambiguous characters as well as bipartite motifs. In
addition, we will develop an approach that allows us to look for combinations of
motifs that might function together. The entire suite of programs will be made
available through an integrated front end.

An important part of the Dartmouth environment is the involvement of
undergraduates in research. Three of the key people involved in developing our
initial approach and in developing the BEAM algorithm are undergraduates. These
students function in the lab as would graduate students, participating in
journal clubs, seminars, and lab meetings. The BEAM source code will be shared
freely over the web once we have papers accepted and have completed the
documentation of the code. This will be done under the standard GNU license. As
of now, the Java code runs on Mac, Windows, and Unix systems.