* 0445250
* Collaborative Research: Bacterial Controls on Mineral Dissolution and Precipitation and Aqueous Geochemistry of Natural Arsenic-Contaminated Groundwater, Bangladesh
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* James Saunders, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2009
* USD 214,979.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Natural arsenic contamination of shallow groundwater poses a
major human health threat in many parts of the world. Research by us and others
indicates that young (Holocene) river floodplain aquifers are most problematic
due to their locally high arsenic levels and because they are exploited for
drinking by tens to hundreds of millions of people in developing nations.
&lt;br/&gt;Recent research supports the concept that As is released by reductive
dissolution of the As-bearing hydrous ferric oxides (HFO) in the floodplain
aquifers. We have recently proposed that the As-HFO hypothesis is actually part
of a much larger continental As transport phenomena, which we have called the
arsenic geo-, bio-, hydro- (GBH) transport process. The essence of the
&lt;br/&gt;GBH process is that typical geologic, hydrologic, and microbial
processes are linked and lead to arsenic contamination in river floodplain
aquifers. The GBH process starts with weathering of mountain ranges by
mechanical effects of ice during the Pleistocene glacial events, and then during
the Holocene, warmer climates leads to rapid chemical weathering of glacial
deposits and bedrock containing minor amounts of As, and its release to the
hydrosphere. Arsenic is sorbed from river waters by HFO in stream sediments, and
stream sediments ultimately are deposited with organic matter in river
floodplains. This in turn causes anaerobic groundwater to develop and anaerobic
iron-reducing bacteria (FeRB) to dissolve As-bearing HFO, producing Fe- and
As-&lt;br/&gt;riched shallow groundwater. Our recent research has generated the
first field microbiologic data (from USA) for the As-groundwater cycling
processes and has identified genera of FeRB and sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB).
Our research indicates that the conditions that lead to this water chemistry in
river floodplains is universal, but only rises to a serious problem in the
developing nations where this water is exploited for human consumption. The
subject of this proposed research will extend and test our hypotheses and
conclusions drawn from our three field areas in USA to a seriously As-affected
region of the world. This will be the ultimate test of our hypothesis regarding
the universality of biogeochemical controls on this type of natural arsenic
contamination. Further, our previous research has also demonstrated an important
role that SRB play in nature in removing As from groundwater. We will
investigate the geochemistry of As under in situ sulfate-reducing conditions by
stimulating indigenous SRB as we have done in our bioremediation research in the
USA, which suggests that As may be removed from groundwater by SRB if dissolved
iron concentrations remain elevated (e.g., precludes formation of significant
As-thio complexes). The proposed field research in Bangladesh will include: 1)
drilling and installation of new wells (including some multiport monitoring
well) at field sites selected from previous Dhaka University research, and also
collection of solid aquifer materials; 2) collection of geochemical data in the
field from existing and new wells; 3) collection of bacteria samples by
filtering of groundwater for DNA sequencing and also extraction from solid
aquifer samples; 4) collection of hypothesized authigenic carbonate and sulfide
mineral phases to evaluate their role in controlling As mobility and groundwater
geochemistry; and 5) an investigation of the behavior of As under artificially
induced sulfate-reducing conditions in the field. In summary, our research team
has unique skills and backgrounds that have never been deployed in As-
contaminated areas before, and thus this research offers an unparalleled
opportunity to document the cause of the arsenic problem, as well as a potential
remediation tool. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research includes educational and
research activities for graduate students and post-docs. The proposed research
has significant technology transfer elements in it, during the progress of the
study, we will also by necessity be cooperating with local scientists and
government officials, and we plan on presenting technical seminars in
Bangladesh. Because As-contamination is a pressing problem in the developing
world, lessons we learn in Bangladesh should be applicable to many other
countries. This proposed project falls under almost all five "priority research"
thematic areas, but particularly more under thematic area IV as identified as
"collaborative research areas" at the US-Bangladesh Workshop on the Ganges-
Brahmaputra-&lt;br/&gt;Meghna Delta, held in Rajendrapur, Bangladesh (January
28-31, 2002). The workshop was sponsored by the US National Science Foundation
and the Government of Bangladesh. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;