* 0445621
* Chromsome Modification and Transcription Repression in Regulation of Systemic Acquired Resistance
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Xinnian Dong, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2009
* USD 480,000.00

Systemic acquired resistance (SAR) is a long lasting, broad spectrum immune
response in plants that is often induced after a local pathogen infection.
Induction of SAR requires the signal molecule salicylic acid (SA) and up-
regulation of pathogenesis-related (PR) genes, which encode proteins with
antimicrobial activities. Genetic studies suggest that there are at least two
induction events. One involves activation of NPR1 by SA and inactivation of SNI1
through NPR1 while the other involves an NPR1-independent, SA-dependent
induction. Recent work has shown that SNI1 might repress PR gene expression
through changes in the chromosome structure. The functional domains of SNI1 have
been defined using the innovative NAAIRS mutagenesis. In the sni1 genetic
background, ssn mutants were identified that affect NPR1-independent, SA-
dependent expression of PR genes. The identification of SSN1 (AtRad51L3)
suggests that chromosome structure indeed plays an important role in PR gene
regulation. Identification of eight ssn mutants implies that there are multiple
components involved in this process. To understand how chromosome modification
and transcription repression affect systemic acquired resistance, this project
will focus on the following specific aims: (1) Mechanism of SNI1 transcriptional
repression; (2) Regulation of SNI1 transcriptional repression; and (3) Cloning
and characterization of ssn mutants. The significance of this project is
manifold. From a plant pathologist's point of view, this study will lead to
better understanding of SAR, which is a major defense mechanism in plants. The
inducible nature of this resistance may reduce the selective pressure for
pathogens to overcome resistance and allow the generation of crop plants with
durable, broad-spectrum resistance. From a molecular geneticist's standpoint,
SAR is a fascinating signal transduction process leading to a coordinated global
change in gene expression. The mechanisms of transcriptional repression are
poorly understood in plants, and it is not known how SSN1, a RAD51 homolog
presumed to be involved in DNA recombination and repair, regulates PR gene
transcription. For this project, a unique set of tools has been developed to
make new discoveries in these research areas. It will be fascinating to explore
the possible link between DNA recombination and PR gene expression during
pathogen challenge, which affects the long-term and immediate survival of the
plant, respectively. Finally, it is also of interest to evolutionary biologists
how plants balance their ability to fend off pathogen challenge and the need to
minimize the cost of resistance. This project will also have a broader impact on
education. It will provide the necessary financial support for the PI, graduate
student and postdoctoral (all women) on this project. Cloning of ssn mutants
will be carried out by undergraduate students as their independent-study
projects. This grant will also facilitate the PI's role as a mentor in the SROP
program for minority undergraduate summer research, as a panelist in the
University Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program, and an editor for
Plant Physiology, Plant Journal and MPMI.