* 0445413
* A Survey of Terrestrial Arthropoda in Chilean Temperate Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Kipling Will, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/28/2009
* USD 347,537.00

This Biotic Survey and Inventory project will be conducted in Chile, a country
that is a virtual biotic island and includes one of the world's five major
temperate rainforest systems and the only such system in South America. The
Chilean temperate forests have been isolated since the Tertiary, resulting in an
extraordinary number of endemic taxa that represent many ancient lineages
clearly connected to the Australian biota. This project will enable an inventory
of beetles, and the collection of many other arthropods from the species rich
and critically threatened Valdivian Temperate Forests. The project includes
canopy-fogging. This method targets species that are seldom sampled otherwise
and are an important and unknown part of the world's biodiversity. Understanding
the distribution and diversity of such groups is fundamental to building the
context of biotic change in the southern continents and within Chile.
Additionally, it is widely recognized that this region is under-protected and
rapidly succumbing to human land-use practices, namely fragmentation and land
conversion. The data and understanding of the temperate forests resulting from
the project will have long-term impacts on the field of biology and Chilean
management practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide high
quality specimens and data for systematics and taxonomic research, resulting in
a prominent increase in publications that address taxonomy, phylogeny, ecology,
and biogeography. Products of the project will include a specimen-level
database, the development of identification keys, species checklists, broadly
available information and images via the internet. This project will provide
specimens for both Chilean and US museums and will have a lasting impact on
arthropod research for Chile and the international community. These collections
are vital resources for future research and crucial to developing an active
intellectual community of arthropod biologists in Chile. Finally, it provides
critically important biodiversity data for Chilean conservation organizations.
Future policy-making, conservation planning, and education are dependent on the
baseline data available. Presently arthropod data are entirely lacking in Chile.
The project will address this gap in our knowledge, permanently changing the
course of research and management in Chile and abroad. Both USA and Chilean
undergraduate and graduate students will be incorporated throughout this
project. They will be trained in collecting methods, specimen identification and
preparation, bioinfomatic data collection and museum methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joint support for the international aspects of this
research was provided by the Office of International Science and Engineering of
NSF.