* 0445768
* Evolution of Neural Circuits for Locomotion
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2008
* Paul Katz, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 12/31/2008
* USD 526,155.00

Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Different species of animals display disparate
behaviors that are produced by underlying neural circuits in the brains of each
animal. To understand how different behaviors may have evolved, it is necessary
to compare how the neural circuits in closely related species differ. The
objective of this project is to address three fundamental questions about the
evolution of neural circuits underlying behavior: 1) How do similar nervous
systems produce different behaviors? 2) Can the same neurons in different
species have similar functions even though the behaviors of the animals differ?
3) How do nervous systems in animals of different lineages produce the same
behavior? &lt;br/&gt;This study addresses these questions by examining
phylogenetic changes in identified homologous neurons in nudibranch mollusks,
also known as sea slugs. Nudibranchs have simple nervous systems with
individually identifiable neurons that underly three different types of
locomotor behavior: crawling and two types of swimming: some sea slugs swim by
lateral body flexions and others swim by dorsal/ventral body flexions. The
divergent swimming behaviors arose independently multiple times in different
nudibranch lineages. Studying phylogenetic differences in the functions and
properties of identified neurons underlying locomotion will help determine how
the behaviors changed during the evolutionary history of these sea slugs and
will also provide understanding of how behaviorally relevant neural circuits can
change in any creature.&lt;br/&gt;Closely-related nudibranchs can exhibit
divergent behaviors that are often associated with species-differences in the
properties and connections of the underlying neurons. This project compares the
neurophysiological properties and synaptic connections of homologous neurons
that produce different behaviors in four closely-related species: Tritonia
diomedea (a dorsal/ventral swimmer), Melibe leonina and Dendronotus iris (both
lateral swimmers), and Tochuina tetraquetra (a non-swimmer). This part of the
project will correlate neurophysiology with behavior to determine which features
of the neurons or their circuit connections are functionally important. The
functions of the neurophysiological properties then will be tested directly
using an electrophysiological technique called dynamic clamp to artificially
transform the membrane and synaptic properties of homologous neurons. If the
properties of neurons can be electrically transformed so their activity more
closely resembles that of the homologous neurons in other species and swim
behavior typical of that species is produced, then it would be strong evidence
that those neural properties play a causal role in the production of
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;Despite large differences in the behaviors of some closely-
related nudibranchs, there likely will be underlying similarities in the
functions of identified neurons. The second aim of the project is to look for
conserved behavioral functions of homologous neurons in species with divergent
behaviors. This will provide a basis for understanding the shared organization
of the neural circuits, which forms the foundation upon which the derived
behaviors are built.&lt;br/&gt;Distantly-related nudibranchs can also display
similar behaviors. The phylogenetic distribution of swim behaviors suggests that
they arose independently multiple times. The third aim of this project is to
test whether independent evolution of the same motor behavior was caused by
convergent or parallel evolution. The functions of homologous neurons in
nudibranchs of different lineages that exhibit the same swimming behavior will
be tested. The species pairs to be examined are Aphelodoris antillensis and
Tritonia diomedea, distantly related dorsal /ventral swimmers, and Flabellina
iodinea and Melibe leonina, distantly related lateral swimmers. If homologous
neurons came to be used in the same way, for the same purpose, independently in
different lineages, then it would indicate that the similarity in the swimming
behavior arose through parallel evolution. This would suggest that components of
neural circuits are like building blocks that can be taken apart and reassembled
in the same way. Alternatively, if it is found that the behaviors resemble each
other because of convergent evolution, then it would indicate that there are
multiple configurations of nervous systems that can produce the same behavioral
output. &lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to involve undergraduate students in
the research plan. Specific mechanisms are in place to enhance the participation
of historically under-represented ethnic groups. Plans have been made to use
this project as a tool to teach about animal diversity and evolution in
secondary schools using Georgia State University's Bio-Bus and to develop public
exhibits on sea slugs at the new Georgia Aquarium in Atlanta.&lt;br/&gt;