* 0445793
* Compensatory Responses of the Olfactory System to Sensory Deprivation
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2005
* David Coppola, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 12/31/2005
* USD 39,000.00

Neural activity, either sensory driven or endogenous, is critical for the
development and functional maintenance of many parts of the nervous system. For
example, if sensory input is eliminated during a critical period in early life,
primary sensory areas in the brain can be malformed, sometimes irreversibly.
Given the importance of continued sensory input, it is possible that sensory
receptor cells would evolve compensatory responses to sensory deprivation.
Recent evidence suggests that neurons in many areas of the nervous system do
indeed display homeostatic plasticity such that their overall intrinsic
excitability is altered by experience. In the developing olfactory system,
surgically occluding one side of the nasal cavity, and thus reducing odor
stimulation to olfactory receptor neurons, alters the development of olfactory
pathways receiving input from these receptors. Recently, the PI and his
colleagues discovered that adenylyl cyclase three (ACIII), olfactory marker
protein (OMP), and a phosphodiesterase (PDE4A), all proteins known or suspected
to be involved in olfactory transduction or modulation, increase in
concentration in olfactory receptor neurons following naris occlusion. These
results imply that olfactory neurons, like many other neuron types, have a
compensatory response to stimulus deprivation. The funds made available by the
NSF will allow the PI to further evaluate this hypothesis. Specifically,
electrophysiological equipment will be purchased to allow a comparison between
the responses of normal and deprived olfactory sensory cells. If Dr. Coppola's
hypothesis is correct, deprived cells should become more responsive to odors. An
operant chamber and flow-dilution olfactometer will be purchased to allow
behavioral odor thresholds (and other parameters) to be compared between normal
and deprived mice. According to his hypothesis, mice deprived of odors should
have a decreased threshold compared to control mice as a consequence of their
compensatory response. Lastly, consumable supplies will be purchased that will
allow preliminary immunocytochemical work on the ACIII, OMP, PDE4A to be
confirmed and extended. Taken together the results of these studies will help
establish a previously unexplored compensatory mechanism of olfactory receptor
neurons, shed light on the role of OMP and PDE4A in odor transduction/modulation
and clarify the role of odor deprivation on the developing and adult olfactory
system. The broader impact of this project lies in its ability to improve the
science infrastructure at Randolph-Macon College.