* 0445565
* Self-organization, molecular mechanics, and catalytic functions of nucleoprotein complexes studied using single-DNA micromanipulation
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2005,10/31/2008
* John Marko, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 10/31/2008
* USD 488,883.00

This project focuses on the study of DNA-protein complexes through single-DNA
micromanipulation. Using magnetic tweezers and micropipette manipulation of DNAs
attached to micron-sized particles, the dynamics of formation, mechanical
properties, and catalytic function of nucleoprotein complexes will be measured.
Self-assembly, activities and disassembly of these protein-DNA complexes will be
studied via precise time-resolved measurement of mechanical properties, i.e.
molecular lengths as a function of applied force. This simple yet versatile
approach allows observation of kinetics of reactions as well as equilibrium
states, for proteins that reorganize DNA structure. The project will also
include development of transverse magnetic tweezer methods, including techniques
for experiments on two DNA segments at once. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of this research will be via its highly interdisciplinary nature, and by
development of new biophysical techniques (transverse magnetic tweezer and
combined magnetic tweezer/micropipette methods) for study of DNA-protein
interactions. Along with this, the proposed activities will focus on research
education for Ph.D. and postdoctoral students, combining physics and biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this award is provided by the Division of
Physics and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and by the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in the Biosciences Directorate.