* 0445136
* SGER: Diagnosis of North American Hydroclimate Variability in Coupled Model Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Sumant Nigam, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

This is a grant under a Climate Variability and Predictability (CLIVAR) Program
pilot project called CMEP, for Climate Model Evaluation Project, with a special
emphasis on water cycle, precipitation and land surface
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will analyze the interannual
variability of North American hydroclimate during summer and winter months in
two coupled simulations of the 20th century climate. Current state-of-the-art
atmospheric general circulation models have rather limited potential in
simulating hydroclimate variability over North America, especially during summer
when the climatological evaporation is large. The models exhibit intense local
recycling of precipitation and weak convergent moisture fluxes, in contrast with
warm-season observations. The PIs will first evaluate precipitation variability
and the associated structure of the atmospheric water cycle during summer and
winter in the Community Climate System Model (CCSM), Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory (GFDL) and Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) coupled
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis will be carried out using
monthly fields. However the issue of local recycling of precipitation (via
surface-atmosphere feedback) versus remote water sources of precipitation (via
convergent moisture fluxes) in the North American region will be given special
consideration. The PIs will use both monthly and pentad anomalies to investigate
the precipitation recycling issue in models and observations. Lead/lag analysis
is expected to be particularly insightful here. They will also examine the
linkages of the two adjoining ocean basins on North American summer
hydroclimate. They will undertake principal component analysis of 700 hPa
geopotential height and SST to identify the basin connections in the
simulations; the corresponding observational analysis has been completed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have a number of target data sets like the newly
available European Center for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (ECMWF)
reanalysis as well as other gridded observations for precipitation, evaporation,
sea surface temperature, and satellite-based precipitation estimates that will
be used to assess the simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If
successful, this research will result in the improvement of climate model
projections of climate variability in a changing climate. This had great
potential benefit to people and their environments.