* 0445127
* Measuring the covariance between sensory systems and behavior: testing the assumptions of the sensory bias and sensory exploitation hypotheses
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2005,10/31/2006
* Joseph Travis, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 10/31/2006
* USD 194,296.00

Males of many species possess extravagant, brightly colored structures that are
costly to produce and that increase their likelihood of being seen and eaten by
predators. One of the great problems of evolutionary biology is understanding
why females select for such extravagant traits in males. The "sensory bias
hypothesis" states that female mating preferences are by-products of natural
selection on the sensory system. Under this hypothesis, strong natural selection
on animals to find food, avoid predators, and find proper habitats results in
indirect selection on mating preferences. The fundamental assumption of this
hypothesis is that the genes (and neurological pathways) that affect foraging
preferences also affect mating preferences. This project will determine the
extent to which different behaviors that share a common sensory system can
evolve independently. The objective of the study will be to determine if
behaviors share a common sensory system and/or does variation in the sensory
system lead to variation in behavior. To address these questions, large amounts
of phenotypic variation in visual properties will be generated and multiple
aspects of behavior will be measured using the bluefin killifish, Lucania
goodei, a species previously demonstrated to have large amounts of variation in
visual properties both within and between populations. &lt;br/&gt; Broader
Impacts: The study will provide the graduate student and several undergraduates
experience with a variety of techniques drawn from many disciplines. This
project involves the collaboration of evolutionary biologists and molecular
biologists/vision physiologists that will help build connections between the
evolutionary biology group within the Biological Science Department and other
groups, particularly the university-wide Program in Neuroscience. The project
should demonstrate that studying natural variation in vision physiology is a
worthwhile endeavor, while developing further insights into the evolution of
vision physiology.&lt;br/&gt;