* 0445277
* Collaborative Research: Biophysical and Ecological Constraints on Maximum Tree Height:Insights From the Three Tallest Tree Species.
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2005,08/31/2008
* George Koch, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2008
* USD 377,121.00

BIOPHYSICAL AND ECOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS ON MAXIMUM TREE
HEIGHT:&lt;br/&gt;INSIGHTS FROM THE THREE TALLEST TREE
SPECIES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;George W. Koch1 and Stephen C.
Sillett2&lt;br/&gt;1Northern Arizona University and 2Humboldt State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Organisms of great size hold an inherent
fascination for humans, and the evolutionary and biophysical determinants of
extreme size have long intrigued biologists. Among trees, at least three species
(redwood, Douglas-fir, and mountain ash) have exceeded 110 meters (" 360 ft)
height in the past. Today, redwood alone reaches such heights, heavy logging
having greatly reduced the number of tall individuals of all three species. The
rarity of giant trees, and uncertainty regarding the threats of continued
logging and predicted climate change, underscore the need for this new study of
Earth's tallest trees, which seeks to answer fundamental questions regarding the
height limits of terrestrial plants.&lt;br/&gt; Trees grow tall where soils are
moist and competition for light places a premium on height growth. Current
research supports the view that constraints on water delivery to the treetop
slow and eventually halt height growth as trees grow taller. Gravity may
constrain height growth by reducing water pressure within the conducting system
of taller trees, which in turn increases water stress to leaves and reduces
rates of photosynthesis. Convincing evidence of lower photosynthesis in tall
trees is lacking, however, because most studies have been limited to trees less
than half of the maximum-recorded height of the species. In this study, the
researchers will access the crowns of trees from 50% to 100% of maximum height
in order to compare water stress, photosynthesis, and height growth among
individuals of different heights for the three tallest trees species, which grow
in temperate rainforests in northern California and Australia. They will also
use tree ring growth records to understand how these long-lived (400 to 2000 yr)
species have responded to past climate variation and how they may be impacted by
future climate change. &lt;br/&gt; Insights from this study will have
implications for other scientific disciplines. A long-standing question in
ecosystem ecology concerns the cause of the apparent decline in net primary
productivity as forest stands grow and age, which may include hydraulic
constraints on photosynthesis, a primary focus of this study. Furthermore,
forests of tall trees are storehouses of biodiversity, and the study will
strengthen the infrastructure for continued long-term monitoring and ecological
research in the state and federal reserves that seek to protect the remaining
giant trees and their dependent biodiversity. The problem of tree top death of
redwoods in state and federal reserves is a high priority of park managers, and
this study may shed light on the causes of this phenomenon and whether it may be
exacerbated by climate change. &lt;br/&gt; The study contributes to human
resources in a number of ways: it strengthens ongoing outreach to high school
biology classes that will access real-time data on environmental conditions in
tall trees for teaching purposes; it supports the thesis research of three
graduate students; and it provides support for involvement of undergraduate
students in laboratory-based research activities, including plant physiology
studies and state-of-the-art analyses of stable isotope composition of leaves, a
powerful index of water stress in plants. Both partner institutions have large
enrollments of Native American students and programs for their involvement with
research. These students and those from other underrepresented groups will be
sought for involvement in this study.&lt;br/&gt;