* 0445679
* CNS Opioids and Maternal Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Mark Kristal, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* J. Steven de Belle
* 03/31/2008
* USD 199,999.00

The rapid, reliable onset of maternal behavior in mammals involves a complex and
dramatic change in neurochemical, endocrinological, and sensory factors at
delivery. These are orchestrated and timed so that the maternal behavior and the
object of the behavior (the infant) "emerge" almost simultaneously at delivery.
Important for the emergence of maternal behavior and for the suppression of some
of the pain of delivery are changes in the brain's own opioid activity.
Ingestion of the afterbirth by the mother, a feature of delivery in almost all
nonhuman mammals, significantly and rapidly modifies this opioid-based pregnancy
mediated analgesia. This project seeks to determine whether afterbirth ingestion
also modifies opioid-mediated influences on maternal behavior. Opioid activation
at the end of pregnancy and during delivery has a complex effect on maternal
behavior best described by focusing on two brain sites of opioid action:
increased opioid activity in the ventral tegmental area facilitates the onset of
maternal behavior, but in the medial preoptic area disrupts maternal behavior.
The hypothesis tested will be to determine whether afterbirth ingestion modifies
specific opioid-receptor systems in these discrete brain regions to optimize the
onset of maternal behavior: enhancing the facilitative effect of opioids in the
ventral tegmental area, and attenuating the disruptive effects of opioids in the
medial preoptic area. These studies will facilitate the development of a
comprehensive model of the biobehavioral/neurochemical basis of maternal
behavior featuring afterbirth ingestion, opioid activity of two of the key areas
of the brain, and the internal hormonal environment at the time of delivery. As
many as four graduate students and six undergraduates, some funded by this
proposal, will be trained in the context of this research project. As a training
experience, this research will be used to exemplify problem-oriented, multilevel
analytical research into the integration of internal and external stimuli in the
natural regulation of a complex constellation of behaviors in a key element of
reproduction in mammals - parturition.