* 0445710
* Evolution of Photoperiodic Time Measurement and the Circadian Clock in Animals: Perspectives from the Pitcher-Plant Mosquito, Wyeomyia smithii
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2005,01/31/2010
* William Bradshaw, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Stephen J Tonsor
* 01/31/2010
* USD 576,786.00

Evolution of Photoperiodic Time Measurement and the Circadian Clock in Animals:
Perspectives from the Pitcher-Plant Mosquito, Wyeomyia smithii William E.
Bradshaw University of Oregon Eugene

Evolution of life cycles that are compatible with the changing seasons is a
major feature of temperate organisms. No life cycle in a temperate zone like
North America can be complete without the ability to exploit the favorable
season, the ability to mitigate or avoid the unfavorable season, and the ability
to switch from one lifestyle to the other on a timely basis. The most prominent
switching mechanism used by temperate plants and animals to anticipate and
prepare for the changing seasons is the length of day or photoperiod. Evolution
of photoperiodic response is a major feature of the geographic dispersal of
invading species and, as prior funding to this lab by NSF has recently shown,
adaptation to rapid climate change. This research examines the physiological and
genetic processes within and between populations that ultimately constitute the
basis for the diversity of seasonal adaptations observed over a continental
scale at temperate latitudes. The main objective of this work is to test whether
there is a necessary, causal connection between the "daily" (circadian) clock
controlling daily activities and the "seasonal" (photoperiodic) timer
controlling seasonal activities. Daily activities include sleep-wakefulness
patterns and hunger cycles in humans; disruption of the circadian clock is
responsible for "jet lag." Seasonal cycles include migration in birds,
hibernation in mammals, and dormancy and reproduction in a wide array of animals
under natural conditions. The genetic basis of daily clocks is fairly well
understood, but little is known about the genetic basis of the seasonal timer,
let alone how the two processes relate to each other. The work in this proposal
will test for the genetic flexibility of the connection between the daily and
the seasonal timer by employing a set of artificial selection experiments.
Knowledge of the potential interaction between these two timing mechanisms is
fundamental to understanding how temperate organisms expand their ranges, time
events as diverse as dormancy and reproduction, and cope with climate change.
North America is undergoing a period of unprecedented climate change that is
imposing strong natural selection for altering the timing of seasonal
activities. The experiments to be run will show whether and how modification of
the seasonal timer affects the daily clock and vice versa. Understanding the
genetics underlying seasonal adaptation will assist in evaluating the survival
of important agricultural crops, the spread of vector-borne diseases, the impact
of agricultural pests, and the composition of natural biotic communities. This
research lends itself well to undergraduate participation, not just as research
assistants, but also as young investigators pursuing related but independent
projects. Recent undergraduate students from this lab have continued on to
graduate or medical school, to careers as teachers, applied biologists, lawyers,
journalists, and to other professions not related to science. Regardless of
their future endeavors, these students constitute an informed citizenry, more
aware of basic research, its importance, and its implications. This research
will continue a strong tradition and commitment to undergraduate research
participation and training by this laboratory.