* 0445848
* Maternal effects link individual behavior and physiology to population states
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Wendy Reed, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 01/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

Maternal effects link individual behavior and physiology to population
states&lt;br/&gt;Wendy L. Reed, Mark E. Clark&lt;br/&gt;North Dakota State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Density dependent regulation of population size
has been a long-time focus of ecological and evolutionary studies, however, the
mechanisms underlying density dependence have not been resolved. In density
dependent regulation, as population size increases either the birth rate of the
population decreases or the death rate of the population increases. Because
populations consist of individuals, changes in the birth or death rates must
result from changes in individuals. That is, changes in the birth or death rates
result from changes in the morphology, behavior or physiology of individuals in
the population. No population can increase indefinitely, so mechanisms for
density dependent population growth must be manifested in individuals at some
point. Unfortunately detecting this pattern in free-living populations is
problematic in large part because population size is difficult to experimentally
manipulate. However, when the density of individuals in a given area increases,
social interactions among individuals increase, and these behavioral
interactions are amenable to experimental manipulation and can have far-reaching
physiological effects on individual reproductive success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This study will test the effects of pre-natal behavioral interactions among
adults on the post-natal physiology of offspring. A population of American coots
(Fulica americana) will be used as a model system to explore this potential
density-dependent mechanism. When population densities increase in an area,
behavioral interactions among breeding pairs increase because territories are
crowded together and intrusions are more frequent. Therefore, simulated
increases in population density will be performed by placing captive adult coots
in the territories of free-living, breeding adult coots just prior to egg
laying. Following the experimental intrusion and egg laying, egg constituents
(primarily hormones present in the egg yolk) will be analyzed. Changes in egg
physiology may act as a conduit for density-dependent feedback in the population
because the early developmental period is especially sensitive to physiological
perturbations. The structure and function of hormone systems are similar in most
vertebrates, and the results from this study will provide a novel way to
approach general processes regulating their populations. Ultimately
understanding the biological mechanisms regulating these populations is the key
to conservation and management. A central focus of this study is graduate,
undergraduate, and community education. Field studies are conducted in rural
North Dakota and depend upon local support and involvement, which is fostered by
direct educational outreach to the citizens and landowners in these
communities.&lt;br/&gt;