* 0445182
* Structural Reorganization of Nuclear Proteins During Mitosis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Jorgen Johansen, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 04/30/2009
* USD 547,646.00

&lt;br/&gt;The long term objective of this study is to test the hypothesis that
nuclear derived proteins form a spindle matrix during mitosis that is distinct
from the microtubule spindle apparatus. The concept of a spindle matrix was
proposed long ago based on theoretical considerations of the requirements for
force production to help organize and stabilize the microtubule spindle during
mitosis; however, molecular evidence corroborating its existence has been
elusive. Dr. Johansen previously characterized a novel nuclear protein in
Drosophila, Skeletor, the distribution of which exhibits many features
consistent with it being part of a spindle matrix. Skeletor is localized to
chromatin during interphase but reorganizes into a true fusiform spindle-
structure during prophase at a time when tubulin is still excluded from the
nucleus. However, Skeletor encodes a low-complexity protein with no obvious
motifs, making it unlikely that Skeletor itself is a structural component of a
spindle matrix but rather that it is a member of a multi-protein complex. In
searching for other members of such a complex, Dr. Johansen recently identified
a protein directly interacting with Skeletor that she named Chromator. Chromator
contains a chromodomain and co-localizes with Skeletor on the chromosomes at
interphase as well as to the Skeletor-defined spindle during metaphase.
Reduction of Chromator levels reveals that Chromator is an essential gene
affecting spindle function and chromosome segregation. Dr. Johansen will
directly test the hypothesis that Chromator plays a functional role in the cell
cycle, by analyzing the effects on cell cycle progression of reduced levels of
Chromator using P-element mutations. She will use EMS-mutagenesis to generate a
range of Chromator mutant alleles, including complete nulls, which will allow
her to genetically dissect the functional requirements of Chromator in different
contexts and which will help in identifying essential residues. The necessary
and sufficient domains of Chromator will be identified by expressing mutated and
deleted constructs of Chromator transgenically in null mutant flies. The
hypothesis that Chromator is a member of a multi-protein complex will be further
tested by using Chromator as a means to identify other components of the
putative spindle matrix by immunoaffinity purification and pull-down assays. The
functional analysis of Chromator and its associated proteins will provide new
and important insights into the mechanisms behind the complex and highly
choreographed process of chromosome segregation during cell division.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will further provide the research basis for
undergraduate and high school training on internships and honors projects within
the laboratory. The PI will continue her efforts to motivate elementary and
college students to consider research careers by both working directly with such
students in the laboratory as well as by presenting general research talks at
primarily undergraduate institutions and high schools that introduce students to
the controversies and mysteries still to be explained in cell division.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;