* 0445936
* Structural and Energetic Effects of Protein Substrate Binding on GroEL Chaperonin
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Mark Fisher, University of Kansas Medical Center Research Institute Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2009
* USD 426,999.00

The long-term goal of this project is to determine how substrate specificity
influences chaperonin mechanism, structure and allosteric transition + ADP. It
is hypothesized that the substrate protein induced allosteric transitions in the
chaperonin GroEL vary with size, binding affinity, binding orientation of the
bound protein substrate, ultimately influencing chaperonin function and
mechanism. Using single particle analysis using cryo-electron microscopy, the
structure of a seven-fold symmetrized GroELsubstrate protein complex at an
intermediate resolution (13 angstroms) has been determined. In addition, the
important allosteric molecular changes that occur in GroEL-substrate protein
complexes as determined from normal mode flexible fitting analysis have been
defined. To understand the variability of substrate influences on the chaperonin
mechanism, unsymmetrized structures of various GroEL substrate protein complexes
+ ADP will be obtained using cryo-electron microscopy of single particles. The
observed presence of a multitude of conformational changes in GroEL during
substrate protein binding suggests that GroEL allosteric transitions are not
two-state. Resolving the low resolution multiple allosteric structural states
will lead to a more comprehensive structural picture of GroEL allostery. The
specific classification procedures employed for the chaperonin system should
enable others to employ similar methods to resolve multiple heterogeneous
protein populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The presence of
projects using single particle analysis with cryoelectron microscipy will help
foster new collaborations within Kansas and will enhance the education and
training of local graduate students and undergraduate students (e.g. partial
training at the Scripps Research Institute). The PI, Dr. Scott Falke at William
Jewel College, Edward Gogol at UMKC and David Prendergrass at the KU Edwards
campus have set up opportunities for undergraduates to work on various
biophysical aspects of chaperonin preparation, electron microscopy image
collection and image analysis.