* 0445134
* SGER: Teleconnection Structure and Evolution in the Coupled Model Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Sumant Nigam, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/2006
* USD 35,000.00

The recurrent patterns of interannual variability (teleconnections included)
will be extracted from the Community Climate System Model (CCSM), the
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) model, and the Goddard Institute of
Space Sciences (GISS), coupled simulations and closely compared with their
observational counterparts, particularly, ENSO (the El-Nino-Southern
Oscillation), PNA (Pacific/North American), NAO/AO (North Atlantic
Oscillation/Annular Oscillation), and the Western Pacific (WP) patterns manifest
during Northern winters of the present-day climate. The land/ocean surface
temperature, ocean heat-content, 200 and 850 hPa geopotential, 200 hPa
divergence, 1000 hPa (surface) winds, and the associated precipitation patterns
will be the focus of intercomparison. The variables constitute a minimal set for
monitoring the quality of simulated interannual variability; the variable choice
will facilitate scrutiny of tropical-extratropical interactions, ocean-
atmosphere interactions in the tropical and extratropical basins, hydroclimate
variability, and of the global warming signal itself.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intercomparison of the variability patterns' mature-phase
structure will be followed by comparative analysis of the pattern evolution;
this should provide a quick, albeit incomplete, check on the realism of the
underlying variability mechanisms in the coupled simulations. The evolution
analysis will be conducted at submonthly resolution; preferably, at pentad time
scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An even more fundamental descriptor of the
atmospheric general circulation is the zonally symmetric circulation, specially
the zonal-mean zonal winds (U). Seemingly subtle differences in the (U)
latitude-height structure can be consequential for climatological stationary
waves and climate teleconnections, from modulation of wave propagation in/across
the troposphere. The PIs will illustrate the dynamical significance of the
inter-model variations of (U)-climatology by computing the orographic
circulation response during winter, using a steady, linearized version of the
atmospheric model's dynamical core (the diagnostic model). Additionally, since
interannual variations of (U) in the middle-to-high latitude winters have
figured prominently in recent discussions of troposphere-stratosphere
interactions, specially, in context of the development of the NAO and global
warming signals in the troposphere, a principal component analysis of (U)
variability in the troposphere and stratosphere will be conducted. The
significance of inter-model differences in the (U)-variability structures will
again be illustrated through diagnostic modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This work will establish the baseline information for
evaluating global and regional climate and water resource model projections for
the 21st century. This is important information for environmental management and
environmental policy decisions.