* 0445648
* Central control of electrosensory processing and learning in mormyrid electric fish
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Patrick Roberts, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 02/29/2008
* USD 312,112.00

The ultimate goal of this project is to understand how the nervous system
accurately stores and processes the temporal flow of sensory information. The
project focuses on the mormyrid electric fish (Gnathonemus petersii), a
nocturnal fish that senses its environment by emitting a weak electric pulse and
then detecting with electrosensory receptors in its skin the distortions in the
signal caused by external objects. This electrosensory system requires
exceptional timing and precision in order for the fish to navigate through its
environment and identify external objects, such as potential mates, prey,
predators and obstacles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site of initial
electrosensory information processing is the electrosensory lateral line lobe
(ELL), a cerebellum-like neural structure in the hindbrain of the fish. Neurons
of the ELL are affected not only by electrosensory input, but also by signals
from central regions of the brain that inform the ELL about the timing of the
motor command that initiates the electric pulse. In addition, the responses of
neurons in the ELL are found to be adaptable to changing sensory conditions that
effect the electrosensory system. This adaptability leads to the ability of
these neurons to "store" an image of the fish's expectation of its own
electrical signal. This expectation of the fish's own signal can be subtracted
from the signal the fish actually receives to reveal the presence of
environmental objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, it is unclear how nervous
signals from central regions of the brain affect the storage and processing of
sensory information in neurons of the ELL . In this collaborative research
project, Dr. Patrick Roberts will use mathematical analyses and computer
simulations to combine experimental data derived from electrophysiological
experiments performed in Dr. Curtis Bell's laboratory. Predictions from
mathematical modeling will be used to test different mechanisms that may be
responsible for how timing information is used by the ELL to interpret sensory
information and control adaptive processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
electrosensory nerves enter the ELL and contact small granular cells that appear
to act as coincidence detectors with respect to a precisely timed input from the
central motor command and the received electrosensory signal. This project will
model the mechanisms of precision in this coincidence detector at the level of
cellular membranes and circuits. The output of the ELL appears to be shaped by
adaptive processes, and those processes may be controlled by descending input
from higher centers of sensory processing. The project will investigate how
descending inputs can control the shape of this initial sensory processing
structure and the computational models produced will form predictions for the
next round of experimental studies. Completion of the proposed research will
clarify underlying mechanisms of sensory processing and illuminate the
principles of neural computation in this and other cerebellum-like structures.
The PI has also developed an outreach effort that brings students from a local
undergraduate institution, Reed College, into his laboratory to participate in
neuroscience research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;