* 0445799
* A Novel Approach to Identify Plant Genes Involved in Agrobacterium-mediated Transformation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Kirankumar Mysore, Noble Research Institute, LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2009
* USD 313,131.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Title: Identification of plant genes involved in
Agrobacterium-mediated plant transformation (this proposal)&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Kirankumar Mysore &lt;br/&gt;Proposal:
0445799&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agrobacterium tumefaciens is a soil bacterium that
can cause crown gall disease in plants. A. tumefaciens genetically transforms
plants by transferring its T-DNA into the plant cell nucleus and integrating
into the plant chromosome. Agrobacterium-mediated plant transformation is the
most common and preferred method to produce transgenic plants. In spite of
significant progress in Agrobacterium-mediated plant transformation techniques,
it is still not easy to genetically transform several important crops like corn
and soybean using A. tumefaciens. A better understanding of this unique inter-
kingdom DNA transfer between Agrobacterium and plants will help improve the crop
transformation efficiency and to prevent crown gall disease on economically
important fruit crops like grapes. The PI has proposed a novel genetic approach
to identify the plant genes that are involved during Agrobacterium-mediated
plant transformation. This approach uses a technique called virus-induced gene
silencing to transiently knockout or to reduce the expression of a plant gene.
This approach is very fast and robust compared to currently used approaches to
identify plant factors involved in Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. This
approach will not only identify novel plant genes involved in Agrobacterium-
mediated transformation but will also characterize the genes that have been
speculated to be involved in plant transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Results from the proposed research will help to improve the
transformation efficiency of plants that are currently recalcitrant to
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation and also to generate transgenic plants
that will be resistant to crown gall disease. This can produce a significant
economic impact on United States agriculture. The PI participates in established
programs that provide extended education to high school teachers and a large
summer intern program that promote enhanced learning and hands-on experience.
The Proposed project will contribute significantly to continuation and
enhancement of the se programs and also will provide training for one
postdoctoral fellow and two summer student interns in highly technical and
multidisciplinary approaches.&lt;br/&gt;