* 0445357
* The Impact of Nutrient Enrichment on the Cycling of Stream Dissolved Organic Matter
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* David McNabb, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2009
* USD 307,000.00

This research is designed to determine the effect of elevated nutrients on
microbial function and diversity in streams. The overall objective is to
evaluate the relationship between nutrient concentration and dissolved organic
matter (DOM) cycling through field-based experimentation on nutrient-rich and
nutrient-poor streams in watersheds of two major Mississippi River tributaries.
Microbial activity on DOM exposed to solar radiation will be used to assess the
ecological impact of nutrient concentration on ultraviolet light-mediated
reactions in stream water. Stable isotope tagged nutrients will be used to
determine their fate and participation in these reactions. Stable isotope tagged
organic substrates will be used in field enclosures to track their use by
microbes. These tagged compounds will be followed into microbial cell membrane
fatty acid markers that are indicative of different stream microorganisms. This
approach will provide a means to assess the stream microbial community, its role
in DOM cycling, and the extent to which it can be altered by nutrient
enrichment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nutrient enrichment, a common scenario
resulting from nitrogen deposition, fertilization, and other land use changes,
is the primary stressor in aquatic ecosystems. Dead zones occurring along
coastlines worldwide are the result of nutrient enrichment derived from
associated watersheds. Small streams are the primary location of nutrient
processing within watersheds, and represent the first places where terrestrial
nutrients enter the aquatic environment. Small streams also are heavily impacted
by current land use trends. Microbial processing of nutrients in streams is
governed by the availability of DOM. Changes in DOM composition resulting from
nutrient-enrichment may alter microbial communities, thereby influencing the
ability of streams to process watershed-deriveed nutrients. The proposed
research will involve the training of students at various levels in stable
isotope biogeochemistry and ecosystem science at an institution underrepresented
in the research community, and serving a diverse population of students from
largely rural backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;