* 0445666
* Conceptual Data Integration for the VirtualPlant
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2005,11/30/2011
* Rodrigo Gutierrez, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2011
* USD 2,198,682.00

New York University is granted an award to develop new informatics,
visualization, math and statistic tools to enable dynamic modeling and
visualization of molecular networks in cells. These tools will be integrated in
a common platform so as to understand how internal and external perturbations
affect processes, pathways &amp; networks controlling plant growth and
development. Succeeding in this endeavor will allow researchers (1) to explain
mechanistically how molecular network changes occur to evoke responses and (2)
to predict molecular network states under untested conditions or after
modifications. Predictive models are useful for developing strategies that
intervene in molecular networks for practical applications. The project has four
major goals: (1) Integration: to integrate known relationships among genes,
proteins and molecules (extracted from public databases, the published
literature and generated with predictive algorithms) with experimental
measurements (e.g. mRNA measurements). (2) Visualization: to develop novel
visualization techniques that will render the multivariate information in visual
formats that facilitate extraction of biological concepts. (3) Synthesis: to
integrate mathematical and statistical methods with the novel visualization
techniques to help summarize the data and test hypothesis. (4) Predictions: to
develop algorithms to make predictions of the molecular network state under
untested conditions. These approaches will be combined in a system called
"VirtualPlant" which may become an essential toolbox for Systems Biological
analysis of genomic data and provide a framework for the analysis of future
high-throughput data.