* 0445643
* CAREER: New Experiments for Studying Protein Dynamics by Solution-state NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Nikolai Skrynnikov, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2010
* USD 668,324.00

The objective of this CAREER project is to develop new NMR relaxation methods to
obtain new information on protein dynamics in solution. Ultimately, these
studies will help to elucidate the all-important relationship between protein
dynamics and biological function. A number of fields, such as protein
engineering and computer modeling of proteins, stand to benefit from new
insights into protein motions. Microsecond-millisecond time-scale dynamics will
be investigated using protein samples doped with Ln3+ ions. This approach will
increase the number of spins reporting on local motions and, more importantly,
permit direct structural characterization of transient conformational species
which are critical for biological function of many proteins. Microsecond-
millisecond time-scale dynamics will be probed by application of rf fields with
new amplitude (or phase) patterns. This technique will improve the sampling of
motion and offer several technical advantages (e.g. with regard to sample
heating and carrier offset effects). Picosecond-nanosecond time-scale dynamics
will be investigated by complementing the set of standard 15N relaxation
measurements targeting deuterated amide sites, 15N-2H. These experiments will be
particularly valuable for studying local dynamics on a ~1 nanosecond time scale
such as segmental motions in partially folded or unfolded proteins.

While the development of research tools is very important, it is equally
important to educate and train future researchers who will be applying these
tools. As a core part of this CAREER project, the PI will design and implement a
goal-oriented approach to teaching NMR spectroscopy. The goal will be to teach
students how to solve the structure of a small protein by means of solution-
state NMR. Each theoretical or experimental concept covered in the lecture
course will be introduced as a means to accomplish certain specific step toward
the final goal. The students will participate in a series of practical exercises
modeling a real-life structure determination study. The goal-oriented teaching
will be very useful for other advanced spectroscopy courses outside the realm of
NMR. A special effort will be made to meet the needs of students with diverse
educational, societal, and cultural backgrounds, in particular with regard to
underrepresented groups. Informal one-on-one counseling sessions will be
conducted in order to direct minority students toward an optimal learning
strategy. The PI will aggressively recruit more students from underrepresented
groups to his research group, both through classroom interaction and active
contacts with minority undergraduate institutions.