* 0445267
* Effects of Mulitple Species Invasions: Albizia Tree and Coqui Frog Colonization of Hawaii
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Rebecca Ostertag, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2009
* USD 300,000.00

Non-native species are considered invasive when they grow and spread rapidly in
their new location. A single species invasion may affect food webs (the
structural links of predators and prey) and ultimately the flow of energy and
cycling of nutrients from vegetation producers through animal consumers. When
multiple species invade an ecosystem, these effects may be magnified. On
isolated islands, such as the Hawaiian Islands where numerous species are both
unique and have limited geographic range, the probability of extinction in the
face of invasions is greatly increased. The recent introduction to Hawaii of
high-density populations of the Puerto Rican coqui tree frog is a special
opportunity to study the destabilizing potential of invasions and interactions
between invasive species. Actively expanding frog populations are layered onto
an older but yet ongoing invasion of a forest type dominated by an Asian tree,
albizia. Albizia dominated forest is replacing native Hawaiian ohia tree
dominated forest at low elevations. The frogs are small but achieve populations
up to 2 frogs per square yard in albizia forest. They represent insertion of a
new top predator that may exert control on forest arthropods, like insects,
spiders, millipedes, etc., that consume plants (herbivores), prey on each other,
and decompose leaf litter (detritivores). We will measure the effects of coqui
frogs on albizia-dominated and ohia-dominated forest types by comparing
arthropod communities, litter decomposition, and soil nutrients between these
two forest types at sites with and without frogs present. We expect to discover
the extent to and the means by which the albizia tree invasion and the coqui
frog invasion disrupts the food web of the lowland Hawaiian forest. We may also
discover aspects of the frog's invasive biology that could prove useful for
controlling this recognized pest species in Hawaii including possible regulation
of the albizia tree invasion. &lt;br/&gt;