* 0445728
* "Catch 222": Effects of Symmetry on Binding and Catalysis in R67 Dihydrofolate Reductase
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Elizabeth Howell, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/28/2009
* USD 510,990.00

Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) is an important enzyme in cellular metabolism.
One variant of the enzyme, R67 DHFR, which is found in some strains of the
bacterium Escherichia coli, is unrelated genetically and structurally to
chromosomal DHFR. R67 DHFR is a homotetramer; its structure resembles a doughnut
and the central hole describes the (single) active site. This enzyme possesses
exact 222 symmetry, requiring that each binding site must have 3 symmetry
related sites. Since two different ligands are used in the reaction, substrate
(dihydrofolate) and cofactor (NADPH), there must be an unusual approach towards
catalysis. For example, binding studies indicate only two molecules bind
concurrently; the combinations are two substrates or two cofactors or one
substrate plus one cofactor. Only the latter results in catalysis. Thus binding
of cofactor and substrate cannot be independently optimized. This is just one
example suggesting that R67 DHFR is a primitive enzyme. To probe how this simple
enzyme works, binding studies of substrate and cofactor analogs will monitor
important interactions in the ground state and temperature dependence studies of
catalysis will explore the transition state. In addition, the active site
symmetry will be broken using a quadruplicated gene construct. Several
asymmetric mutants have already been constructed, the next step is to "mix and
match" the mutations to allow independent manipulation of each half of the
active site pore. This should lead to favorable interactions with NADPH on one
side of the pore and complementary interactions with dihydrofolate on the other
and perhaps result in a more efficient enzyme.

The broader impacts of this research are diverse. The PI has an established a
strong track record in engaging undergraduates in research. Several
undergraduates, including underrepresented minority students, participate in R67
DHFR research each year. Some undergraduate students have been co-authors on
publications. In this project, graduate students, including a hearing-impaired
student, will receive rigorous training in various biochemical disciplines. In
addition, collaborations with computational biologist and a statistician provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary training of students. The programs that are
developed as a part of the collaboration will be available to others via
Internet.