* 0445606
* Function of the Thalamic Reticular Nucleus
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Karen Manning, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Cedric L. Williams
* 02/28/2009
* USD 420,000.00

Nearly all sensory information destined for conscious perception is processed
first in a central brain region called the thalamus before being sent to
cerebral cortex. Sensory signals are actively modified in the thalamus as a
function of behavioral state or events. Converging evidence suggests the
thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) is essential to this process; TRN receives
input from myriad brain regions, and TRN impacts directly the thalamic neurons
that pass the ascending sensory signals on to cortex. Modification of sensory
signals in the thalamus has been demonstrated in association with the sleep-wake
transition, but little is known about sensory modifications that occur within
the awake brain. To address the challenge of understanding the function of TRN
in the awake state, this project will determine sensory and non-sensory factors
that activate TRN neurons and the consequences of TRN activation on transmission
of visual information through the thalamic lateral geniculate nucleus.
Preliminary electrophysiological recording, in conjunction with behavioral
methods, suggests that TRN neurons have robust visual responses and significant
non-visual reward and/or attention-related responses. The project will
distinguish these and more fully define the role of TRN neurons in the awake,
behaving state. This research will advance significantly understanding of the
essential processes in the brain that underlie conscious perception of the
world. The project will also provide training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students within a program recognized nationally for its success in
recruiting and retaining underrepresented students in graduate training.