* 0445770
* RUI:  Investigation of Mechanism of Spermidine Action in Promotion of Neurite Outgrowth
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,10/31/2005
* Kristen Boeshore, Juniata College
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 10/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Investigation of mechanism of spermidine action in promotion of neurite
outgrowth

Regions of the peripheral nervous system are capable of extensive spontaneous
regeneration following injury. It has recently been found that synthesis of two
polyamines, putrescine and spermidine, increases following injury of the
superior cervical ganglion (SCG). Furthermore, spermidine has been shown to
promote outgrowth of neurites in the PC12 cell model of sympathetic neurons,
suggesting a possible involvement in the regenerative process. In the work
supported by this proposal, the molecular mechanisms that underlie the ability
of spermidine to promote outgrowth will be investigated. Specifically, the
ability of spermidine to alter the activation state of members of the Rho family
of GTPases will be examined; this family of proteins is involved in cell shape
changes. Since regeneration in the central nervous system (CNS) is inhibited, in
part, by myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), the ability of spermidine to
promote neurite outgrowth from PC12 cells grown on this normally inhibitory
substrate will be tested. Finally, the involvement of the Rho GTPases in the
spontaneous regeneration that occurs following injury of the SCG will be
investigated. The nerves exiting the SCG in adult male rats will be transected,
and the activation states of the Rho GTPases will subsequently be analyzed.
Together, these studies are intended to elucidate the molecular pathway by which
spermidine promotes neurite outgrowth in vitro (in the PC12 cells) as well as to
uncover a similar function during spontaneous regeneration of the adult rat SCG
in vivo.

The proposed work will provide educational opportunities for undergraduate
students, allowing them to participate in an active research environment beyond
the scope of typical classroom or laboratory instruction. Students will be able
to address questions within the realm of neurobiology while learning techniques
of cell and molecular biology. Such opportunities will further prepare students
for research careers and for graduate school.

