* 0445714
* Collaborative Research:   Multi-Tree:   A Digital Library of Language Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2009
* Helen Aristar-Dry, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2009
* USD 242,607.00

Genetic relationships among languages can provide considerable insight into the
culture, migrations, and contacts of human populations. However, it has so far
been difficult to find and compare hypotheses about genetic relationships, since
they exist only in scholarly books and papers, and can only be accessed
individually. The Multi-tree project will develop a digital library of scholarly
hypotheses about language relationships, one which is fully documented and
transparently traceable to the scholarly work upon which it is based. Hypotheses
about groups of related languages will be displayed graphically as familiar
diagrams of family trees, with each node opening to display additional
information on the language or subgrouping represented. Moreover, competing
hypotheses about the same language family will be displayed as two or more trees
aligned side by side for easy comparison. The Multi-Tree database will also be
integrated with the existing LINGUIST List databases, which house a wealth of
information about language and linguistics collected over a 15-year period of
building electronic infrastructure for the discipline. The Multi-Tree project
thus has considerable potential to contribute to research and education both
within the field of linguistics and in related scientific disciplines. The
project will provide accessible data and an overview of language classification
which can trigger new hypotheses. It will make relationships between lesser-
known languages better known, stimulating research on minority languages.
Finally, the online search facility will constitute a captivating instructional
tool, for use in K-12 through graduate education.

