* 0445583
* Intrinsic Bursting and Information Transmission by Visual Corticotectal Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Harvey Swadlow, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Kirk
* 06/30/2009
* USD 403,493.00

Award Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The sensory neocortex of the brain is essential for
sensation and perception, and this has led to an intense effort to understand
the functional properties of this tissue. Pyramidal cells comprise about 80% of
all neurons in the cortex, and a special type of pyramidal cell in layer-5 that
shows intrinsic bursts of activity is one of the most anatomically and
physiologically distinctive of pyramidal sub-populations. These neurons have
especially thick apical dendrites and they project descending axons that branch
to innervate multiple subcortical areas of the brain. The superior colliculus is
one of the subcortical structures innervated by these bursting pyramidal neurons
and is responsive to visual stimulation. Such "corticotectal" pyramidal neurons
are known to strongly influence the response properties of neurons in the
superior colliculus, but the mechanism of this influence is still unknown. It is
not known, for example, whether receptive field properties are conveyed to
superior colliculus neurons directly by corticotectal input, or whether the
corticotectal influence modulates other input to the neurons of the superior
colliculus. This proposal focuses on the means by which corticotectal neurons
influence their targets in the superior colliculus in awake rabbits, and how EEG
state (alert vs. drowsy state) may affect corticotectal communication. First,
Dr. Swadlow will gain a comprehensive, global view of the synaptic impact of
single corticotectal neurons on the superior colliculus, and the dynamics of
this impact. He will do this by electrophysiological examination of monosynaptic
currents generated within the superior colliculus by the impulses (bursts and
single spikes) of single corticotectal neurons. Next, Dr. Swadlow will gain a
local view of the synaptic impact of single corticotectal neurons on members of
specific neural sub-populations within the superior colliculus, and the dynamics
of this impact. To do this, he will obtain simultaneous extracellular
electrophysiological recordings from corticotectal neurons and from specific
sub-populations within the superior colliculus, and apply cross-correlation
methods to infer synaptic connectivity. In addition, Dr. Swadlow will record
intracellularly from corticotectal neurons and examine the sub-threshold sensory
events related to bursting behavior. The proposed studies will provide important
insights into both the manner in which sensory cortical information is processed
in an awake, perceiving subject and how cortical neurons communicate with and
influence neurons in distant regions of the brain. Such information is crucial
if we are to understand the mechanisms of perception in awake, perceiving
mammals. The proposed studies will also further the training of future
neurobiologists through involvement of undergraduate students in the PI's
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;