* 0445631
* Analysis of Quiescent and Non-quiescent Cells in Stationary-phase Yeast Cultures
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Margaret Werner-Washburne, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* LaJoyce Debro
* 06/30/2008
* USD 125,213.00

The long-term goal of this research is to understand how yeast cells enter,
survive in, and exit the quiescent state and, eventually, to use this
information to understand this process in other organisms. Quiescence or G0 is
the most common state of cells on earth and was surely one of the first states
in the evolution of living cells. Paradoxically, this fundamentally important
process has not been well studied, but the advent of genomics and the
development of ancillary technologies have recently enabled significant progress
in understanding this state. Leading up to the current project, this research
group has studied the changes in gene expression as cells in stationary-phase
cultures re-enter the mitotic cell cycle. They identified over 30 new genes
required for long-term survival of cells in stationary-phase cultures. They
recently developed a method that allows separation of quiescent and non-
quiescent cells in stationary-phase cultures and developed a rapid sampler that
allows them to reproducibly harvest cells in culture for genomic analysis at
intervals as short as 10s.

The group will now characterize quiescent and non-quiescent yeast cells from
stationary-phase yeast cultures. GFP constructs and electron microscopy will be
used to detect morphological differences between cell types. Various biochemical
and genomic analyses will be carried out on both cell types as a function of
time in culture. The non-quiescent cells will be evaluated using several assays
to determine the percentage of cells that exhibit apoptotic or senescent
characteristics. As necessary, modified separation methods will be used to
increase the purity of populations from the non-quiescent-cell fraction. The
intellectual merit of the work comes from the novel insight provided by being
able to study, for the first time, pure populations of quiescent and non-
quiescent cells and through the identification of genes and pathways critical
for the differentiation of these cell types. This work has broad relevance,
since, based on previous work with yeast, these differentiation processes are
likely to be conserved in other microbes and eukaryotic organisms. The broader
impacts of this work are in the involvement of students and faculty from
underrepresented groups, the breadth of collaborations between biologists,
statisticians and engineers, the commitment to the free distribution of newly
developed technology, and sharing genomic reagents.