* 0445684
* Regulation of Sperm Development in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Harold Smith, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2009
* USD 390,000.00

Summary Complex metazoans contain an incredible variety of cell types. Such
variety reflects the specialized roles performed by different cells: the
transport of oxygen by red blood cells, the generation of force by muscle cells,
the transmission of electrical impulses by neurons. How does a single cell, the
fertilized egg, give rise to such remarkable diversity? In large part, cellular
differentiation is determined by the expression of cell-type-specific genes.
Expression is restricted both spatially and temporally, with groups of genes
required for a particular step or process induced in tissue and stage-specific
patterns. The expression patterns are governed by the activity of transcription
factors that typically function in a regulatory cascade. The goal of the
proposed research is to understand the developmental program that governs sperm
cell differentiation in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. This model system
provides the opportunity to combine cytological and genetic studies with genome-
wide analyses to understand the complex process of cellular differentiation at
the molecular level. DNA microarray screens of nearly the complete genome have
identified 1,343 genes that are induced during sperm production. Those
spermenriched genes make the cell uniquely suited to its role and thus are the
focus of further analysis. The proposed experiments are designed to divide those
genes into groups on the basis of expression patterns, and to identify the
different stages of sperm development at which those groups function. The
strategy is to identify transcription factors that regulate expression of sperm-
enriched genes; to isolate mutations in those transcription factors; and to
characterize the defects in fertility, sperm cell development, and gene
expression that result from those mutations.

The broader impact of this research is to provide insights into the fundamental
mechanisms of cellular development. The assignment of functional roles to
previously uncharacterized genes will suggest roles and avenues of investigation
for homologs in other organisms. In addition, the proposed research will provide
critical student training in the laboratory. The experiments are modular by
design, and thus appropriate for undergraduate research projects (encompassing a
single experiment) while remaining sufficiently comprehensive, when combined,
for graduate/postdoctoral research projects.