* 0445365
* Connectivity and Development of the Drosophila Larval Visual System
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Volker Hartenstein, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* James Deshler
* 01/31/2009
* USD 500,132.00

The visual system of the fruitfly Drosophila has proven to be an excellent model
to identify conserved genes that control how the visual system of an animal is
formed. Much has been discovered about the photoreceptors and the structure of
the Drosophila eye. In contrast, the central (brain) neurons that process visual
information have received less attention. This grant will allow the Hartenstein
lab to investigate the structure and development of the simple central visual
neuropile (the circuit, made by axons, dendrites and synapses) of the Drosophila
larval brain. Experiments in aim #1 (anatomical circuitry) will address the
pattern of neuronal connections in the visual neuropile and map the neurons that
send axons from the brain to the ventral nerve cord. Aim 2 (function) addresses
how larval behavior is influenced by light stimuli. A functional assay (head
turning away from a local light source) will be used to analyze quantitatively
the effect of directed light on movement. Aim 3 (development) is based on
previous findings indicating that many elements of the central visual system are
derived from the same embryonic field that also gives rise to the eye. This eye
field expresses a network of early eye genes (called eyeless, eyes absent, sine
oculis, and dachshund) whose function is well established for the eye. Dr
Hartenstein and his colleagues will investigate the expression and function of
the early eye genes in the developing central visual system. Aim 4 (gene
discovery) will use a novel "gene trap" method to screen for genes that are
expressed only in the visual neuropile. The neurons expressing these genes will
be characterized. A long-term goal of the research is the characterization of
genes that are preferentially expressed in the visual neuropile.

Broader Impact: Genetic screens and phenotypic analyses in Drosophila have
revealed many aspects of developmental neurobiology. The findings resulting from
this research are likely to provide insight into a highly conserved gene
network, the early eye genes, that plays multiple roles in vertebrate
development.

At the same time, this research program serves as a vehicle for undergraduate
teaching. The PI is responsible for a large undergraduate class, Developmental
Biology, taken yearly by 150-200 UCLA undergraduates. Many undergraduates
(between 6 and 10 per year) rotate through the lab and conduct short (1-3
quarters) research projects. These students are teamed up with postdocs or
graduate students and gain practical research experience. The preliminary work
leading to several of the proposed aims was conducted together with
undergraduate students. Among the undergraduates is a sizeable number of
minority students. UCLA has a special program (CARE) that awards short term
fellowships for minority students to conduct research. The PI's lab currently
hosts one CARE student, Luis Garcia, who visualized the photoreceptor terminals
in the larval optic neuropile (aim #1).

