* 0445211
* Documenting  Floristic  Diversity  in  a Threatened Biodiversity Hot Spot: San Diego County, California (Phase 1)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Mary Ann Hawke, San Diego Society of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2008
* USD 304,049.00

San Diego County is an internationally-recognized "hotspot" of
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;It's climatic, geographic, and geologic features support
the greatest&lt;br/&gt;floristic diversity of any county in the contiguous U.S.,
making it more&lt;br/&gt;diverse than some entire states. This diversity is
threatened by rapid&lt;br/&gt;urbanization and associated habitat loss. Recent
wildfires burned almost 25%&lt;br/&gt;of the county, underscoring the urgency
and significance of collecting and&lt;br/&gt;preserving plant specimens to
document this remarkable floristic diversity&lt;br/&gt;before it is lost. The
pace of regional development has left land managers&lt;br/&gt;with limited
scientific data on local flora, along with mounting&lt;br/&gt;responsibilities
for stewardship and informed decision-making. Crucial&lt;br/&gt;decisions made
here affect the future of national biodiversity and they must&lt;br/&gt;be made
with the most comprehensive, scientifically sound,
information&lt;br/&gt;possible. The San Diego County Plant Atlas (Plant Atlas)
will address these&lt;br/&gt;needs by scientifically documenting the county's
floristic diversity through&lt;br/&gt;the collection of voucher plant specimens
for the San Diego Natural History&lt;br/&gt;Museum (SDNHM); the independent non-
profit organization overseeing the&lt;br/&gt;project. Voucher specimens (dried
and pressed plants, mounted on archival&lt;br/&gt;paper with a data label, and
filed in the herbarium) are the raw materials&lt;br/&gt;for various scientific
disciplines. The associated data (including&lt;br/&gt;geographic coordinates
plus detailed taxonomic and ecological information)&lt;br/&gt;are stored in a
web-accessible, searchable electronic database. This creates&lt;br/&gt;a
comprehensive, centralized source of botanical information for the
county&lt;br/&gt;and includes both historic and new data that are based upon
actual specimens&lt;br/&gt;rather than observations that can no longer be
verified. Specimen and data&lt;br/&gt;collections are made and submitted by
"parabotanists"; volunteers from the&lt;br/&gt;community trained by a novel
program developed and taught by the SDNHM staff&lt;br/&gt;(but identification of
all specimens is verified by a professional&lt;br/&gt;botanist). This creates
sufficient workforce to collect specimens over a&lt;br/&gt;5-year period within
an organized, county-wide grid system that complements&lt;br/&gt;the county-wide
bird and mammal atlas projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collections will be
maintained by the SDNHM for education, informed land&lt;br/&gt;management and
decision-making, and to support scientific research on&lt;br/&gt;biodiversity,
phytogeographic history, biogeography, taxonomy, anatomy,&lt;br/&gt;morphology,
reproductive biology, and genetics. Besides acting as a model&lt;br/&gt;program
for other regions, the training and publicity from the
novel&lt;br/&gt;parabotanist program increases the community's awareness and
respect for&lt;br/&gt;local natural history (and the national, if not global
significance of the&lt;br/&gt;local flora), and strengthens their role as
stakeholders, stewards, and&lt;br/&gt;participants in regional botanical
science. This collaborative project has&lt;br/&gt;the support and participation
of state and local government, NGO's, the&lt;br/&gt;private sector, academia,
and both professional and lay individuals.&lt;br/&gt;Educational links with
garden clubs, conservation groups, and other&lt;br/&gt;institutions like schools
and universities are being developed. San Diego&lt;br/&gt;County contains a rich
heritage of botanical diversity and we have an&lt;br/&gt;obligation to better
understand and preserve it for ourselves and for future&lt;br/&gt;generations.
The Plant Atlas project will increase our knowledge of the&lt;br/&gt;diversity
and distribution of plants in the county, share that knowledge&lt;br/&gt;with
specialized and public audiences, and contribute to
conservation,&lt;br/&gt;education, science and sound land management.
&lt;br/&gt;