* 0446929
* Statistical Learning of Linguistic Structure
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Robert Frank, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2009
* USD 305,956.00

It is a commonplace observation that children, in contrast to non-human primates
or sophisticated computers, are able to learn a language in what seems to be an
effortless fashion. Yet, the basis of this ability remains a point of
contentious debate. Some theorists emphasize the importance of nature, focusing
on the exquisitely abstract and subtle generalizations that form part of a
child's linguistic knowledge. Others stress the importance of nurture,
highlighting the remarkable ability of child language learners to detect and
exploit subtle statistical properties of the language input they receive. While
there is no incompatibility between these two perspectives on language learning,
there has to date been little systematic investigation of the relative
contributions of nature and nurture in an empirically rich domain. With support
from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Robert Frank, William Badecker, and
Donald Mathis will explore this middle ground, focusing on a diverse and
crosslinguistically variable set of phenomena in the domain of sentence
structure (syntax). This research project will use computational simulations of
artificial neural networks to probe the precise character of the generalizations
that emerge when statistical learning is applied to such complex syntactic data.
These generalizations will be compared to patterns of human linguistic behavior
via a parallel set of psycholinguistic studies, allowing the identification of
contexts in which human linguistic knowledge is a close reflection of
statistically-induced patterns and contexts in which it bears the stamp of a
learner's innate nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project include an understanding of factors that might distinguish between the
processes normal and abnormal language development and point to possible lines
of intervention, as well as a potential characterization of certain types of
language breakdown. The interdisciplinary character of this work, encompassing
ideas from linguistics, psycholinguistics, and computer science, will enhance
the integration of research and education both through the unique research
opportunities the project will provide for undergraduate and graduate students
as well as through the development of innovative courses on the mental structure
of language that will incorporate a laboratory component to be made publicly
available on the web.&lt;br/&gt;