* 0446339
* Roles of clock genes in modulation of Drosophila oogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Jadwiga Giebultowicz, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 01/31/2009
* USD 476,345.00

A. PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Circadian clocks are important
coordinators of physiological and behavioral rhythms. Drosophila melanogaster
serves as an excellent model for investigating clock mechanisms, however little
is known about the functional significance of clock genes in the fly physiology.
The group led by Dr. Giebultowicz demonstrated that peripheral circadian clocks
play multiple roles in reproductive physiology. Recent research revealed that
two essential clock genes, period and timeless, are involved in the regulation
of female fecundity. Surprisingly, these genes seem to act not as components of
the circadian clock but as part of a homeostatic mechanism. An integrated
physiological and molecular approach is proposed to investigate this novel
fitness-related phenotype. Preliminary data led to a hypothesis that proteins
encoded by period and timeless are part of the signaling pathway that modulates
the rate of egg production. This hypothesis will be tested in an experimental
program divided into four objectives. (1) Several aspects of reproductive
physiology will be compared between mutant and wild-type females, to determine
if mutant females have altered endocrine functions or other physiological
parameters that may account for their failure to increase oogenesis in response
to protein-rich diet. (2) A genetic approach will be used to determine whether
increased fecundity of flies on high-protein diet is dependent on the function
of period and timeless genes in the ovary, or in other organs such as the
nervous system. (3) Expression of period and timeless will be investigated at
the mRNA and protein level to determine whether it is affected by female age and
nutritional status. (4) Biochemical tools will be used to elucidate the role of
period and timeless in female fecundity. Accomplishment of these objectives will
be aided by the wealth of genetic information and the ease of molecular
manipulations in Drosophila, which make it an ideal system for the dissection of
multi-component nutrient-fecundity pathway. The results of these studies will
help to understand the functional significance of phylogenetically conserved
clock genes in a genetic pathway regulating fecundity. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact. Scientific program outlined here will facilitate partnerships between
several faculty members, graduate, and undergraduate students. The proposed
research will provide ample opportunities for training students; participants
from groups underrepresented in science will be actively recruited to the
program. The combination of physiological, molecular and genetic experiments
will allow students to gain experience in the interdisciplinary approach to
research. Students will be mentored with respect to their academic goals and
encouraged to consider career in science. Dr. Giebultowicz has an excellent
record of engaging undergraduate female students in her research and helping
them to choose science as a career. The PI also integrate research activities
into the teaching of science in area schools. She is a co-PI in the NSF-funded
K-12 Rural Science Education Program at OSU, mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students who help to teach science in selected rural schools in Oregon.
She also participate in "Adventures in Learning" program for middle school
girls, inviting students to the lab to conduct small experiment, offering hands-
on approach to science. Research results obtained with NSF funds will be
published in peer-reviewed journals, and research highlights will be posted on
the laboratory web-site in a format accessible to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;