* 0446836
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Neurolinguistic Investigation of Second Language Acquisition:  Effects of Explicit and Implicit Learning Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Michael Ullman, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Vincent R. Brown
* 04/30/2008
* USD 12,000.00

Is it possible for adults to learn a second language as well as a native
speaker? Can they learn both vocabulary and grammar equally well? How does the
way adults learn second languages differ from how children learn language? Do
adults learn second languages differently in different situations, such as in a
classroom or a foreign country? Previous research from cognitive neuroscience
(that is, the integration of neuroscience and cognitive psychology) suggests
that adults learn second language differently than children, but that adults may
be capable of achieving high levels of proficiency with sufficient practice.
Research by applied linguists has established that the learning situation can
affect at least how quickly an adult is able to learn a second
language.&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr.
Michael Ullman and Kara Morgan-Short, M.A.T., will use some innovative methods
drawing from these two related fields of research in order to further explore
such phenomena. The project will examine which brain systems are involved when
adults learn second languages, if these brain systems are similar to or
different from the brain systems that children use, and if they are affected by
explicit or implicit learning situations (that is, taught directly or picked up
unconsciously). The research has broad impacts, including implications for
second language teaching. The research is expected to benefit government,
academic, and private institutions that are concerned with successfully training
adults to become highly proficient in a second language, a vital need given
today's international socio-political situation. This project will take place in
the context of Ms. Morgan-Short's dissertation studies and will provide
interdisciplinary educational opportunities for students who participate in
conducting research. &lt;br/&gt;