* 0446191
* Developmental Evolution of Fertilization Biology In Ancient Angiosperm Lineages
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2010
* William Friedman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2010
* USD 519,585.00

&lt;br/&gt;1&lt;br/&gt;Award Abstract and Statement of Broader Impacts of
Planned Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After a long period of empirical and
intellectual stagnation, many of the century-old paradigms about
the&lt;br/&gt;initial phases of the diversification of angiosperms are in the
midst of being rewritten. It is now evident&lt;br/&gt;that the earliest phases
of angiosperm evolution may have been characterized by a very high degree
of&lt;br/&gt;developmental experimentation and structural lability. In contrast
to concerted efforts to study the&lt;br/&gt;evolution of floral morphology,
vegetative anatomy and ecophysiology among ancient
angiosperm&lt;br/&gt;lineages, little attention has been paid to reconstructing
the early diversification of embryological features&lt;br/&gt;among flowering
plants. It is the explicit goal of the planned research to study the basic and
highly&lt;br/&gt;interrelated processes of female gametophyte development,
double fertilization, and endosperm formation&lt;br/&gt;from an evolutionary
developmental perspective in a set of species specifically chosen to represent
the&lt;br/&gt;breadth of diversity among basal clades of flowering
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following four interrelated questions will be
addressed: 1) Did the earliest flowering plants possess a&lt;br/&gt;process of
double fertilization, and have some ancient angiosperm lineages lost this
process? 2) What was&lt;br/&gt;the developmental pattern and mature structure of
the ancestral angiosperm female gametophyte? 3) Are&lt;br/&gt;there additional
and previously undocumented developmental patterns and mature structures of
female&lt;br/&gt;gametophytes among basal angiosperm lineages? 4) How has ploidy
and genetic constitution (e.g. the&lt;br/&gt;maternal to paternal genomic ratio)
of early angiosperm endosperm evolved? Beyond establishing&lt;br/&gt;general
developmental principles that can explain the diversification of female
gametophyte structure and&lt;br/&gt;endosperm genetic structure and ploidy, the
planned research will make a significant contribution to&lt;br/&gt;understanding
more general aspects of the tempo and mode of character evolution during the
earliest&lt;br/&gt;phases of the evolutionary diversification of flowering
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will contribute significantly
to the development of human resources in the&lt;br/&gt;sciences. Members of the
Friedman lab (undergraduates, graduate students, postdoctorals,
technicians)&lt;br/&gt;have the opportunity to grapple with some of the most
basic and longstanding questions in evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;biology, and to
develop independent intellectual skills. All members of the lab are charged
with&lt;br/&gt;significant scientific responsibility. One Ph.D. student, Eric
Madrid, is a member of an underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;group in the sciences
(Hispanic). He will be directly supported by the proposed research grant. Eric
is&lt;br/&gt;committed to outreach efforts to improve the level of participation
of minorities in the sciences and&lt;br/&gt;already has had a major impact in
serving as a role model for other members of underrepresented
groups&lt;br/&gt;in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, most of the
members of the Friedman lab are women and aspire to careers in the life
sciences&lt;br/&gt;as educators and/or practicing scientists. One technician,
Kirsten Ryerson, who will be supported by the&lt;br/&gt;proposed research grant,
plans to enter a career in public school science education. She will
begin&lt;br/&gt;working towards a teaching certificate for the state of Colorado
next fall. Her direct engagement in&lt;br/&gt;research in the Friedman lab
should directly benefit her future biology students. Another technician
who&lt;br/&gt;will be supported by the planned research grant, Amanda Redford,
is keen to pursue research&lt;br/&gt;opportunities that will lead to graduate
study. Finally, through the REU program, undergraduates will
be&lt;br/&gt;supported to gain first hand research experience in the laboratory
of the PI, William Friedman. In&lt;br/&gt;essence, while the vast majority of
funds associated with this proposal will go to support the solution
of&lt;br/&gt;basic and longstanding scientific questions, these funds will play
a critical role in supporting the&lt;br/&gt;development of members of the next
generation of life scientists and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, it is
anticipated, that the basic findings derived from the planned research will, as
has been the&lt;br/&gt;case in the past, be covered in college level textbooks.
Thus, the research should have an impact on&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate
curriculum development throughout the U.S.