* 0446567
* Contingent Self-worth and Learning Goals
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Jennifer Crocker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 03/31/2009
* USD 375,586.00

College students experience pressure to obtain academic credentials to gain
entry to graduate and professional programs. Ironically, these pressures are
most intense among the most talented students, who are likely to attend the most
selective and competitive colleges and universities, and have high aspirations.
This pressure to succeed creates stress and consequent dysregulation of the
stress hormone cortisol, which in turn contributes to both physical and mental
illness, such as respiratory illness and depression. The pursuit of academic
success can paradoxically interfere with learning, especially in challenging
contexts. Many students focus not on acquiring knowledge and learning skills but
on obtaining high grades with the minimum work possible. Cheating, which
prioritizes grades over learning, is commonplace: In a survey of 1800 college
students from state universities, 70% admitted cheating at least once during
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to the self-worth theory of achievement
motivation (Covington, 1992), achievement behavior in schools reflects students'
attempts to maintain self-esteem by constructing an image of themselves as
academically competent. For students whose self-worth is contingent on academic
success, investing effort in academics is threatening because failure combined
with effort suggests a lack of ability, which diminishes self-worth.
Consequently, academically contingent students sacrifice learning and avoid the
esteem-threatening implications of failure, by lowering aspirations, creating
excuses for failure, avoiding effort, cheating, or psychologically disengaging.
The main goal of the project is to investigate whether and when learning
orientations (beliefs that intelligence can improve, mastery goals, and double-
loop learning goals, i.e., the goal of learning from failure by examining
assumptions and strategies) buffer students with contingent self-worth from
self-threat in the face of academic difficulty. We hypothesize that learning
orientations enhance learning, decreasing stress, vulnerability of self-esteem,
and cheating, and improve mental and physical health outcomes, especially for
populations at risk (e.g., women in nontraditional fields such as engineering).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of laboratory experiments, longitudinal studies,
and an intervention study test the hypotheses that 1) students who base their
self-worth on academics experience stress in the face of difficult tasks; 2) the
belief that intelligence can be improved buffers contingent self-esteem from
failure in the absence of practice but not with practice; and 3) double-loop
learning goals protect self-esteem, increase learning, and decreases stress and
cheating among students with contingent self-worth facing difficulty, better
than measured single-loop learning goals or incremental theories. An
intervention experiment implements training in double-loop learning goals to see
if it decreases negative outcomes (stress, poor performance, physical symptoms,
symptoms of depression), in students with contingent self-worth, especially
among women in engineering, who are at risk of dropping out of their major,
relative to a control group.&lt;br/&gt;