* 0446325
* Molecular Phylogeny of Stingless Bees: A Framework For Historical Biogeography and Behavior
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Sydney Cameron, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2009
* USD 302,198.00

The highly social bees represent a peak in the evolution of social living and
sophisticated communication systems. Such bees are represented predominantly by
the honey bees (Apini) and the stingless bees (Meliponini). The primary aim of
this project is to reconstruct a well supported tree of phylogenetic
relationships of the stingless bees on a world scale so as to ultimately
decipher the origins and development of one of the most fascinating
communication systems known among animals: the dance language of the honey bee.
The dance of a returning forager laden with nectar and pollen encodes for other
colony members the position of the most rewarding flowers outside the nest.
Unfortunately, because all species of honey bees living today possess a dance
language and are the only social insects to have acquired this extraordinary
communication system, they cannot be studied directly for insights into how the
dance language evolved. One must instead turn to their near relatives, the
stingless bees, for insights. Indeed, stingless bees possess exceptionally
diverse mechanisms of forager communication among colony mates, which can be
studied to elucidate possible evolutionary pathways that may have led to the
dance. Interpreting this pathway requires knowledge of the evolutionary history
of the diverse genera and subgenera that make up the stingless bees. For this
project, the phylogeny of approximately 50 subgenera representing 225 species
will be reconstructed from DNA sequences of five gene fragments that have been
shown by preliminary research to be excellent for resolving relationships of
stingless bees. The five genes include a mitochondrial gene (16S rRNA) and four
nuclear genes (EF-1alpha, opsin, arginine kinase and wingless). A large number
of species have been collected for sequencing and remaining groups will be
collected during the course of the project, primarily from Latin America and New
Guinea. Standard procedures for DNA sequencing will be used and preliminary
computer analyses of pilot molecular data indicate these five genes will yield a
well supported phylogeny.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To understand the stunning
communication system of the honey bee, we must probe into the workings and
mechanisms of close relatives, the stingless bees, for evolutionary clues. This
requires a phylogeny of the stingless bees, which will be developed during the
course of this research project. Ongoing research by laboratories around the
world on recruitment communication systems will be advanced in light of this
well supported phylogeny. This evolutionary framework promises insights into
convergent pathways and historical constraints in the development of precise
language, and a rare opportunity to reveal the interplay between history and
adaptation in the evolution of such language. The training and educational
components of the project will provide a PhD student with state-of-the-art tools
and experience for establishing a career in the field of systematics and
tropical insect biodiversity. An undergraduate from an underprivileged
background will have the opportunity to undertake independent research that has
the potential to lead to a stimulating career in biology. This research will
contribute to an understanding of the biodiversity of one of the world's most
important pollinators in tropical rain forests. Many species of stingless bees
remain to be discovered, named and described. In developing countries, increased
knowledge of stingless bee diversity has the potential to stimulate new economic
development through growth of stingless bee honey production in rural
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;