* 0446861
* NSF Arizona AMS Laboratory: Research and Operational Support
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2006
* George Burr, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2006
* USD 659,286.00

0446861&lt;br/&gt;Jull&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide funding for
the continued operation of the NSF-Arizona Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS)
Facility. This facility utilizes two AMS instruments which are dedicated to the
study of cosmogenic isotopes and has operated at the University of Arizona since
1981. The laboratory focuses most of its effort on radiocarbon (14C)
measurements, with other studies on 10Be and 129I. The NSF-Arizona AMS Facility
enables scientists to date prehistoric materials to ~50 kyr before present and
to use radiocarbon as a chemical tracer to investigate the pathways carbon
follows in nature. Understanding these pathways illuminates a diversity of earth
processes in the oceans, on land, and in the atmosphere. NSF-Arizona AMS
Facility measurements allows researchers to study these processes over time, and
use the past as a benchmark for studying the present. For the last two
consecutive years the facility has produced over 6,000 radiocarbon measurements
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The time and resources of the NSF-Arizona AMS
Facility are evenly divided between service and research. These two activities
are complementary and both contribute to the intellectual merit and broader
impacts of the proposal. Research within the Facility expands its capabilities
for service to the greater scientific community, and conversely the service work
can benefit new research initiatives. The in-house research program emphasizes
the development of sample processing techniques for a variety of sample types.
Proposed research activities for the coming years include studies in
archaeology, meteoritics, radiocarbon calibration, forest fires, in situ 14C and
10Be, paleoclimate, oceanography and hydrology, as well as studies using 129I
and 26Al. The broader impacts of the proposal are manifest in the number and
diversity of scientists who use the facility, and by the number of students who
receive training here. Many of these students received hands-on training and the
bulk of student analyses were provided at no cost.&lt;br/&gt;