* 0446800
* Connectionist and Dynamic Systems Approaches to Development:  On the Cusp of a New Grand Theory or Still Too Distributed?
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2005
* John Spencer, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 09/30/2005
* USD 29,970.00

The study of child development has always been organized around "big issues" and
"grand" theoretical ideas. In this milieu, two new theoretical perspectives
emerged in the 1990's - dynamic systems theory and connectionist approaches to
development. According to both theories, children develop step-by-step; that is,
each change in the child's ability sets the stage for the next developments.
Importantly, this step-by-step process is not specified in advance by genes or
"maturation"; rather, development emerges as each child finds his/her own unique
pathway. This is natural because development is a product of many factors coming
together to produce behavioral change - brain changes, bodily changes,
environmental changes, etc. Although these two perspectives share many concepts,
they have been applied to very different phenomena. For instance, dynamic
systems theory has been used to explain changes in motor skills such as
reaching, crawling, and walking, while connectionism has been used to explain
the development of cognitive abilities such as language. As such, it is unclear
exactly how these approaches relate to one another. Dr. John Spencer has
organized a 3-day conference to bring together a set of core scholars affiliated
with each approach to determine whether these are two separate theories of
development or one grand theory. To sharpen this dialogue, speakers from a
related viewpoint - developmental systems theory - will also participate, as
will a second group of scholars with general expertise in developmental and
cognitive psychology. In addition, there will be a large group of graduate
students in attendance, funded in part by conference travel awards. An edited
book summarizing results of the conference will be published by Oxford
University Press. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference and published book are
likely to make a major contribution to the field of developmental psychology in
that they will clarify the relationship between two of the most promising new
theories in the field. More broadly, results of this conference are likely to
impact the well-being of children because grand theories of development shape
how people think about children. These theories influence national policy,
educational curricula, and parenting, forming a framework within which real
children learn and grow. Thus, debate and discussion about these two new
theoretical contenders - connectionism and dynamic systems theory - have the
potential for far-reaching influences.&lt;br/&gt;