* 0446763
* Design and Self-Assembly of Cluster-Based Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Abdessadek Lachgar, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 12/31/2008
* USD 421,000.00

The main goal of the proposed research is to prepare hybrid inorganic-organic
materials containing nanosize metal clusters with predictable structural and
physical/chemical properties. The work will test novel methodologies for the
preparation of cluster-based materials with specific dimensionality and
framework topology . The approach takes its roots in crystal-engineering
principles in which a series of specifically designed building units, an
octahedral metal cluster and a metal complex with preferred directional bonding
requirements are used to prepare extended frameworks through coordination bonds.
The dimensionality and properties of the extended frameworks obtained will
depend on i) the properties of the clusters and metal complexes used; ii) the
function and type of bridging ligands; and iii) the roles played by the shape,
function and charge of counterions. The work will ultimately lead to an
understanding of the chemical conditions that allow the preparation of cluster-
based materials with structural and physical properties that can be adjusted
either before or after obtaining the inorganic-organic polymers. The research
proposed will significantly advance our understanding of the relationship
between composition, bonding, and properties of materials allowing the
preparation of materials with specific properties by design.&lt;br/&gt;The work
will advance the field of solid-state materials chemistry, and will support the
education of young scientists participating in this important and exciting area
by serving as a vehicle to train young individuals in state-of-the-art research
methodologies and techniques to prepare them for research and development
careers. The project will advance research/inquiry based teaching and training
at all levels (undergraduates, graduate, and postdoctoral fellows) which is an
essential component of the research project described in this proposal. Students
at all levels of training will become experts in materials chemistry and physics
through direct research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for high-
technology has advanced exponentially in recent decades leading to high demand
for new materials with greatly improved properties offering both better
performance and new applications. Organic-inorganic hybrid materials with well-
defined structures controlled at the molecular scale represent a very important
class of materials both for their use as composites and because of their
potential use in a wide range of technologically advanced as well as more
conventional applications areas such as photonics and electronics, chemical and
biological sensors, energy storage, and catalysis requires better understanding
of the assembly of well defined chemical species into functional materials. The
objective of this work is to develop new hybrid materials based on nanosize
metal clusters, using a new methodology recently developed based on crystal
engineering principles. The materials will be prepared through the assembly of
molecular nanoobjects into well organized materials with desired physical and
chemical properties. The use of transition metal clusters as building blocks of
well organized hybrid materials is of special importance due to their nanosize,
electronic flexibility, magnetic and photophysical properties, and chemical
stability. The work will contribute significantly to training of students at all
levels (postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students) in cutting edge
techniques and methodologies in materials preparation and characterization,
preparing them for excellent research and development, and academic
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;