* 0446667
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grants:  Continuity Hypotheses Revisited:  English L2 Acquisition of Bulgarian Nominal Domain
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2005,05/31/2007
* Hyeson Park, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2007
* USD 11,936.00

With NSF support and under the direction of Stanley Dubinsky and Hyeson Park.
Ms. Mila Tasseva-Kurktchieva will investigate the second language (L2)
acquisition of the Bulgarian noun phrase by adult native speakers of English.
The goals of this research are: (i) to test a new variant of the dynamic
approach to the L2 acquisition of Bulgarian nominal structure, including the
timing and order of acquisition of gender and number agreement, possessives, and
definite determiners. The study will use a unique pool of subjects-US Peace
Corps volunteers exposed to the target language through both immersion and
classroom instruction. This research will be among a few studies to focus on the
very early stages of L2 acquisition-three to four weeks after subjects' first
exposure to the target language. Subjects will be tested before and after
exposure to (somewhat) formal grammar instruction in the classroom. Thus, the
study will utilize both naturally occurring data and data from a controlled
classroom environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study promises several important
results: (i) it adds to our knowledge of the cognitive processes involved in the
L2 acquisition of the grammatical structure; (ii) it will contribute to our
understanding of the acquisition and syntactic structure of Slavic languages;
(iii) where most L2 acquisition studies are concerned with the grammatical
properties gender and number, definiteness, or possessives in isolation, this
research will consider the acquisition of these properties in relations to one
another; and (iv) it will inform foreign language teaching practices and help to
answer long-standing questions regarding the role of input type (instructed
versus natural) in L2 acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;