* 0446371
* Naturally Occurring Constraints on Development in a Model Learning System
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2005,08/31/2010
* Stephen Rothstein, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 08/31/2010
* USD 544,001.00

Scientific Merit: The use of complex acoustic signals for communication is
widespread in animals. In songbirds, such vocal signals are called 'song' and
have an additional, intriguing aspect in that they are learned. How birds learn
and develop their songs is an important model used for studying the evolution,
ecology and neuro-physiological bases of learning in general. However, our
understanding of this model is limited because most studies of song learning in
birds have been based on laboratory experiments in which essentially all
ecological and social variables have been controlled or removed. Recently, it
has become increasingly evident that the complex social and ecological factors
songbirds experience in nature can affect the course of development and produce
a pattern different from that observed in the lab. Past studies of brown-headed
cowbirds demonstrate this point very clearly. In the lab, cowbirds follow a
developmental pathway that results in young males singing adult songs by the
time they are one year old, as is the case in many other songbirds. Field
studies, however, show that most cowbirds take two years to develop an adult
repertoire in the wild. It has been hypothesized that the extended song
development observed in cowbirds is due to the combined effects of two
constraints. The first occurs during a bird's hatching year and is a restricted,
or even complete lack of, exposure to local songs because adults are no longer
singing by the time many juveniles are old enough to be memorizing local songs.
The second is the apparent inability of young males to alter their song
repertoires during their first breeding season because of naturally elevated
levels of testosterone. The present project continues investigations into these
natural constraints on song development in male cowbirds and also, on the
development of female song preferences. The proposed research will make
significant contributions to understanding of the birdsong model, arguably the
pre-eminent model system for experimental studies of learning, by: 1) Maximizing
the utility of the birdsong model by determining the normal course of
development in nature and by identifying factors that have and continue to shape
evolution of song learning, 2) Elucidating the nature of sensitive periods,
which are an important characteristic of language acquisition, imprinting and
development of normal sensory function, 3) Determining whether high testosterone
levels are the proximate cause of the loss of behavioral plasticity during the
breeding season, 4) Exploring the developmental bases of female preferences for
variants of male song. The last objective is particularly important because
although it is generally accepted that one of the prime functions of song in
birds is attraction and sexual stimulation of females, little is known about the
ontogeny of female preferences even though bird song is a major model system for
studies of sexual selection.

Broader Impacts: The project will result in salaried training for graduate and
undergraduate students. In addition, the research will used to educate the
public about avian breeding biology, including cultural and genetic evolution.
Results will also be incorporated into a University of California outreach
program for elementary school students. Because the study species, the brown-
headed cowbird is involved in the decline of several other bird species and is
managed heavily in some regions of the US, the research may contribute to
management efforts for endangered species.