* 0446224
* MorphBank: Web Image Database Technology for Comparative Morphology and Biodiversity Research
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Gregory Riccardi, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2009
* USD 2,249,530.00

Florida State University is granted an award to enhance the MorphBank Image
database. Many biological disciplines rely for their data primarily on
observations of appropriately prepared specimens. A few examples include
comparative anatomy, histology, morphological phylogenetics, and taxonomic
research. The need for access to suitable specimens constitutes a significant
hurdle to rapid progress in these disciplines. However, in many cases data of
comparable quality can be generated from photographs of the specimens instead of
from the specimens themselves. The development of fast Internet connections and
the availability of low-cost high-quality digital imaging techniques is
currently revolutionizing research and teaching in these disciplines, and recent
years have seen a rapid proliferation of 2D- and 3D-image databases of
biological specimens on the web. MorphBank (www.morphbank.net), not to be
confused with MorphoBank, is a searchable web repository of images for
comparative morphology and biodiversity research, originally conceived by a
consortium of Swedish, Spanish and American systematic entomologists. It
currently contains about 6,000 images documenting morphological phylogenetics
analyses, newly described taxa, and voucher specimens tied to GenBank sequences.
MorphBank has been open to the user community for uploading of images since
early 2003 and works well as a searchable image archive. The next steps in the
development of specimen image databases focus on three projects, each
exemplifying one important use case for such databases: (1) large phylogenetics
projects; (2) remote annotation of natural history collections; and (3)
comparative histology projects. The interdisciplinary research team, which
includes biologists, computer scientists, a mathematician, and information
retrieval specialists, will develop general technology that can easily be
adapted to address the specific needs of each of these use cases, facilitating
the incorporation of additional use cases in the future. In particular, the team
will develop community annotation technology, making it possible for researchers
to link their observations to specific images, without compromising the original
image, and enabling their colleagues to search, process and comment on these
annotations. The team will also develop the MorphBank user interface including a
new image-handling client, develop networking technology to support database
functionality, substantially revise and refine the table structure, and
implement more sophisticated data filtering and backup technologies. Finally,
the team aims to build an international network of institutions supporting
MorphBank or MorphBank-compatible image databases and to spur the development of
international standards for biological image databases. The MorphBank project
provides ample opportunities for supporting educational and outreach activities
through its open access to biological images and associated information.