* 0446811
* The Science Education Resource Virtual Diversity Center
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,01/31/2006
* William McHenry, Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 01/31/2006
* USD 507,773.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In partnership with the Science.gov Alliance, the
principal investigator, Dr.&lt;br/&gt;William E. McHenry and the co-principal
investigator Dr. John S. Colonias propose to&lt;br/&gt;create a web-based
comprehensive one-stop science, technology, engineering,
and&lt;br/&gt;mathematics (STEM) educational resource tool the Science Education
Resource Virtual&lt;br/&gt;Diversity Center (SER Virtual Diversity Center). The
SER Virtual Diversity Center will&lt;br/&gt;feature: (1) STEM education programs
by category of federal support; (2) promising&lt;br/&gt;practices and lessons
learned from federal STEM education supporting agencies as well
as&lt;br/&gt;from the institutions they support; (3) STEM-based educational
resources for students and&lt;br/&gt;parents; and (4) a virtual electronic
campus designed to assist institutions in sharing&lt;br/&gt;STEM educational
courses and degree programs using the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Merit. The
SER Virtual Diversity Center will serve as the major STEM education
content&lt;br/&gt;portal for federal programs that target increasing
participation from women,&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minorities, and persons
with disabilities in the STEM workforce and&lt;br/&gt;eventually serve as a tool
for sharing information on all strategies designed to address&lt;br/&gt;the
nation's STEM workforce needs. The SER Virtual Diversity Center will
use&lt;br/&gt;technology-enabled processes to connect federal agencies with each
other and with higher&lt;br/&gt;education faculty and administrators; K-12
teachers, counselors, administrators; students&lt;br/&gt;and parents in order to
achieve dramatic improvement in efficiency for those involved
in&lt;br/&gt;increasing minority participation in STEM -- especially federal
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact. As outlined in the BEST Report, the
participation of American students in STEM&lt;br/&gt;fields must dramatically
increase if America is to remain competitive in a global economy.&lt;br/&gt;With
the American population becoming more diverse, students from groups that
are&lt;br/&gt;traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields must be encouraged
to participate.&lt;br/&gt;Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs),
Hispanic Serving Institutions&lt;br/&gt;(HSIs), and Tribal Colleges have a
record of unparalleled success with these students. The&lt;br/&gt;NSF's HRD
Programs, especially the Model Institutions for Excellence (MIE) and
alliance&lt;br/&gt;programs, are examples of the impact partnerships between the
federal government and&lt;br/&gt;minority-serving institutions can have on
increasing the capacity of those institutions&lt;br/&gt;for producing STEM
professionals. Purposively, the SER Virtual Diversity Center
will&lt;br/&gt;enable federal agency program officers to better access
information across agency lines,&lt;br/&gt;coordinate science education
initiatives, and connect agencies more directly with higher&lt;br/&gt;education
institutions and their faculty and school districts and their
teachers,&lt;br/&gt;counselors, students, and parents to create STEM knowledge-
based communities.&lt;br/&gt;The authors propose to create a one-stop SER
Virtual Diversity Center through which&lt;br/&gt;federal agency program officers
and others can view: (1) STEM education programs by&lt;br/&gt;category of
federal support; (2) promising practices and lessons learned from federal
STEM&lt;br/&gt;education supporting agencies as well as from the institutions
they support; (3)&lt;br/&gt;STEM-based educational resources for students and
parents; and (4) a virtual electronic&lt;br/&gt;campus designed to assist
institutions in sharing STEM educational courses and degree&lt;br/&gt;programs
using the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;