* 0446107
* Designing New Soluble Polymers to Facilitate Separations and Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* David Bergbreiter, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2009
* USD 558,000.00

The focus of this research is to show how the solubility properties of soluble
macromolecules can be controlled, modified and used to advantage in synthesis
and catalysis. Studies with spectroscopic probes will examine the subtle effects
of copolymer microstructure on polymer phase selective solubility, using
parallel syntheses to minimize effects of polydispersity and other variables
normally encountered in polymer synthesis. Further, the project will demonstrate
new ways to use covalent, ionic or environmental stimuli to control a soluble
polymer's phase selective solubility. Also, biphasic mixtures of phase
selectively soluble polymer supported reagents or catalysts will be used to
facilitate high dilution reactions. The project will lead to the syntheses of
new polymers with high solubility with high capacity that are designed for
synthesis and catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this renewal award, the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and
educational activities of Dr. David E. Bergbreiter in the Department of
Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University. Professor Bergbreiter will focus his work
on developing methods for preparation of new polymer supported catalysts and new
soluble polymer supports with useful phase selective properties. The advantages
of controlling polymer concentrations in specific phases under biphasic
conditions and how such effects can facilitate known catalytic or synthetic
reactions and their workup is the unifying theme of the project. Broader impacts
are strong in the area of training for both undergraduate and graduate students
and the work has significant implications for Green Chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;