* 0446389
* Digital Fish Library
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Cheryl Peach, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2011
* USD 2,465,063.00

The University of California at San Diego is awarded a grant to digitize a
representative sample of the Marine Vertebrates Collection (MVC) at the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography (SIO), among the largest and most comprehensive
collections of its kind in the world. It is a significant research resource for
many scientists and also holds great potential as an educational resource.
However, long-term maintenance of specimen integrity is often in conflict with
specimen usage (e.g., dissection) and transfer of specimens is costly and
involves potential risk to specimens. Moreover, accessibility to the MVC is
necessarily restricted, limiting the potential scope of educational uses.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is unique in its ability to non-invasively
acquire high-resolution 3- dimensional (3D) digital data from soft tissue
structures. Recent collaborative work between the UCSD Center for Functional MRI
(CFMRI) and researchers at SIO has shown that MRI can effectively be used to
non-invasively visualize and quantify the internal anatomy of fishes, and can
potentially increase the effectiveness of both the research and educational uses
of the MVC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this award Digital Fish Library (DFL) will
be developed that includes 1. Collection of high-resolution 3D MRI images of
specimens that cover the range of morphological diversity in fishes with special
emphasis on the strengths of the MVC; 2. Development of a public DFL web site
for data retrieval, visualization, and quantitative analysis of the MRI data
from the MVC, including integration of the data with extant databases and with
data collected from other methodologies; 3. Development, in collaboration with
the Birch Aquarium at Scripps (BAS), of the Digital Dissection Tool (DDT), an
educational program embedded within the DFL site. Aimed at high-school science
students, it uses the MRI data from the MVC and the image analysis tools within
the DFL, and is supplemented by educational modules on the basic scientific
areas involved in the DFL. This tool will be tested in the Academic Connections
Program (ACP), a college preparatory high school level curriculum run through
UCSD. Successful completion of this project will establish a digital library of
approximately 1000 MVC specimens available to researchers, students, and
educators on the internet for quantitative analysis, visualization, or
bioinformatics purposes. In addition, an educational tool will be produced that
is appropriate for high school students and above for learning about fish
anatomy, MRI, bioinformatics, and the application of digital image analysis
methods to marine biology. &lt;br/&gt;