* 0446536
* CAREER:Evolution of a vertebrate-specific plug-and-jack interaction
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Edward Schmidt, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2010
* USD 641,596.00

&lt;br/&gt;The C-terminal core of the TATA-binding protein, TBP, is one of
nature's most conserved protein domains; however the TBP N-terminal region
varies greatly among phyla. A novel domain arose at the pre-
vertebrate/vertebrate transition and has been conserved along all subsequent
lineages. The investigator hypothesizes that the N terminus functions as a
signaling port by which the basal transcription machinery receives specific
regulatory signals via protein:protein interactions, reminiscent of the diverse
task-specific 'plug-and-jack' communication connections on the back of
computers. Variation between N termini likely represents commitment to phylum-
specific gene-regulation. This project investigates co-evolution of the
vertebrate TBP N terminus with its interaction partners. The work will begin
with two-hybrid protein:protein interaction screens in representatives of
advanced (mouse) and primitive (hagfish) vertebrates. Putative interactors are
being confirmed first biochemically and then in live cells via co-transfection
assays. Various cell lines from different phyla, as well as mammalian cells
lacking the vertebrate N terminus, are being used to represent major variations
in metazoan TBP N termini. Lastly, functional evolution of the vertebrate N
terminus is being investigated by precisely replacing the N terminus protein-
coding region of the mouse tbp gene with those from hagfish (the lowest extant
vertebrate) or amphioxus (an advanced pre-vertebrate chordate). This project is
expected to provide a paradigm for co-evolution of protein:protein interactions.
The mammalian version of the vertebrate N terminus plays an important, yet only
partially understood, role in maintaining pregnancy. These studies on the pre-
vertebrate and early vertebrate functions of this domain, and of the molecular
evolutionary history of this domain along vertebrate lineages, will provide the
basic understanding to help the scientific community to understand such
phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project integrates advanced
research on evolution of the transcription machinery with hands-on research
experience for students at many levels. The underlying hypothesis is that the
vertebrate N terminus co-evolved with interactor proteins as 'plug-and-jack'
interactions, and that these diverged to assimilate novel functions during
vertebrate evolution. This provides an interesting and novel topic that is being
integrated into an advanced undergraduate course taught by the investigator.
Moreover, most of the experiments and approaches used in this study are
compatible with providing research training to relatively inexperienced
students. Therefore, the students in the class also participate on a small
aspect of this CAREER project each year. This serves both to demonstrate the
type of empirical investigation that underlies molecular evolutionary research,
and helps make the lecture materials more tangible. Despite the relative
technical simplicity of most aspects of this project, the hypotheses are novel
and important, the training value is high, and the scientific importance of the
evolutionary processes that will be investigated is great.&lt;br/&gt;