* 0446157
* Role of SCD1 in Plant Cytokinesis and Polarized Cell Expansion
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Sebastian Bednarek, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 06/30/2009
* USD 446,538.00

Cell growth and division are crucial for normal growth and development of
multicellular plants and animals. The long-term objective of this work is to
understand the molecular events and mechanisms involved in intracellular vesicle
trafficking that take place during plant cell division (cytokinesis) and plant
cell expansion. During cytokinesis, one or more exocytic secretory pathways are
polarized toward the plane of division - i.e., secretory vesicles move to the
division site -- resulting in the de novo formation of the cytokinetic organelle
known as the cell plate (a structure that is the precursor to the cell wall that
will eventually divide the two halves into separate cells). Similarly, plant
cell expansion is mediated through the delivery and fusion of secretory vesicles
carrying membrane and cell wall components to specific sites on the plasma
membrane, resulting in intercalation of new membrane and wall components to the
existing cell surface and thereby cell expansion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the
present time, relatively little is known about the organization of the exocytic
and endocytic pathways, their interaction with the cytoskeleton, and the
molecular machinery involved in these complex processes in plants. Dr. Bednarek
has recently demonstrated that, in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, a
plant-specific protein, SCD1, is critical for cell plate formation and polarized
cell expansion. SCD1 is a 130 kDa peripheral membrane protein containing an
N-terminal DENN domain (named for the human DENN protein which it resembles in
terms of amino acid sequence: Differentially Expressed in Normal and Neoplastic
cells) and eight C-terminal WD-40 repeats, which are commonly associated with
protein-protein interactions. Although the precise function of DENN domains is
not known, they have been identified in animal proteins that interact with Rabs
(small GTPases that regulate secretory vesicle trafficking) and other signaling
proteins including mitogen-activated protein kinases. Dr. Bednarek hypothesizes
that SCD1 may regulate vesicle trafficking and/or cytoskeletal dynamics during
cell division and expansion. This project has been designed to: 1) study the
localization and targeting of SCD1 within the plant endomembrane system; 2)
learn the identity of SCD1-associated endomembranes; and 3) identify
SCD1-interacting proteins required for polarized membrane trafficking in plants.
The project will use experimental approaches that integrate complementary
forward and reverse molecular genetic, cytological, and biochemical approaches.
The outcome of this project is expected to contribute significantly to both an
understanding of the function and organization of the plant secretory pathway
and its role in cell plate biogenesis and polarized cell expansion. Upon
completion of the project, it is expected that the function of SCD1 in plant
morphogenesis will be understood. These studies will also contribute to a
general understanding of the function of DENN-domain containing proteins in
membrane trafficking and signaling in other eukaryotic cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project will provide valuable
research training in modern cell biology for young scientists at the
undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate level. Graduate students and
postdoctoral research associates will also learn valuable teaching and mentoring
skills by assisting undergraduate classroom instruction and by supervising
undergraduate independent study projects related to the funded project. All
reagents and research tools generated by this project will be distributed to
other laboratories to assist in the further characterization of membrane
trafficking and cytoskeletal regulation of plant growth and development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;