* 0446218
* Solvent Structure and Function in Macromolecules
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* A. Alan Pinkerton, University of Toledo
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2010
* USD 890,017.00

Project: Hydrogen bonds and proton transfer lie at the heart of biochemistry.
Experimentally determined hydrogen and solvent positions and orientations are
intrinsic to understanding fine-scale biochemical interactions within and
between proteins. When studying the atomic structures of proteins, neutron
macromolecular crystallography (NMC) is unparalleled for determination of the
position of H atoms involved in enzyme catalysis and the role of the solvent
surrounding the molecule. For this study, a suite of proteins will be examined
at ambient and cryogenic temperatures with NMC and X-ray macromolecular
crystallography to experimentally determine the protonation state and position
of hydrogens within proteins, and the position and orientation of water
molecules in the surrounding solvent shell, with the goal of elucidating
enzymatic mechanisms and other unresolved functionalities of the proteins.
Neutron diffraction studies require the use of large, high-quality single
crystals. The proteins chosen (flap endonuclease 1, a-carbonic anhydrase V,
haloalkane dehalogenase, D-xylose isomerase, and equine hemoglobin) have well-
defined isolation, purification and crystallization protocols that have produced
large crystals, but still have unresolved mechanistic questionss. Most of the
proteins used in these studies will be produced from recombinant material in
deuterated expression facilities provided at Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(ORNL) and at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), respectively. Data
measurement will be performed at protein crystallography beamlines at LANL, the
Institut Laue-Langevin in Grenoble, France, and, when online, the neutron
sources at ORNL. The extended funding period will enable the use of the
Macromolecular Neutron Diffraction beamline at the ORNL Spallation Neutron
Source during its commissioning period.

Broader impacts: This project will develop and promulgate the expertise for NMC
among a new generation of scientists. The increasing number of neutron sources
for macromolecular diffraction, especially in this country, will mean increased
opportunities for both the interpretation of neutron data and an understanding
of the sorts of questions that can be resolved with neutron diffraction. The PI
is a member of the Instrument Development team for the Macromolecular Neutron
Diffraction (MaNDi) beamline at the ORNL Spallation Neutron Source (SNS).
Because of this and the planned activities of this project, graduate students
and post-doctoral fellows will be introduced at an early stage of their training
to the power of the SNS and of the challenges associated with NMC. Following
successful refinement and analysis, deposition and publication of structures is
planned. These structures will serve as the nucleus of a database of protein
structures with experimentally determined hydrogen and solvent positions.