* 0446304
* Electronic Structures of ET Active Sites and their Contributions to Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Edward Solomon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 02/28/2011
* USD 904,500.00

Professor Edward I. Solomon of the Chemistry Department at Stanford University
is supported by the Division of Chemistry for his research that employs a
variety of spectroscopic methods combined with electronic structure calculations
to obtain new insights into copper and iron sulfur electron transfer (ET)
proteins. This research is aimed at defining geometric and electronic structure
contributions to long range rapid ET in biological systems and the role of the
protein in activating the metal site for function. The active sites being
studied are important in the catalysis of N2, N2O, and CO2 reduction, in
biotechnology, in environmental regulation of green house gases, and in medical
and health applications, including Fe and Cu metabolism and related disease
states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding rapid ET in biological systems as
well as the role of the protein in activating the metal site for function will
provide fundamental insights into active sites that are important in
biotechnology and environmental regulation. Additionally, the research has
applicability to iron and copper metabolism and related disease states. The
spectroscopic methodologies developed in this work will apply to a variety of
important classes of metal sites in biology and catalysis. Postdoctoral
associates, graduate students and undergraduates involved in this research
receive excellent training in a range of spectroscopic methods, quantum
chemistry, inorganic chemistry and enzymology in a forefront inorganic chemistry
program.