* 0446830
* BCS:  DELAMAN 3:  The Third Annual Meeting of the Digital Endangered Languages and Musics Archive Network
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2006
* Heidi Johnson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2006
* USD 15,950.00

Imagine if no one had thought to preserve copies of the Iliad and the Odyssey,
or Beowulf, or the Bhaghavad Gita, before the languages they were composed in
became extinct. The world would have lost some of its greatest works of
literature forever. There are great works of oral literature in the world today
that are in danger of being lost, because the languages that they are composed
in are dying, as their last speakers grow old and die and their children adopt
other languages. Out of some 5,000 languages currently spoken, only half are
expected to survive into the next century. Linguists and anthropologists are
working with speakers of these endangered languages to record as much as
possible of their oral literatures, histories, myths, traditional musics and
other forms of knowledge before it is too late. They are producing prodigious
amounts of recorded information on a wide range of media. These recordings must
all be converted into standard digital formats and preserved in digital
archives, where they can be securely maintained for future generations and also
be used today by speakers, scholars, and students for a variety of research and
educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Digital Endangered Languages
and Musics Archive Network is a global organization dedicated to pooling methods
and technologies for creating and managing the archives that are tasked with
preserving this priceless linguistic heritage. Members of the Network meet
annually to coordinate efforts and determine strategies for improving the
security and accessibility of endangered language archives around the world.
With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Joel Sherzer will host
the third annual meeting of the Network at the University of Texas at Austin in
November, 2005. The Network is currently working on developing improved methods
of managing access to sensitive materials, like sacred chants or personal
histories, so that the creators of these resources can feel secure about
archiving them. The Network is also working on designs and strategies that will
make it easier to establish digital endangered language archives and thus add
members to the Network. The Network is also working on designs for
"archivelets": smaller archive outlets that offer localized sets of resources to
specific communities, like a minority language community, with localized
interfaces but without the expensive burden of preserving the resources over the
long term.&lt;br/&gt;