* 0446129
* Gain Modulation in Visual Cortex by Balanced Synaptic Input
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Frances Chance, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Karen A. Mesce
* 06/30/2011
* USD 506,315.00

To understand the neural basis of cognition and behavior, we need to understand
the mechanisms by which neurons gate and modify each other's actions. Recent
work by Dr. Chance has introduced and characterized a cellular mechanism for
gain modulation, a phenomenon in which one input acts as a "volume control", or
gain control, of neuronal responses to static inputs. However, because the brain
is inherently dynamic, it is crucial to describe the dynamical aspects of this
mechanism of gain modulation. Dr. Chance and members of her laboratory will
record the electrophysiological responses from neurons in slices of rat visual
cortex to measure the temporal dynamics of gain modulation and describe how the
temporal dynamics of neuronal responses are affected by such modulation. Once
the temporal dynamics of the gain modulation mechanism are characterized, Dr.
Chance's laboratory will construct detailed computational models of the
circuitry of the primary visual cortex that incorporate the data characterizing
the mechanism for gain modulation. The model will then be used to test the
hypothesis that the gain control mechanism is responsible for some well-known
non-linear response properties of visual cortical neurons, such as response
normalization, that are observed in vivo but which cannot be explained by
traditional feed forward models. Dr. Chance's research thus combines
experimental and computational techniques to study how gain modulation arises at
the cellular level and to explore its function at the level of neural circuits
in primary visual cortex. This research will not only contribute to the
knowledge of how visual processing works, but will lay the foundation for
uncovering mechanisms underlying later stages of cortical processing and
phenomena, such as attention. Dr. Chance is a young female investigator serving
as a role model for young women to become, or stay, involved with computational
approaches to neurobiology, including a female graduate student who will be
mentored on this project.