* 0446040
* Functional Analysis of Plant Carotenoid Dioxygenases
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Donald McCarty, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/29/2008
* USD 504,381.00

This proposal addresses the functions of a class of enzymes known as carotenoid
cleaving dioxygenases (CCDs). These enzymes metabolize carotenoids, creating a
vast array of molecules that are economically important in the food industry as
colorants and contribute to flavor. The products of these enzymes, generally
known as apocarotenoids, also have biological activity in plants and animals.
Important apocarotenoids include retinoids in animals, abscisic acid in plants,
the major colorant and flavor compound in saffron, and the major scent volatiles
in roses. Four CCD enzymes (CCD1, CCD4, CCD7 and CCD8) of unknown function have
been the focus of research. Studies to date have shown that 9,10 (9',10')
cleavage of diverse carotenoid substrates by CCD1 is a major source of volatiles
and flavor constituents in tomato and petunia. CCD1 also plays a major role in
regulating accumulation of nutritionally important carotenoids such as beta-
carotene in cereal grains. Mutations in CCD7 and CCD8 cause major alterations in
plant growth, particularly in the ability of the plant to make branches.
Therefore, It has been concluded that CCD7 and CCD8 act together in the
synthesis of a novel, and as yet unidentified, apocarotenoid hormone. The
continuing work will have three key objectives: 1) An integrated, multitiered
strategy aimed at identifying the biologically active compound synthesized by
the CCD7/CCD8. 2) Comparative analysis of CCD7 and CCD8 function in divergent
plant species. 3) Functional analysis of CCD4 with goals of defining its
substrate specificity and its role in leaf
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The work has already
generated material that will be fundamentally important to human nutrition,
taste and aroma. A collaboration aimed at increasing carotenoid content in
cereal grains that has the potential to impact the developing world has also
been initiated. This research will be used as a platform to educate
undergraduate and graduate students, including minority students from Fort
Valley State University, an 1890 Land-Grant University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;