* 0446651
* Planning Visit to set up an International Chemistry REU Program at Lund University, Sweden
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2005
* Christy Whiddon, University of Redlands
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 37,627.00

0446651&lt;br/&gt;Whiddon&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry undergraduates are often limited
in their opportunities to study abroad due to both the number of major classes
they must take and the rather rigid order in which these courses should be
taken. In turn, study abroad programs seldom offer any chemistry courses, so
that a chemistry student who wishes to finish a major on time cannot afford a
semester abroad. This award will make it possible for two students to go to
Sweden for the summer with the two-fold goal of working on research
collaborations previously agreed on with investigators at Lund University, and
of planning for a more permanent international REU chemistry program at Lund
University in Sweden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students benefit greatly from
participation in research experiences. By doing research abroad, the broader
impact is that students will learn how to do science while at the same time
being exposed to a different culture and different ways of looking at the same
research problem. As a result of this REU award, students will be able to expand
their professional networks to include scientists from different backgrounds and
will be encouraged to think of science more globally. They will also get an
understanding of the breadth and history of science by exposure to how science
is done in a different culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The undergraduate research
students will go to Lund University in the summer of 2004, to do research for a
period of 6-8 weeks, under the supervision of the PIS and their colleagues, Olle
Soderman (Department of Physical Chemistry 1), and Sofi Elmroth and Ebbe
Nordlander (Department of Inorganic and Bioinorganic Chemistry) at the Lund
University Center for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering. T he students will
work closely with graduate students in the respective departments and be able to
choose from the following collaborative projects: Effects of Alkylglucside
Membranes on Enzyme Activities; Investigations of Novel Surfactant and Polymer
Systems; and Synthesis and Modeling of MetalloEnzyme Active
Sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the end of the summer, the students will present
results from their summer research in a written report. Redlands students will
present a poster on their summer research at the University of Redlands Science
Center Summer Research Poster Session in September.&lt;br/&gt;