* 0446001
* Genetic Analysis of the Roseobacter-Dinoflagellate Interaction
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* M. Robert Belas, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 01/31/2009
* USD 412,500.00

Members of the Roseobacter clade of the a-proteobacteria are among the most
abundant and ecologically relevant marine bacterial groups. Roseobacter isolates
and gene sequences derived from them have been retrieved from marine
environments ranging from sea ice to open ocean mixed layer to tropical coral
reefs, and in ecological niches ranging from free-living plankton to sponge
symbiont to biofilm pioneer. Although Roseobacter are cosmopolitan in the marine
environment, their numbers and activity significantly rise with increases in the
population density of phytoplankton and dinoflagellates. However, little is
known about the cellular factors and molecular mechanisms required for
roseobacters to move towards and remain in the phycosphere surrounding
phytoplankton and dinoflagellates. The long-term goal of this research is to
understand the signals and molecular mechanisms used to initiate and maintain
the interaction between the roseobacter and its eukaryotic host. Members of the
Roseobacter clade are prevalent and often numerically dominant in laboratory
cultures of dinoflagellates. They are found within the dinoflagellate's
phycosphere or attached to its surface. Axenic cultures of dinoflagellates grow
poorly compared to cultures with associated bacterial assemblages, and adding
back either a single isolate (Silicibacter TM1040) or mixed bacterial
assemblages restores normal growth. TM1040 actively metabolizes the
dinoflagellate secondary metabolite dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP), and is
motile and chemotactically attracted to dinoflagellate homogenates, DMSP, amino
acids, and other chemicals released by the dinoflagellate. The research will
test the following hypothesis: Roseobacter clade bacteria establish the initial
interaction with their eukaryotic partners through a response to dinoflagellate
signals, e.g., DMSP, and chemotaxis-driven swimming. This behavior brings the
bacteria into close physical association with their eukaryotic host, at which
point other bacterial gene products are expressed in response to dinoflagellate-
derived signals to maintain the interaction. Using TM1040 as a model, the
specific objectives of this research are to (1) analyze flagellar arrangement,
morphology, energetics, and chemotaxis of TM1040; (2) identify potential genes
involved in the bacterial-dinoflagellate interaction through a comparative
genomics analysis of Silicibacter TM1040, S. pomeroyi DSS-3, and Jannaschia sp.
CCS-1; and, (3) use genetic techniques to identify and characterize the genes
affecting the bacteria-dinoflagellate interactions, and analyze how each
mutation affects the interaction between bacteria and dinoflagellates. The
results of this research will be important to current research efforts in marine
microbial ecology and will benefit society through a better understanding of the
effect of Roseobacter/dinoflagellate interactions as they affect nutrient
cycling, especially sulfur cycling, in the world's oceans, and may have
implications to global climate control.