* 0446131
* Main-Group Deltahedral Clusters: Functionalization and Oligomerization by Design
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Slavi Sevov, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Daniel Rabinovich
* 01/31/2009
* USD 360,000.00

Dr. Slavi C. Sevov, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Notre Dame
University, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division for studies on the reactivity of
homo- and hetero-atomic main-group deltahedral clusters (Zintl ions). The
chemistry of such clusters is unique in that the constituting elements are in
unusual negative oxidation states and have the potential to provide novel
bonding, structures, coordination, and reactivity. The focus of the research
will be on the solution and solid state chemistry and bonding of homo- and
hetero-atomic anion clusters of germanium, silicon, tin, group II-V elements,
and transition metals. The PI has already synthesized and characterized dimers,
trimers, and tetramers of Ge9 clusters. These studies will be extended to larger
oligomers of Ge and broadened to include Si, and the other elements mentioned
above. A major effort will involve functionalizing the clusters through
reactions with nucleophiles. This will allow addition of organic groups with
various functionalities such as multiple bonds, aromatic rings, and heteroatoms,
as well as various nucleophilic organometallic substituents.

The knowledge of the chemistry of these clusters will help in foreseeing new
compounds and materials with unusual properties. Such clusters are of interest
as potential precursors to new classical materials (intermetallics, extended
structures) as well as nano materials (nanorods, thin films, surface grafting)
with novel electronic and magnetic properties. The project has a strong
educational component. The training of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
students, that include women and minorities, will be undertaken.