* 0446415
* Collaborative Research: Division of Labor in Communal Groups
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Susan Bertram, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 04/30/2009
* USD 286,103.00

Collaborative Proposals 0446415 and 0446342&lt;br/&gt;Title: Division of labor
in communal groups&lt;br/&gt;Jennifer Fewell, Susan Bertram, Penny
Kukuk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary: Social groups from insects to humans
divide their labor among individuals so that different group members specialize
on different tasks. This division of labor has long been considered one of the
key adaptations of sociality. Recent work suggests that its underlying
mechanisms involve simple rules of individual behavior, which when combined with
interactions among individuals generate complex group level properties (self-
organization). Self-organization is thought to occur across all biological
levels, but this has proven difficult to test experimentally. Social groups
provide an important opportunity to test this assertion, because individuals can
be observed and interactions between group members quantified. &lt;br/&gt;This
research will examine how local interactions among the members of simple social
groups could produce division of labor during early social evolution. The
central hypothesis is that division of labor can self-organize if interactions
among group members amplify differences in their probability of performing
tasks. If so, division of labor could emerge even in the absence of selection,
and thus could appear spontaneously at the origins of sociality. The alternate
hypothesis will be tested, that division of labor is produced primarily via
selection for increased differences in task performance after the formation of
social groups.&lt;br/&gt;The research will use two different modeling approaches
to explore how interactions among group members could potentially generate
division of labor. The first assumes that individuals within any group vary
naturally in their tendency to perform tasks, and that amplification of these
differences generates division of labor. The second borrows from economics by
treating group members as "companies" that compete for tasks; tasks become
distributed among group members based not on initial variation, but on
differences in individual success at performing them. To test these models and
to examine how division of labor changes during early social evolution, the
researchers will compare the behavior of groups made up of normally social
individuals to those of solitary individuals that are forced to form social
groups. Two taxa have been identified in which solitary and social populations
can be compared. These are the ground nesting bee genus Lasioglossum, which
contains both solitary and communal species, and the seed harvester ant species,
Pogonomyrmex californicus, which has two populations of the same species that
initiate nests alone versus in communal groups. Both of these taxa can be
brought into the laboratory, allowing artificial social groups to be constructed
and observed. This provides a unique opportunity to test how social structure
and division of labor change during the transition from solitary to social
living. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This work makes an important
contribution to our understanding of the mechanisms underlying division of
labor, an essential component of social organization within human cultural as
well as biological systems. It also addresses the broad question of how
properties emerge across levels of biocomplexity. The research actively engages
undergraduate and graduate students in the process of science, from data
collection to analysis, presentation, and publication. Students will have the
opportunity to participate in both the theoretical and experimental components
of the research. The PIs have exceptional records of undergraduate mentoring,
including directing undergraduate research programs at their respective
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;