* 0446779
* Georeferencing Mesoamerican Vascular Plant Specimens at the Missouri Botanical Garden
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Gerrit Davidse, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 04/30/2010
* USD 280,964.00

A grant has been awarded to the Missouri Botanical Garden under the direction of
Dr. James Solomon for partial support of a project to georeference an estimated
571,255 databased vascular plant specimen records from Mesoamerica [specifically
Mexico, Belize, Guatemala, Costa Rica and Panama], representing an estimated
52,000 unique collecting sites that are based on the specimens in the herbarium
at the Missouri Botanical Garden (MO). These data will be made available on the
Internet through the Garden's web site, w3TROPICOS (http://www.tropicos.org),
and through the web sites of the Global Biodiversity Information Facility
(GBIF), the Red Mundial de Informacion Sobre Biodiversidad (REMIB), Discover
Life and Species 2000. In addition to providing access to the individual
georeferenced specimen records over the web, this project will produce a web-
based, searchable gazetteer, with mapping capabilities, of Mesoamerican
botanical collecting sites, a query form for displaying itineraries for
individual collectors, and a tool for the identification of major collecting
sites, including the determination of collecting densities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of taxonomic work are to recognize, name, and
characterize the world's organisms; provide tools to identify them; delineate
where they occur; and analyze their relationships. Documenting as precisely as
possible where species occur is the immediate useful product of this project. It
will be possible to generate detailed, vouchered, distributional maps from the
georeferenced specimen data for any species included in the database. Because
the data is vouchered, the information may be verified since the exact source
for each point on a map can be identified and confirmed. A detailed knowledge of
the distribution of plant species is fundamental to biological research,
biodiversity conservation, scientific land-use management and the impact that
biodiversity issues have on society, both within and outside the US. Databasing
and assigning geographical coordinates to these specimen records are essential
steps in enhancing the usefulness of these collections. Without geographical
coordinates, much of the value of the specimen record remains unusable for GIS
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Georeferenced specimen data are useful not
only for taxonomic research but also for other scientific disciplines and
practical endeavors such as conservation, biological resource management, and
sustainable species utilization. The information produced by this project can be
used to answer a wide variety of urgent questions related to the monitoring of
native, threatened, and endangered species and documenting the introduction and
spread of alien weeds that have significant real or potential impacts on our
nation's agricultural system. Using predictive modeling on these kinds of
organisms is becoming increasingly critical as man continues to move germplasm
around the world and formulates policies to conserve, manage and regulate the
world's biological diversity. At the same time these same data are of particular
importance for biodiversity managers in the Mesoamerican countries where the
specimens and their data originated.&lt;br/&gt;