* 0446648
* Dictionary of American Regional English
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Joan Hall, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2007
* USD 303,573.00

Have the media and the mobility of the American population caused the
"homogenization" of American English? Will we all talk alike within a few
generations? The four published volumes of the Dictionary of American Regional
English demonstrate that, while language change is inevitable over time,
thousands of words, phrases, and pronunciations still vary from one part of our
country to another. Regional distributions can be quite small (e.g., stuffie 'a
stuffed quahog' in Rhode Island, strubbly 'disheveled' in the Pennsylvania
German settlement area, or stubbleberry 'deadly nightshade' in North and South
Dakota) or very large (demonstrated by the contrast between tennis shoe, which
is widespread but least frequent in the Northeast, and sneaker, which is
widespread but most frequent in the Northeast and North Central states). With
support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Joan Houston Hall and the
staff of DARE will continue their work on Volume V of DARE (Sl-Z), which is
projected for publication in 2009. The first four volumes of the Dictionary were
published in 1985 (A-C), 1991 (D-H), 1996 (I-O), and 2002 (P-Sk) by the Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press.

Like the Oxford English Dictionary, DARE provides historical treatment of its
entries, illustrating the use of each word with quotations that demonstrate both
chronological range and regional distribution. Unique to DARE is the inclusion
of maps (adjusted to reflect population density rather than geographic area)
that are based on an extensive program of fieldwork conducted in 1,002
communities across the United States between 1965 and 1970. Supplementing the
fieldwork is a massive collection of written sources (including materials such
as diaries, letters, newspapers, novels, folklore collections, and government
reports) that document our language from the seventeenth century to the present.
Work on the current volume is greatly enhanced by the recent availability of
valuable digital resources. DARE materials (including audio recordings and
special collections as well as the published volumes) have been widely used by
teachers, linguists, sociolinguists, librarians, and lexicographers. They have
also been used by forensic linguists (to profile crime suspects on the basis of
language use), physicians (to understand the folk medical terms used by their
patients), psychiatrists (to evaluate the results of standardized vocabulary
tests that fail to recognize regional variation in their scoring sheets), and by
journalists, researchers, historians, and playwrights. They are also used by
readers who simply delight in the variety and creativity of our American English
language.



