* 0446888
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Investigating the Local Construction of Identity:  Sociophonetic Variation in Smoky Mountain African American Women's Speech
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2006
* William Kretzschmar, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2006
* USD 9,768.00

Under the direction of Dr. William Kretzschmar, Ms. Rebecca Childs will conduct
sociophonetic research in Texana, North Carolina for her doctoral dissertation.
The project examines the social meaning of phonetic detail among two African
American women's communities of practice, investigation specifically ways in
which these African American women use subtle phonetic variation in the
construction of their identity. Over the years, studies of African American
English have been the major focus of American women's language. This project
will look specifically at African American women's language in a regional
context (Appalachia) and examine the ways that local social practices can affect
women's language. Using an integration of sociolinguistic and acoustic phonetic
methodologies this study will account for the phonetic variables such as
coarticulation and duration and social variables particular to each community of
practice that have an effect of vocalic production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has broad significance, first it would allow linguists to compare the
phonetic characteristics of different regional and social groups of African
American women and gain a sense of the complexity and heterogeneity that can be
found within the speech of this group. It will also provide one of the few
quantitative and phonetic studies of African American women's language.
Additionally, it will build on the variations research tradition by analyzing
this variety not only with regard to traditional variables such as race, gender,
region, and age, but also with these variables as they manifest in social
practice. Further, this research would add to our knowledge base about Smoky
Mountain English, since it comprises the bulk of the very few studies that have
examined the dialect of African Americans living in this region of the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;