* 0446968
* Curation of the Wasp Nest Collection of The American Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* James Carpenter, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 02/29/2008
* USD 237,629.00

A grant has been awarded to the American Museum of Natural History under the
direction of Dr. James Carpenter and Lisa Kronthal for partial support of
curation of one of the largest collections of social wasp nests (family
Vespidae) in the world, according to modern conservation techniques, and for
digital photography of the collection to allow Internet access. The collection
will be re-housed in new cabinetry, with appropriate supports constructed. The
conservation will preserve a unique resource for future researchers, for without
proper preservation the collection will continue to deteriorate and information
will be lost. This project will also improve availability of the collection by
permitting electronic access.

This project represents a unique collaboration: scientists and professional
conservators have never worked together on a wasp nest collection. We will
produce a "Best Practices" document for treating such collections which will be
made available on the AMNH natural sciences conservation website - the first
resource for how to treat such collections properly. The document will provide
general information on the construction and composition of the nests as well as
information concerning their response to external environments and forces found
within a museum setting. Instructions and parameters concerning handling, long-
term storage and re-housing will be presented using supplementary diagrams.
Images of examples from the collections will be presented to further illustrate
specific steps involved in re-housing and building supports. Student training
will also be provided, for an intern in the newly emerging field of conservation
of natural history collections. The student will participate in both the
conservation and imaging of the nest collection.

The collection has already served as the basis for a significant number of
scientific publications, including some of general interest to evolutionary
biology. It has also served in an educational role, in the form of
demonstrations at lectures and tours given to members, students, journalists,
and other parties. The best practices document will serve the growing field of
natural science conservators as well as collections managers worldwide through
its accessibility via the Internet. The imaging that will be accomplished under
this project will have a direct benefit to scientific researchers who will be
able to study the images without having to visit the Museum and will act to
preserve the collection by reducing the level of handling it currently endures,
but it will also have indirect benefits as well.

