* 0446139
* Proximate mechanisms that regulate intestinal performance for the python
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Stephen Secor, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 04/30/2010
* USD 427,985.00

The enzymes and transporters housed within the outer membrane of cells lining
the inside of the small intestine are responsible for the final break down and
absorption of a meal's nutrients. Fortunately these cells can increase their
digestive and absorptive performance when faced with a larger meal or when
segments of the small intestine are lost to surgery or disease. Although the
capacity to increase digestive performance is important for health and
nutrition, the means by which the intestine can do this is currently unknown.
Whereas previous research has used traditional laboratory mammals (mice, rats,
and rabbits) to study intestinal function, this project takes a different
approach and uses the Burmese python to investigate the mechanisms by which the
intestine can alter performance. The advantage of the python is that they
increase intestinal function by 20-fold with each meal, far above the more
modest 2-fold increases that mammals can exhibit. Pythons also possess the
extraordinary ability to rapidly increase intestinal surface area by lengthening
their intestinal microvilli (small finger-like projections that extend from
intestinal cells). Therefore, identifying the steps involved in improving
intestinal function will be more easily accomplished from studies of the python
intestine rather than from studying mammal intestine. This project employs
tissue, cellular, and molecular techniques to elucidate the relationship between
intestinal surface area and intestinal function, and the means by which that
surface area can be expanded to increase function. The research and student
training will take an integrative multi-level approach. Graduate and post-
doctoral training will occur during this work, but a strong focus will be placed
on the inclusion of undergraduate student researchers in all aspects of this
work.