* 0446801
* Neural systems for the extraction of socially-relevant information from faces
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2005,06/30/2008
* James Haxby, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 06/30/2008
* USD 450,000.00

Appropriate and effective social interaction requires ready access to
representations of the personal traits, intentions, goals, opinions, and mental
states of others. With funding from the National Science Foundation, James V.
Haxby is investigating the functional organization of neural systems that
extract such person knowledge from the perception of faces and gestures. The
proposed experiments use functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
electroencephalography (EEG), and other measures to investigate the roles played
by neural systems for face perception, action perception and imitation (mirror
neuron, MN), and theory of mind (ToM) in obtaining social information from
faces. This information can be transient mental states, such as direction of
attention, emotional state, and level of interest, or more enduring attributes,
such as personal traits, goals, attitudes, and beliefs. Perception of facial and
social gesture, on the one hand, and recognition of familiar faces, on the
other, are hypothesized to be mediated by distinct parts of the neural systems
for face and action perception. By contrast, a common neural system for the
representation of person knowledge is hypothesized to mediate the
representations of transient mental states and enduring personal attributes of
others that are activated during face perception. The system for these
representations is hypothesized to be the same system that has been associated
with ToM, the ability to represent the mental states of others. The first
objective of the experiments is to characterize the functional organization of
the mirror neuron system, its role in the perception of facial expressions,
social gestures, and eye gaze, and its role in the activation and updating of
representations of transient mental states in the ToM system. The hypothesis is
being tested that perception of facial movements and gestures activate mirror
neuron networks (superior temporal sulcus, intraparietal sulcus, and premotor
regions, namely Broca's area and the frontal eye fields)' that both perception
and imitation evoke this activity; and that movements that convey socially-
relevant information also will evoke activity in the ToM system. The second
objective is to investigate which of the regions that are activated during the
recognition of familiar faces are associated with the spontaneous retrieval of
representations of the enduring personal attributes associated with familiar
individuals. The hypothesis is being tested that this process is mediated by
cortical areas in the ToM system (anterior paracingulate cortex, posterior
superior temporal sulcus), and these areas can be distinguished from areas
associated with emotional responses (amygdala) and the retrieval of
autobiographical episodic memories (posterior cingulate/precuneus, anterior
temporal cortex). Automaticity of retrieval of person knowledge associated with
familiar faces by manipulating awareness of the faces will also be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Face perception is a highly developed and
efficient skill that plays a central role in social communication. In
particular, face perception may play a more critical role than language in
conveying information about the intentions, attitudes, emotions, level of
interest, and other transient mental states of others. Better understanding of
the functional architecture of the human neural systems that mediate this skill
can help to inform computational approaches to face perception, with possible
applications to improved human-computer interfaces. Such understanding can also
help in the development of diagnostic procedures and therapies for psychiatric
disorders characterized by impaired social communication and face perception,
such as social phobia, autism, and schizophrenia. Undergraduate and graduate
students at Princeton University will be involved in the research.&lt;br/&gt;