* 0446017
* Collaborative Research:  Automating Scaling and Data Processing in a Network of Sensors: Towards a Global Network for Lake Metabolism Research and Education
* BIO,EF
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Paul Hanson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/28/2011
* USD 612,611.00

This three-year award is a collaborative project by the University of
California-San Diego, University of Wisconsin-Madison, and Indiana University to
automate the extensibility and scalability of data-generating networks. Rapid
advances and deployment of cyberinfrastructure and sensor networks have created
opportunities for new knowledge of ecological systems and their role in global
environmental processes. Expanding current networks and developing new networks
capable of addressing the spatial and temporal variability of important
ecological processes such as lake metabolism at regional to global scales will
require novel technical improvements in an architecture that transports data
from sensors to databases, allows dynamic control of sensors and reconfiguration
of the network, addresses data quality assurance, provides data access and query
to distributed data in the network as well as to other relevant datasets, and
provides tools for analysis. Specifically this project has two major technical
goals: 1. Develop new methods and tools to help automate the updating of data
flows from dynamically deployed sensors to publicly accessible biological
databases. 2. Develop a suite of new algorithms and software for analysis of
biological information to automate detection (real-time) of events based on data
from sensors and databases, with applications to classification of signals to
biological or physical events or to sensor failure, allowing rapid response. The
dissemination of analytical tools and framework developed will be useful to
existing research projects, evolving environmental observing systems such as
National Ecological Observatory Network, networks, agencies, international
partners, and K-16 teachers. Graduate and under graduate students will
participate in the project. Both software tools and basic research data from
this project will be incorporated into existing and ongoing professional
development resources for teachers and instructional resources for students in
grades 6-12.