* 0446227
* The Evolution of Protein Structure, Function, and Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Zaida Luthey-Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2009
* USD 598,572.00

The objective of this project, jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, is to develop
evolutionary profiles that best preserve the phylogenetic tree topology of
homologous proteins. Using a multidimensional QR algorithm recently developed in
a preliminary study, non-redundant sets of sequences and structures that best
span the evolutionary space of the proteins will be constructed from combined
sequence and structural alignment information. The targets of these studies will
primarily be the proteins involved in the translational machinery, ribosomal
proteins and aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (AARS), that are present in all domains
of life. The goal is to apply these evolutionary profiles to identify structural
words important for folding and to analyze evolutionary changes in patterns of
structures and sequences governing protein/RNA. With data available from over
25,000 entries in the structural databases and the complete sequences of over
200 genomes, major evolutionary events can now be correlated with changes in
shape and function of the proteins. Features extracted from these profiles will
also be instrumental in developing new assays for improving gene annotation.
These profiles will be implemented and tested in a protein structure prediction
algorithm. Using hybrid molecular dynamics simulations, the folding of the
structural words and interactions of the AARS with tRNA for organism s from
several domains of life will be investigated and the results compared to studies
carried out in collaboration with an experimental group. The information
obtained from this work will enhance the understanding of the evolutionary and
physical principles of interplay between structure, function, and folding.

The concepts and methods developed in this project will be incorporated into the
course, "Computational Chemical Biology" that the PI has recently developed in
the UIUC Chemistry Department. This course is aimed at undergraduates and first-
year graduate students interested in research at the interface of chemistry,
biophysics, and computer science. The preliminary work on this evolutionary
approach to bioinformatics and the QR algorithm has been presented at two NSF
sponsored workshops on computational biology as well as several other recent
workshops in the US and Australia. More hands-on workshops are in the planning,
and copies of the tutorials are made available through the web. The QR
algorithms and evolutionary profiles developed in this project will be made
available to the broader scientific community as part of a sequence and
structure bioinformatics plug-in for the popular visualization program VMD that
is freely distributed.

