* 0446774
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Variation in Singapore English
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Gregory Guy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2006
* USD 11,740.00

The English in Singapore is not a single uniform entity; rather there is a well-
documented range of Singapore Englishes. At one end of the spectrum lies
Standard Singapore English (SSE), a variety grammatically similar to other
standard varieties of English, which is used in formal settings such as
educational institutions and the media; at the other end lies Colloquial
Singapore English (CSE), an informal variety spoken among friends and family,
which is markedly different from the standard. Individuals command different
ranges of this spectrum, and shift among the varieties they command according to
setting, topic, and audience. A variety of linguistic features are involved in
differentiating these varieties, including phonological variables like the
deletion of final stops and grammatical characteristics like the use of the
third singular -s suffix on present tense verbs. Under the direction of Prof.
Gregory Guy, Ms. Laureen Lim will investigate the constraints on these variable
processes for her doctoral dissertation, in order to develop a dynamic analysis
of the linguistic repertoire evident both in an individual and across the speech
community. This research project will study the ways in which Chinese
Singaporeans from English-medium schools vary their speech in sociolinguistic
and ethnographic interviews. The question that arises in the face of such
diversity is whether to treat these varieties as different styles within a
single language, or as more analogous to distinct languages. Linguistic work on
other linguistically complex societies presents several models that are
potentially relevant: alternation between different languages (code-switching,
bilingualism), alternation between High and Low varieties of one language
(diglossia), and stylistic variation within one language. Which of these models
is appropriate when speakers vary between SSE and CSE? Can the variation in
Singapore English be properly characterized using monolingual communities as a
model? If these two varieties have distinct language rules representing two
mental grammars, would a bilingual framework be more applicable? Or, does
Singapore English represent a new synthesis for the analysis of linguistic
variation?

Situated in a context of explicit language planning and ideology, Singapore
offers the sociolinguist a multilingual environment in which this unique variety
of English can be studied. Our investigation into the variation both within a
speaker and across speakers will enable us to shed light as to which theoretical
model most aptly captures the pattern of variation in Singapore English. In
doing so, we will complement existing theories of language variation. The
proposed research more broadly informs language education practices in
Singapore, currently influenced by a general stigmatization of CSE. By
demonstrating that CSE usage is found among individuals who also command SSE,
this research supports an alternative practice valuing such linguistic
diversity, by showing that competence in CSE need not interfere with the
acquisition of a standard variety. In fact, speakers who command both
resourcefully adapt their choice of variety to the social situation. Such
linguistic flexibility may be valued as enhanced social capital, reinforcing
national identity and solidarity.