* 0446565
* Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer for Interdisciplinary Geochemical and Microbiological Research and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2007
* Johnson Haas, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2007
* USD 89,031.00

EAR-0446565&lt;br/&gt;Koretsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inductively-coupled plasma
optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) is a robust and reliable method of
obtaining elemental abundance data from aqueous samples at a wide range of
concentrations, including major (i.e. %) and trace (ppm-ppb) levels. Acquisition
of an ICP-OES system by the Department of Geosciences at Western Michigan
University (WMU) will tremendously enhance a wide range of geochemical and
microbiological investigations currently underway, and will profoundly expand
the potential for future research efforts. WMU is a student-centered research
university (Carnegie category one) with a commitment to student engagement in
original research at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. This grant in
support of an ICP-OES system directly enhances faculty and student research at
WMU across a diverse range of geologic, chemical and biological disciplines,
including projects currently funded by the National Science Foundation, the
American Chemical Society Petroleum Research Fund, and the US Environmental
Protection Agency. Some of the specific projects that will immediately benefit
from this instrumentation include: (1) laboratory studies of metal adsorption on
complex mineral assemblages and field studies of metal accumulation at
macrofaunal burrow walls, (2) investigating interactions between dissimilatory
metal-reducing bacteria and dissolved metals and metal-organic complexes, (3)
studies of the relationships between aqueous geochemistry and methane efflux in
solid waste landfills, (4) investigations of the molecular mechanism of copper-
transporting P-type APTases, (5) national and international field studies of
ground water quality and salinization processes and (6) studies of the role of
metal-regulated ion pumps in bacterial metabolism. These studies will result in
improved understanding of socially-relevant problems including: predicting heavy
metal transport and bioavailability in the environment, mechanisms leading to
greenhouse gas emission from landfills, practices leading to salinization of
agricultural land, groundwater sanitation, and the functionality of proteins
implicated in the development of Wilson disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;