* 0446688
* Biradical-like Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2008
* Josef Michl, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 965,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Josef Michl of the University of Colorado-Boulder and his
collaborators will work on two projects in the area of their traditional
interests, photophysics and photochemistry and on a third project that involves
reactive intermediates and their isolable analogs in the field of carborane
chemistry. The first project is related to their current effort to understand
the electronic structure of oligosilanes, prototypical sigma-conjugated systems,
and deals with the relaxation of their vertical excited states that are
associated with excitation energy localization, and with an attempt to discover
and assign their triplet excited states. The geometrical relaxation of the
excited singlets will be examined using time-resolved Raman spectroscopy. The
detection of the triplet states connects oligosilane spectroscopy to the second
project, which takes advantage of the accomplishments attained in the current
grant period with respect to improving the sensitivity of an electron energy
loss spectrometer. This is expected to permit the detection of spin-forbidden
transitions in oligosilanes, but also in fluorocarbons, in various matrix-
isolated species, and additional samples. The third project deals with the
chemistry of compounds derived from the anionic icosahedral carborane,
HCB11Me11(-). It is still relatively new to this research group and builds on
the discovery of a new type of reactive intermediates that was made in the
current grant period. These are the isomeric carbonium and boronium ylides
HCB11Me11, which show unusual reactivity in preliminary experiments and will now
be examined in detail. Peralkylated and perfluoroalkylated carborane anions will
also be used as sterically bulky protecting groups to stabilize structures
containing electron-deficient atoms of main group elements for structural and
spectroscopic studies and well as an examination of chemical reactivity.
Perfluorinated anions of the type CB11Fx(CF3)12-x will be used for the
stabilization of highly reactive cations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the research of Professor Josef Michl
of the University of Colorado-Boulder that will impact the field of reactive
intermediate chemistry. Contributions to this field will be communicated through
publications in scientific journals in the areas of synthetic organic,
inorganic, physical, and theoretical chemistry. The work is expected to
contribute to the education and training of undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral students in a range of interdisciplinary experimental and
theoretical methods spanning an area from bonding theory, photophysics,
spectroscopy, and photochemistry to physical organic and inorganic as well as
preparative chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;