* 0446622
* Effect of Aromaticity and Anti-Aromaticity on Transition States and Intrinsic Barriers of Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Claude Bernasconi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2009
* USD 470,463.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
Claude F. Bernasconi, of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
University of California, Santa Cruz, will continue experimental and
computational studies of the effect of aromaticity and anti-aromaticity on the
intrinsic barriers to a number of fundamental chemical reactions. Investigations
of intrinsic barriers, that is the barriers in the absence of a thermodynamic
driving force, allow critical evaluation of the factors affecting transition
state energies and contribute to our basic understanding of the rates of
chemical reactions. Both experimental and computational approaches will be used
in these investigations. The experimental approach will involve kinetic and
equilibrium measurements of proton transfers, nucleophilic additions to highly
electrophilic systems, and hydride ion transfers. Reactions will be chosen which
allow modulation of the degree of aromaticity or anti-aromaticity in products or
reactants and intrinsic barriers will be determined experimentally. The
computational approach will focus on gas phase proton, hydride ion, hydrogen
atom, halonium ion, and halide ion transfers involving aromatic and anti-
aromatic species. Intrinsic barriers will be calculated and compared to the
respective barriers of corresponding model reactions that do not involve
aromatic or anti-aromatic species. The broader impacts of this research will be
two-fold. At the scientific level, the project addresses fundamental questions
about chemical reactions and our understanding of how structure affects chemical
reactivity, a central theme of physical organic chemistry. At the level of human
resource development, the proposed work provides students with a broad
educational experience, ranging from synthesis and spectroscopic
characterization to kinetics, data analysis, and computational chemistry.