* 0446616
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding the Diversity of Parasites and Infectious Diseases in Three Mammalian Orders
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Charles Nunn, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2006
* USD 99,867.00

Pathogens and parasites are a major component of biological diversity, and have
important impacts on natural populations. A central question in host-parasite
ecology concerns what features of host behavior, life history, and environment
best explain the diversity and evolution of infectious diseases. Significant
theoretical progress has advanced our understanding of factors that influence
infectious disease dynamics within populations, yet relatively few studies have
analyzed ecological variables that underlie observed variation in pathogen
diversity and characteristics. This project will examine patterns of parasite
diversity across three mammalian orders to explicitly test predictions derived
from both epidemiological models and island biogeography theory. Major questions
this project will address include (1) What are the key ecological variables that
determine variation in the types and diversity of parasites in wild mammal
populations? (2) How do parasite transmission mode and the degree of specificity
depend on host ecology? (3) Does evolutionary diversification of hosts correlate
with patterns of parasite species richness? (4) Does knowledge of parasite
diversity have important implications for wildlife conservation? Establishing a
large database on the pathogens and parasites infecting wild mammals is critical
to conducting comprehensive analyses and represents a major goal of this
project. The investigators have recently assembled a large database on the
pathogens and parasites of primates and will extend this effort to two other
well-studied groups - carnivores and ungulates. These databases capture (i)
ecological, behavioral and life history traits relevant to theoretical models of
disease spread, (ii) records of parasites and pathogens recovered from wild
populations, (iii) data on parasite transmission mode and degree of host
specificity, and (iv) phylogenetic information on the hosts. Database
development requires an immense effort and following this study all data will be
made freely available over the World Wide Web so that other scientists can
access the fruits of this labor. Understanding factors that underlie parasite
diversity and characteristics is vital to managing vulnerable wildlife
populations and mitigating threats to human health. This study extends the scope
of previous host-parasite comparative work by examining a rich diversity of both
micro- and macroparasites, including information on parasite characteristics,
and by assessing phylogenetic information involving tree topology, branch
lengths and rates of host diversification. Analytical comparative methods will
control for sampling effort, test multiple variables simultaneously, and will
assess whether host and parasite traits are correlated with phylogeny. A
synthetic approach that links ecology, parasitology, epidemiology, and
phylogenetic comparative methods is crucial for developing a broad conceptual
framework to explain parasite diversity and characteristics in relation to host
features. To advance these goals, the investigators will organize three annual
workshops composed of experts from each of these disciplines to refine
predictions for comparative research, explore methods for examining ecological
and evolutionary interactions in host-parasite assemblages, and chart future
directions for both theoretical and empirical work.