* 0446333
* The Morphosyntax of Verbs in Arizona Yaqui
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Jason Haugen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2007
* USD 165,992.00

The nucleus of any sentence of any human language is the verb. When a speaker
chooses a particular verb, the structure of the rest of the sentence usually
follows automatically. Verbs seem to hold the key to understanding the central
expressive possibilities of human language. Interestingly, there are relatively
few structural options for verbs in English: they can accept or reject the
presence of a subject, an object, and/or an indirect object, but not much else.
In English, verbs that share a core meaning usually pattern alike in the
sentence structure(s) they accept. These core meanings may give us insight into
the universal structure of human thought - or may only give us insight into the
structure of thought of speakers of English. We don't know because no systematic
classification of the structural properties of the verbs of any language other
than English currently exists. With support from the National Science Foundation
Dr. Heidi Harley and Dr. Jason Haugen will attempt to fill this gap by
documenting the verbs of Yaqui, a Native American language of the southwest.
Yaqui differs from English significantly in that many kinds of suffixes can be
added to its verbs. These suffixes change the sentence structures that the verbs
require. By discovering which suffixes can attach to which verbs of Yaqui, the
investigators will establish whether the verb root's core meaning affects
sentence structure in the same way that it does in English - and more
importantly, will discover whether the same types of core meanings that define
English verb classes are also at work in Yaqui. The investigators will work with
speakers of Yaqui to create a large database of Yaqui verbs and example
sentences using them, with and without each verbal suffix. By the end of the
study, it should be clear whether the core meanings that matter for English verb
classes are also important in the classification of Yaqui
verbs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using endangered, understudied Yaqui as the subject
language will provide a dual benefit, unlike a study of a widely-studied living
language with similar suffixing properties. This project will provide extensive
documentation of many important aspects of Yaqui grammar for the first time,
contributing new data to our store of knowledge about human language-data that
may well otherwise be lost to science and humanity forever. In addition, the
Yaqui language teaching community will be able to employ the materials produced
by the study in language classes, and as documentation of their linguistic
heritage. These materials will support the tribe's active efforts in the urgent
arena of language maintenance and revitalization.&lt;br/&gt;