* 0446660
* SGER:    Investigating Optical Hardware, Fixed-Weight Learning Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* A. Steven Younger, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/2005
* USD 49,626.00

Current optical neural networks have limited learning speed. Typically, light
attenuators imaged on a photographic slide control the optical couplings
(weights) between the neurons. Expensive, high-speed spatial light modulators
sometimes control these weights. In either case, the weights must be changed as
learning takes place. Creating the new weights is slow because it does not take
advantage of the optical network's speed. Developing a new slide slows some
networks even more. This project will to move the learning operation from the
attenuators to the light interactions themselves. Light signals (sometimes
called "flying weights") encode the mapping being learned. We gain two
advantages: the learning takes place at optical speeds and inexpensive slides
can still be used. We move the learning to the light interactions by including
fixed weight learning networks in the slide, increasing its complexity by up to
an order of magnitude. However, this is usually not a problem since a slide has
such high resolution. The learning really does take place at the speed of light,
which is potentially one million times faster than other neural networks, either
digitally-programmed or optical ones. The PI will develop an optical neural
network which will solve a simple problem (performing all 16 two-input logic
operations). Varied hardware and software will be investigated seeking improved
speed, integration, and efficiency. These include: 1) Photodetector arrays for
the output neurons, 2) High-speed interface for a micro-mirror array, 3) The use
of geometric optics for neuron functions, and 4) Improved fixed-weight learning
algorithms.