* 0446391
* Neuromechanical Models of the Rat Vibrissal System
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Michael Peshkin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 02/29/2008
* USD 432,840.00

Neuromechanical Models of the Rat Vibrissal System Mitra &lt;br/&gt;J. Hartmann,
Michael A. Peshkin, Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Animals use
movements to acquire and refine incoming sensory data to construct meaningful
representations of the environment. This process is often called "active
sensing." During exploratory behaviors, each movement an animal makes aids in
the extraction of task-relevant sensory data. As yet, however, neuroscientists
have little understanding of how the body and brain work together to acquire,
encode, and process the sensory data generated through movement. To study the
neuromechanical principles that underlie active sensing behaviors, the
investigators will construct an active sensing system in hardware based on
careful modeling of a well-understood sensorimotor system: the rat vibrissal
(whisker) array. The rat whisker system is an ideal model for studying active
sensing behaviors. When exploring their environment, rats sweep their whiskers
back and forth in the air and against objects at frequencies typically between 5
and 12 Hz. Using this whisking behavior, the rat can extract accurate
information about an objects spatial properties, including size, shape,
orientation, and texture. The core of the project involves (1) characterizing
the mechanics of rat whiskers and natural whisking movements, both when moving
freely in air and when in contact with objects (2) constructing an array of
actuated, biomimetic (robotic) whiskers with sensors at the base (3) developing
models to interpret the spatiotemporal patterns of whisker sensory activation
(both real and robotic) to extract object features. The results will directly
generate hypotheses about how information is represented in the rat nervous
system, and shed light on the many hundreds of neural recordings from rat
somatosensory cortex (barrelcortex) that are performed each year. This project
begins to establish rigorous mathematical models for sensory encoding in the
whisker system that may generalize to other sensorimotor pathways. In computer
science, the research may inspire studies on unsupervised 3D object recognition
using non-optical sensors. The project contributes to the interdisciplinary
scientific training of both graduate and undergraduate students, brings a
quantitative engineering approach to neuroscience, and directly complements
coursework in Neural Engineering being developed at Northwestern University.