* 0446825
* Mapping the social brain with fMRI and interactive games
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* James Rilling, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 06/30/2009
* USD 294,025.00

Knowledge of the neurobiology of human social behavior is still in its infancy.
With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Rilling and colleagues
will conduct a series of experiments that will contribute to the young but
rapidly growing field known as social cognitive neuroscience. Functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) will be used to monitor brain function in
people engaged in genuine social interactions. This will be accomplished with a
simple interactive game that has been studied for decades, the Prisoner's
Dilemma (PD) Game, and a computer interface that allows subjects in the MRI
scanner to view and respond to a non-scanned partner's behavior. The primary
goal of the project is to continue to understand the neurobiology of social
cooperation and non-cooperation. This will involve experiments on the neural
bases of the prosocial emotions, emotions that help to sustain and reinforce
cooperation, such as camaraderie and trust. The research will also inform our
knowledge of how the brain normally functions to maintain beneficial
interpersonal relationships. Four experiments will be conducted that will
address the following related questions: 1) Whether activation of brain reward
areas in response to mutual cooperation (observed previously) is dependent on
accompanying monetary gains, or whether the reward is purely social in nature;
2) Whether the neural response to mutual cooperation differs for individuals
belonging to a common, unifying group vs. different groups; 3) Whether men and
women differ in their neural response to mutual cooperation; 4) Whether
activation during decision-making can predict subjects' cooperation; and 5)
Whether using deception to achieve greater experimental control affects results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the broader impacts of this project is the
possibility that understanding how the brain normally functions to maintain
beneficial interpersonal relationships will provide clues as to the location of
brain system malfunctions in patients with social behavioral disorders, such as
autism, conduct disorder, or sociopathy. This project can shed light on the
neural correlates of camaraderie and social bonding, which can occasionally
manifest themselves in socially destructive behaviors such as gang violence,
warfare, genocide. &lt;br/&gt;