* 0446960
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Coasts in Motion:  Quantifying the patterns of coastal change using LIDAR
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Sarah Tebbens, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 04/30/2009
* USD 117,568.00

ABSTRACT The proposed research involves collecting and analyzing new
observations of shoreline change. Four new LIDAR surveys of the North Carolina
Outer Banks coastline, each separated by sixmonths, would be conducted. These
surveys, combined with previous surveys of the same coastline segments in 1997,
1998, 1999, and 2000, would allow the analysis of patterns of shoreline change
over 18 time intervals, ranging in length from six months to eight years.
Analysis techniques previously applied to the changes over a single annual
interval (Tebbens et al, 2002) quantify statistics including: 1) the amount of
shoreline change as a function of alongshore length scale; 2) the distribution
of the alongshore-lengths of contiguous zones of erosion and accretion; and 3)
the distribution of the magnitudes of erosion and accretion occurring during a
time interval. In the previous analysis, the statistics of the patterns of
shoreline varied among the different coastline segments measured. These
shoreline segments have different orientations, and therefore different
effective wave climates. Repeating the analyses over many time intervals will
test whether the statistics and the variations from one coastline segment to
another are robust. The proposed work would also test a hypothesis and potential
model for the main cause of the observed shoreline behaviors. The way the
statistics describing the patterns of shoreline change vary as a function of
regional wave climate suggests the hypothesis that these changes are driven
chiefly by subtle gradients in alongshore transport associated with subtle
deviations from a smooth shoreline. Recent work has shown that when waves
approach shore from deep water at relative angles greater than approximately 45,
shoreline perturbations grow, causing alongshore-heterogeneous shoreline changes
on any scale at which perturbations exist (Ashton et al., 2001). Waves
approaching from deep-water angles closer to shore-normal tend to smooth out the
shoreline. The patterns of change over some extended time period will result at
least partly from the interactions between the roughening and smoothing
influences, which will depend on the regional wave climate, including the
relative proportions of high and low wave-approach angles. A model treating
alongshore transport (Ashton et al., 2001; Ashton et al., 2003a; Ashton et al.,
2003b) predicts the observed trend with shoreline orientation (regional wave
climate) in one of the statistics in the previous analysis (Tebbens et al,
2002).

Broader Objectives. If the new data collection and analysis bears out the
preliminary findings concerning different coastline segments, and if other model
predictions are consistent with the observational results, the model be able to
generalize the usefulness of the observations and analyses; the model will
provide a way of extending, to any coastline for which a wave climate can be
estimated, probabilistic forecasts including expected maximum magnitudes of
erosion and accretion over a time interval, and alongshore extents of erosion
and accretion zones. Along with the practical benefits such predictions could
offer coastal managers, successful model tests would represent an advance in
basic understanding of the processes that are important for shoreline changes on
scales ranging from hundreds of meters to tens of kilometers. Models that will
be able to elucidate the range of coastline changes to be expected in the next
century as sea level rise accelerates rely on such improvements in basic
understanding. In addition, undergraduate as well as graduate students would
participate in the research and the presentation of the results.

