* 0446480
* RUI:    Selected Experiments in the Halogenations of Model Compounds of the Humic Acids and Other Contaminants of Drinking Water with Particular Emphasis on the Chloramines
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Victor Heasley, Point Loma Nazarene College
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2008
* USD 127,200.00

With this renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
continues its support of the work of Professor Victor Heasley of the Department
of Chemistry at Point Loma Nazarene College in San Diego, CA. The research will
extend the PI's studies of the chlorination of organic contaminants in water
during purification. In particular, chlorination of compounds, which are models
for humic acid impurities, will be studied along with other organic compounds
found in drinking water. Analysis of the structure of the products of these
chlorinations will provide mechanistic and theoretical insights into the
pathways that lead to the production of contaminants during water chlorination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These investigations of the chemical reactions that take
place during water purification are expected provide important information
concerning the ways drinking water becomes contaminated during chlorination. The
identification of these contaminants may lead to ways to prevent their formation
and allow their removal. Another important aspect of this project will be the
introduction of undergraduate students to an important research area. These
students will be trained in the use of modern chemical instrumentation and
experimental techniques in studies designed to foster a life-long interest in
research.&lt;br/&gt;