* 0446869
* A Cognitive Model of the Implicit Associations Test
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Christine Reyna, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2009
* USD 99,983.00

The study of implicit, automatic attitudes has been a dominant theme in social
psychology over the last two decades. While a great deal is known about the
causes and consequences of such attitudes, very little is known about the
specific cognitive processes underlying implicit attitude judgments. The major
aim of this research is to model the cognitive mechanisms underlying one of the
most widely used paradigms to test implicit attitudes: the implicit associations
test (IAT: Greenwald, McGhee, &amp; Schwartz, 1998). Since its development six
years ago, there have been over 100 articles published using the IAT to test a
variety of implicit attitudes. Despite its popularity, the meaning of IAT scores
remains controversial. Little is known about the cognitive processes driving
implicit attitudes, and even less is known about what exactly the IAT in
particular assesses. In order to map the cognitive processes underlying the IAT,
this project will employ a model that makes explicit assumptions about
processing, and explicit quantitative predictions: the diffusion model (e.g.,
Ratcliff, 1978; Ratcliff &amp; Rouder, 1998). The diffusion model is a model of
decision making in tasks wherein participants make fast binary choices (like in
the IAT). Explicit models of fast decision making can reveal a number of
interesting alternative explanations for decision processes that could
illuminate our understanding of tasks that intend to measure implicit attitudes.
In a series of IAT studies, different factors of the IAT will be manipulated in
order to test different possible cognitive processes underlying IAT effects. To
do this, a standard IAT procedure will be employed, and various factors within
this paradigm will be manipulated to test the model under different conditions.
By applying a quantitative modeling tool to the IAT, this research can better
reveal the cognitive processes that are at play when a person takes an IAT. In
so doing, three goals can be attained: (1) to advance our field's understanding
of the cognitive processes used when participating in the IAT; (2) to use the
diffusion model to account for IAT data, and to test different versions of the
model that are anchored in theories about the locus of IAT effects; and (3) to
establish a data set of different parametric manipulations in the IAT so that
future researchers can use the IAT more strategically depending on the cognitive
processes they wish to explore. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By effectively modeling
the IAT, scientists would be better able to use this popular methodology more
appropriately and effectively. This is especially urgent given that more and
more scientists are interested in exploring intervention applications of the
IAT, such as in understanding attitudes related to psychological dysfunctions,
consumer behavior, and so on. A better understanding of unconscious
contributions to attitudes and behavior could provide greater insight into
important social issues, such as attitudes toward racial
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;