* 0446604
* CAREER:    Preconditioning Large, Sparse Linear Systems:   Theory and Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Tzu-Yi Chen, Pomona College
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 02/28/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Preconditioners comprise a range of techniques for transforming a system of
linear equations Ax=b into a related system that is somehow ``better''. For
example, a solver may take less time to compute the solution to the new system,
it may compute a more accurate solution, or it may do both. Although a good
preconditioner can be critical to computing an accurate solution efficiently,
choosing a good preconditioner from the many that are available can be
difficult.

The goal of this project is the development of tools to help users choose from
large families of preconditioners one that is likely to be well-suited to their
particular application; the initial focus will be on preconditioners that are
based on reordering the rows and/or columns of a matrix, and those that compute
an incomplete factorization of the matrix. In the process of developing these
tools, the PI, undergraduate researchers, and other collaborators will work on
developing better heuristics, improving theoretical knowledge about specific
preconditioners, creating an extensible framework for evaluating different
preconditioners, and making the results of extensive experimentation available
in a user-friendly form. All work will help lead to a better understanding of
the performance of specific preconditioners on sparse systems from specific
applications.

As a professor at a liberal arts college, the PI's primary plans for broader
impact include: supervising undergraduate and postbaccalaureate research,
seeking opportunities for students to present their work outside of the local
community and more generally preparing them for graduate work; outreach to
groups traditionally underrepresented in computer science through mentoring and
the formation of support networks; and the development, refinement, and
dissemination of courses that emphasize the role of mathematics in computer
science, as well as of courses that give a basic understanding of computing to
students who are not computer science majors but whose education will
nevertheless be enhanced by such knowledge.

