* 0446749
* Conjugated Halocarbon Chemistry for New Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Nancy Goroff, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2008
* USD 399,000.00

This research program addresses the chemistry of unsaturated halocarbon
compounds. Given their Lewis acidity and the general reactivity of C-X bonds,
conjugated halocarbons such as halocumulenes and haloalkynes provide good
starting points for making a large variety of carbon-rich materials.
Topochemical polymerization of diiodopolyynes in ordered crystals will form
polydiacetylenes made up only of carbon and iodine. Preliminary evidence
supports formation of such polymers when cocrystals of diiodobutadiyne and
bis(pyridyl) host molecules are subjected to high pressures (&gt;3 GPa). The
electronic and optical properties of these unprecedented iodine-substituted
polydiacetylenes will be examined, and their transformation into iodine-doped
carbyne will be explored. In addition, methods will be developed for
regioselective halogenation and hydrohalogenation of diynes to make
halocumulenes and halobutenynes. Experiments will center on controlling the
stoichiometry of addition and on understanding the influences of structure on
the regiochemistry of reaction. Further studies will exploit the solution-phase
reductive coupling of these halocumulenes and haloenynes to prepare otherwise
inaccessible polymers, including polydiacetylenes, poly(ethynylacetylenes), and
polyacenes. Larger unsaturated halocarbons, including longer diiodopolyynes and
tetraiodocumulenes, will also be targeted, pushing the boundaries of known
halocarbon chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Nancy
S. Goroff, of the Department of Chemistry at SUNY - Stony Brook. Professor
Goroff is developing new methods for the preparation of molecules and polymers
with unusual architectures and chemical composition. Because of their electronic
and optical properties, these materials will have applications as semiconductors
and as non-linear optical absorbers. Such organic materials will be lighter in
weight, more easily modifiable, and less expensive than their inorganic
counterparts. New synthetic methods are critical to the development of this
important field. A major component of this proposal involves collaborative
research, increasing communication across national and disciplinary boundaries.
The graduate students and undergraduates supported by this grant will gain
experience in modern organic synthesis, computational modeling, spectroscopy,
and polymer characterization methods. They will learn how to communicate about
science by working together and by presenting their results at professional
meetings. The PI has demonstrated a strong commitment to integrating research
and education, an effort that will continue with the proposed research.