* 0446057
* Effects of leptin and its Mechanisms of Action on Mammalian Trophoblast Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Thomas Kunz, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Slocum
* 01/31/2011
* USD 450,000.00

Central to an understanding of successful pregnancies is determining how the
placenta&lt;br/&gt;attaches itself to the uterine wall of the mother. The outer
lining of the placenta contains a layer&lt;br/&gt;of cells (trophoblasts), which
have the property of being able to invade the uterine lining,
thus&lt;br/&gt;establishing the placenta. How the invasion process is initiated
and regulated is uncertain. In&lt;br/&gt;this project, the hypothesis that the
reproductive hormone leptin stimulates invasiveness of&lt;br/&gt;trophoblast
cells will be investigated in trophoblast cells grown on an artificial, protein-
coated&lt;br/&gt;membrane. Invasive cells secrete enzymes that degrade the
protein coating, and permit the cells&lt;br/&gt;to move through tiny pores in
the membrane; the number of cells penetrating the membrane are&lt;br/&gt;counted
under a microscope. The ability of leptin to stimulate invasion of trophoblasts
from&lt;br/&gt;placentas at early and late gestation will be examined; we
predict that leptin will promote&lt;br/&gt;invasion only in trophoblasts from
early-stage placentas. The molecular mechanisms by which&lt;br/&gt;leptin
stimulates invasiveness will be determined by examining changes in intracellular
signaling&lt;br/&gt;molecules and gene expression induced by leptin. Placentas
will be studied in species&lt;br/&gt;representing the two most abundant
mammalian orders. The mouse placenta does not produce&lt;br/&gt;leptin, but
expresses receptors for leptin and is therefore sensitive to leptin actions. The
little&lt;br/&gt;brown bat placenta produces and secretes leptin (as does the
human placenta), and like the mouse&lt;br/&gt;placenta is a target for leptin.
The effects of leptin on mouse and bat placental function will
be&lt;br/&gt;compared. Broader impacts of this project include: 1) documentation
of the importance of leptin&lt;br/&gt;in establishing the placenta in diverse
mammals; 2) understanding the role of leptin as a general&lt;br/&gt;signal for
cell migration and invasion (i.e., in other cell types where leptin is known to
act and&lt;br/&gt;where cells are invasive); 3) understanding gestational stage-
dependent actions of hormones on&lt;br/&gt;trophoblast cells; and 4) education
of young scientists-in-training and outreach to include&lt;br/&gt;participation
of underrepresented minorities (one postdoctoral fellow, one to two
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students and four undergraduates students will be mentored
per year on this project). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;