* 0446385
* Single Molecule Studies of Protein Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2012
* Susan Marqusee, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2012
* USD 971,444.00

The objective of this project, jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, is to investigate the protein-
folding problem using single molecule studies and an optical trap (laser
tweezers) methodology. Protein folding, the mechanism by which the amino acid
sequence encodes the energy landscape of a protein, remains a major challenge
for modern molecular biology. This project involves the use of a novel method to
manipulate and monitor protein conformational changes at the single molecule
level using the optical trap or laser tweezers. This apparatus allows a direct
probe of the role of mechanical stress on protein structure and stability.
Mechanically induced unfolding experiments have the additional advantage that,
unlike bulk studies, the reaction coordinate is well defined: the end-to-end
distance of the molecule. In contrast to the more common mechanical induced
unfolding studies using the atomic force microscope, the softer spring constant
of the optical trap offers the potential to observe protein refolding as well as
unfolding. The proposed set-up consists of single proteins, or even small
domains, connected to polystyrene beads via long dsDNA handles. The handles are
tethered to the protein via unique disulfide bonds. One bead is held in place at
the end of a pipette by suction, the other by the optical trap. Force is applied
by pulling the beads away from each other. Initial studies on the well-
characterized protein ribonuclease H demonstrate the ability to monitor the
unfolding and refolding trajectory of a single molecule. The protein is observed
to fold through a compact intermediate. The simplicity of the set-up allows for
easy manipulation of proteins of varying sequence, and with various attachment
points of the handles allowing the force to be applied along different regions
of the structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train students at the
interface of chemistry, physics, and biology. The work will require a
combination of students and postdoctoral fellows with diverse backgrounds to
work closely together. The project will also involve undergraduates with a
background in engineering and physics, giving them direct exposure to the
biological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;