* 0446384
* Efflux Transporters in Sea Urchin Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* David Epel, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2008
* USD 390,000.00

Project Summary for IBN-0446384&lt;br/&gt;Efflux Transporters in Sea Urchin
Development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efflux transporters in embryos can
have both housekeeping and developmental roles. The housekeeping role can
protect the embryo from external toxicants during embryogenesis. The
developmental role can pump endogenous signaling molecules out of cells to
influence adjacent cells or to feedback on the cell itself in an autocrine
fashion. Preliminary work reveals members of the mrp family of ABC efflux
transporters are dormant in the unfertilized sea urchin egg and become active as
part of the response to fertilization. The increased activity appears to result
from movement of vesicles containing these transporters to the egg surface after
fertilization and insertion of the proteins into the membrane. Proposed
experiments will prove or disprove the vesicle movement hypothesis using
antibodies to follow any changes in the location of the transport
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results suggest several developmental roles. One
is a role in forwarding cell division during the cleavage period. The proposed
research will examine specificity of the effect by injection of antibodies to
the active site of the transporter. If indicated as a specific effect a search
will be made for the active substance effluxed by the transporter. A plausible
endogenous substrate are leukotrienes and levels of these compounds will be
measured during cleavage and later development. &lt;br/&gt;The other transporter
function is a role in signaling in primary mesenchyme cell differentiation,
perhaps in the cross-talk between ectoderm and underlying mesenchyme cells. The
proposed studies will describe the expression of new transporters during
development, localize them by in situ hybridization and assess their role using
morpholinos to specifically prevent new transport expression. &lt;br/&gt;This
work also broadens the view of efflux transporters, which has in the past been
primarily centered on their medical relevance in terms of evading drug therapy
during treatment against cancer. The proposed research looks at these ubiquitous
molecules in new ways; in terms of a fertilization response leading to re-
organization of the plasma membrane, in terms of a role in normal cell functions
such as mitosis and in terms of a signaling role for integrating morphogenetic
responses. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research also has broad impact on education,
as many of these experimental results can be integrated into laboratory
exercises used in introductory biology labs at Stanford and in high school and
college exercises across the country. To facilitate this, exercises suggested by
this research will be disseminated on the widely used (last year received 4
million hits) Sea Urchin Embryology web site
(http://www.stanford.edu/group/Urchin/ ).This combination of environmental work
with cell and developmental biology also attracts numerous undergraduate
students to the P.I's lab (often from under-represented groups); these students
often receive University recognition for outstanding undergraduate research and
many of these students later go on to graduate study in developmental biology
and environmental sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;