* 0446260
* Molecular Characterization of AtCam9
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Raymond Zielinski, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2008
* USD 366,000.00

Project Abstract

Calcium ions (Ca2+) are used as messengers in all eukaryotic cells to trigger
physiological responses to internal and external stimuli, such as hormones and
environmental stresses. The initial perception of Ca2+ is accomplished by
proteins that specifically bind the metal and in turn modulate the activities of
other cellular proteins. The best characterized example of this class of
proteins is calmodulin (Cam). Cam proteins have long been implicated in
regulating plant growth and development as well as responses of plants to
stressful stimuli, but the specific mechanisms by which they participate in
these responses are not well understood. This proposal focuses on defining the
role of ATCam9, a novel member of the AtCam gene family of Ca2+-binding proteins
in Arabidopsis. Preliminary data have revealed that AtCam9 might function by a
mechanism similar to, but not identical with, more conventional Cam proteins.
This suggests that AtCam9 functions by interacting with and regulating a unique
set of proteins. In addition, knockout mutants of AtCam9 display a rapid
growth/overall enlarged phenotype compared with control Arabidopsis plants;
knockouts of conventional Cam genes yield plants with reduced growth phenotypes.
Thus, AtCam9 appears to function in a manner distinct from conventional Cam
proteins on both the molecular and organismic levels. The hypothesis that will
be tested in this proposal is whether AtCam9 functions as a negative regulator
of the rate of plant growth. To test this model and define the pathway(s) by
which AtCam9 modulates growth, the project will pursue four specific aims: (1)
It will be determined whether AtCam9 regulates growth by modulating cell
expansion or whether it also plays a role in cell division. (2) It will be
determined whether conventional AtCam proteins can substitute for AtCam9, and
conversely, whether AtCam9 can substitute for conventional Cam proteins. (3) The
cell types and subcellular locations in which AtCam9 is expressed will be
defined. As part of this aim, it will be determined whether AtCam9 is freely
diffusible, a property that will indicate whether AtCam9 functions by
interacting with other proteins. (4) The identities of AtCam9-interacting
proteins will be determined, and the timing and subcellular locations of the
interactions with AtCam9 will be defined.

Broader Impact of the Proposed Activity. Elucidating the specific functions
mediated by AtCam9 will provide a deeper understanding of the roles of Ca2+ in
regulating plant growth and development, factors that are central to
agricultural productivity. Understanding the molecular bases for the unexpected
phenotype displayed by AtCam9 knockout plants may facilitate novel strategies
for engineering or controlling plant growth. The project will provide training
for students from the undergraduate through the postdoctoral levels in protein
biochemistry, Arabidopsis molecular genetics, analyses of plant growth and
cellular imaging.

