* 0446738
* Exploratory Research on Devotional Values Among Jihadist Suicide Terrorists
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Scott Atran, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2006
* USD 24,822.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research is a preliminary investigation of the
role of devotional values in cultural conflicts. The focus is on interviewing
operatives from Islamic Jihadist organizations that sponsor suicide attacks in
order to evaluate the contribution of devotional values (DVs) in motivating
suicide terrorism. The hypothesis is that devotional values - which encompass
aspects of what political scientists, sociologists, anthropologists and
psychologists call non-instrumental, sacred or protected values - are critical
in generating and sustaining seemingly intractable cultural conflicts.
Interviews with captured and freely-operating militant Islamic Jihadists in
Israel / Palestine, Turkey, Singapore, the Philippines and Indonesia will probe
the nature of extreme devotional values. The interviews will elicit information
that permits a more comprehensive and longer-term study, involving a more a
pointed set of questions that can be analyzed for patterns showing tradeoff
reluctance, quantity insensitivity, immunity from free rider concerns, framing
effects, evidence of moral outrage and, more generally, which sorts of cognitive
entailments make a suicide terrorist action difficult to carry out and perhaps
even not worthwhile to do at all. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This
research helps to provide the theoretical framework and empirical information
needed to understand the point at which commitment becomes absolute and non-
negotiable, in order to find out what is needed to reach people before they come
to it. It furnishes a cross-cultural methodology for eliciting devotional values
from Jihadist militants, which can be readily transferred to other populations
of religiously and ideologically-driven actors. It informs how cognition and
emotional judgments interact in devotional values to affect decision making and
risk. More generally, the work makes clear how important understanding the
mental and motivational structure of players in a given situation is for
predicting and understanding their behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. Current risk assessment approaches for resolving ethnic conflicts, or
for countering religiously motivated terrorism, often assume that adversaries
model the world through rational choices that are commensurable across cultures.
Such assumptions are prevalent in conflict and risk modeling by U.S. diplomatic,
military and intelligence services. This research suggests that culturally
distinct value frameworks constrain preferences and choices in ways not readily
translatable across frameworks. This research enables a better of assessment of
the motivations of religiously-motivated suicide terrorism - the most deadly,
destabilizing and rapidly developing form of terrorism. The results will be of
immense interest to policy makers, officials and members of the public seeking
to better understand the nature of homicidal political acts. &lt;br/&gt;