* 0446039
* Regulation of Protein Phosphatase 2A Activity in Arabidopsis by the RCN1 Protein
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Alison DeLong, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 01/31/2009
* USD 456,000.00

Reversible protein phosphorylation is a ubiquitous regulatory mechanism
governing biological processes such as the cell cycle, metabolism, transmembrane
signaling and gene regulation. Phosphorylating and dephosphorylating enzyme
activities are carefully balanced in normal cells, and often are regulated by
covalent modifications, association of specific regulatory subunits and
formation of large multi-component signaling complexes. The protein phosphatase
2A (PP2A) holoenzyme is a heterotrimeric complex containing a catalytic subunit
(PP2A-C) bound to one A and one B regulatory subunit. The mechanisms allowing
the regulatory subunits to control PP2A activity remain poorly defined. In
Arabidopsis, small gene families encode each of the PP2A subunits. The ROOTS
CURL IN NPA (RCN1) gene encodes one of three regulatory A subunits, and the RCN1
protein acts as a positive regulator of PP2A activity. Loss of RCN1 function
perturbs seedling root growth by altering transport of the growth regulator
auxin. Mutations in the RCN1 paralogs PP2AA2 and PP2AA3 have little effect on
overall PP2A enzyme activity, indicating that RCN1 plays a cardinal role in
regulating PP2A activity. Cryptic functions for the PP2AA2 and PP2AA3 isoforms
are unmasked in the rcn1 mutant background. Thus, although the A subunits of
Arabidopsis PP2A exhibit very strong sequence similarity, their functions are
not fully redundant. The basis for functional specialization of A subunit
isoforms is unknown. &lt;br/&gt; The proposed experiments focus on defining the
protein sequences and/or expression patterns required for the unique biological
functions of RCN1, identifying specific binding partners and characterizing
conditional and tissue-specific functions. The rcn1 mutant phenotype clearly
defines non-redundant aspects of RCN1 A subunit function. The working model is
that amino acid sequence determinants and/or unique aspects of the RCN1
expression pattern are required for these non-redundant functions. Furthermore,
RCN1-specific functions are mediated by protein complexes that contain different
PP2A subunits and accessory factors, targets or regulators. The proposed
experiments will identify key determinants of RCN1 function, providing new
insight into the regulation and biological functions of PP2A activity. The long-
term goals of this project are to define the circuitry that regulates PP2A
activity and to elucidate the normal functions of PP2A enzymes in
plants.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; Protein phosphorylation levels in
cells are determined by a highly dynamic balance between the activities of
protein kinases and phosphatases, and protein phosphatase activity levels are
exquisitely calibrated. The Arabidopsis system provides a powerful model for
this analysis because of the molecular and genetic tools that are available for
generating and analyzing specific phosphatase mutants and identifying
interacting regulatory factors. This systematic approach to the analysis of
phosphatase regulation will provide new insights into this fundamental cellular
control mechanism. The proposed work will provide training opportunities in the
areas of molecular genetics, plant physiology and development, functional
genomics and proteomics at the undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral levels.
The PI's laboratory has a strong record of undergraduate authorship on
publications. The PI is committed to providing high-quality research
opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students, particularly members of
under-represented groups, and also is involved in increasing outreach efforts
through Brown's MCB Graduate Program to under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;