* 0446109
* Calcium-Dependent Protein Kinases in Plant Defense Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Jen Sheen, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 04/30/2009
* USD 540,000.00

The goal of the research project is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
underlying early defense signal transduction mediated by calcium-dependent
protein kinases (CDPKs) in plants. Recent discoveries have revealed remarkable
conservation in the recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) by leucine-rich-repeat (LRR) receptors in innate immune responses from
plants, insects, to mammals. Plant cells appear to possess many sensors to
detect non-self PAMPs and launch convergent as well as specific defense
responses. An Arabidopsis leaf cell system based on the induction of early
defense gene expression by diverse PAMPs, including flagellin, LPS
(lipopolysaccharide), harpin (a secreted bacterial protein), NPP1 (a surface
fungal necrosis-inducing Phytophthora protein 1) and chitin (a fungal cell-wall
component), will be used to study innate immune signaling in plants. The new
research will focus on the elucidation of signaling pathways controlled by a
group of CDPKs in innate immune responses. The cell-based system and reverse
genetics greatly facilitate the application of a functional genomic approach to
determine the precise roles of multiple CDPKs in convergent and specific
signaling events initiated by diverse pathogens. The project will provide
excellent training opportunities for research fellows and undergraduate/graduate
students in a multidisciplinary academic environment with integrated programs
for community services and for supporting woman and minority scientists. The
molecular mechanisms mediating PAMP signaling in innate immune response is a
very new area in plant defense. The Arabidopsis cell-based system is recently
developed. Some major breakthroughs in the understanding of plant innate immune
responses will be generated through this NSF-sponsored research program. Because
the PAMP-mediated signaling is a more general and conserved defense mechanism,
the work may create new tools for the generation of more durable disease
resistance to a broader spectrum of pathogens in plants and improve agriculture.
Information and materials generated from this project will be available to the
plant community.