* 0446954
* The nature of first word combinations:  insights from the comprehension and production of subject-verb agreement and tense-marking by young native French-speaking children
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2011
* Geraldine Legendre, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2011
* USD 328,336.00

"The Nature of first word combinations: insights from the comprehension and
production of subject-verb agreement and tense-marking by young native French-
speaking children"

Abstract

Acquiring one's native language is a tremendous achievement. Most 3 year olds
already exhibit both a solid understanding of the linguistic exchanges that
surround them, and also, within the limits set by their expanding vocabulary, a
significant ability to express themselves in that language. Four main questions
arise: How do they get to this point? Where do they start? Do they exhibit the
same patterns in production (the forms they use) and comprehension (the forms
they understand)? How much is tied to the particular grammatical properties of
the language they are acquiring? Few non-contradictory answers exist, in large
part because of the notorious difficulty of testing linguistic comprehension in
very young children.

With funding from the Linguistics Program and the Office of International
Science and Engineering, Dr. Geraldine Legendre and Dr. Isabelle Barriere will
seek answers to these and other related questions using recently developed non-
invasive experimental methods. Based on measuring the duration of gazing at
short videos paired with short audio descriptions that match or do not match the
videos, these methods have been used to test linguistic comprehension in very
young children acquiring English. The research team will apply such methods to
the testing of children acquiring French, a language which has a richer system
of marking tense, person, and gender distinctions than English. This novel study
of comprehension in young children from a cross-linguistic perspective will
inform the debate on, and attempt to resolve contradictory claims pertaining to,
first language acquisition. Broader impacts include advancing the diagnostic of
atypical linguistic development by establishing a benchmark for both typical
production and comprehension, creating research opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students at Johns Hopkins University, and fostering
scientific dialogue with research communities abroad.