* 0446540
* Prosodic Position in Cross Language Perception and Production
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2010
* Kenneth de Jong, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2010
* USD 299,786.00

Most people have the remarkable ability to produce speech sounds at a very high
rate of speed, and also to be able to identify the speech sound others are
making and to relate them to the complex system of a language. Even more
astounding, the majority of speakers in the world can do this in two different
languages; they can flexibly talk and listen using often very different
linguistic systems. To understand how this is accomplished, Dr. Kenneth de Jong
and a research team will examine how Koreans produce and perceive consonants in
English and how their developing skills relate to other skills having to do with
language structure. These tasks require them to identify and produce the sounds,
and to be able to break up English utterances into syllables and to determine
where stress lies. Their abilities in doing these tasks will tell us how tightly
connected the various perception, motor, and classification skills are related
to each other. The research group will also determine how their English
perception skills rely on their Korean perception skills by having them classify
the English sounds with Korean labels. Put together, these studies will show how
the various skills of speaking, listening, and generalizing fit together in the
learning of a second language. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will
make a significant contribution to the fields of second language acquisition and
of phonetics by examining a number of different perception and production
abilities in a good sampling of the English consonant system. Most previous
studies examine small numbers of different segments and rarely examine
production and perception skills in the same individuals. This project will
particularly determine how systematic effects found for one set of sounds are
across the larger system. It will also systematically determine the effect of
prosodic organization on both production and perception skills. The second
language acquirers, since they are in the process of rapid change, give a window
into the structure of speaking and perception skills, and how they relate to
each other. &lt;br/&gt;