* 0446791
* SGER: Sensitivity of the West African Monsoon to Gulf of Guinea Sea Surface Temperatures (SSTs)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Kerry Cook, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2005
* USD 24,725.00

Output from state-of-the art coupled atmosphere/ocean global models will be
examined to evaluate the models' ability to capture a distinct mode of rainfall
variability over West&lt;br/&gt;Africa. When the eastern Atlantic (Gulf of
Guinea) is warm, for example, summer monsoon precipitation is observed to be
especially strong along the southern (Guinean) coast of Africa. At the same
time, rainfall in the Sahel region to the north tends to be much lower than
normal, bringing crop failure and severe hardship for the
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past studies of this mode of variability in
models and observations have identified the physical processes that lead to this
dipole precipitation response. Enhanced precipitation along the coast is due to
increased evaporation to the south over the warm Gulf of Guinea, since the
presence of an equatorial (east/west) Walker circulation with its sinking branch
over the Gulf prevents locally-enhanced convection in association with the
warmer sea surface. Reduced precipitation over the Sahel is a consequence of the
enhanced sinking of warm, dry air flowing equatorward out of the Saharan high
near 700 hPa, and the requirements of potential vorticity conservation for this
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model output will be examined to understand the
relationship between a model's ability to simulate the precipitation dipole and
its resolution and physical treatments. Atmospheric moisture budget, vorticity,
and moist static energy budget analyses will be used to evaluate the mechanisms
of the simulated variability. The possibility that the dipole pattern will occur
more frequently, or become permanently established, in the future as ocean
temperatures rise will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
contribute to our fundamental understanding of how drought occurs in the Sahel
and lead to an improved ability to predict African drought on all time scales.
It will also provide guidance to environmental managers and policy makers
regarding the quality of climate projections for this part of the world.