* 0446423
* Role of TAF1-mediated Histone Modifications for Transcription Activation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2008
* Frank Sauer, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 07/31/2008
* USD 594,904.00

The genome of eukaryotic cells contains several thousand genes, whose expression
has to be precisely regulated to keep cells functional and alive. Regulation of
eukaryotic gene expression at the level of transcription initiation depends on
an intricate interplay between transcription factors, proteins that establish
transcription-competent chromatin by posttranslational modification of histones
and chromatin remodeling, and the general RNA polymerase II transcription
machinery (GTM). That interplay culminates in the recruitment of the GTM to the
promoter of target genes and transcription initiation. The GTM consists of RNA
polymerase II, general transcription factors (GTF) TFIIA, -B, -D, -E, -F, -H and
-I, and associated cofactors. The GTF TFIID is essential in transcription
regulation by nucleating the assembly of the GTM at promoters. TFIID is a multi-
protein complex that consists of the TATA-box binding protein (TBP) and at least
12 TBP-associated factors (TAFs). TAF1 is the largest TFIID-subunit and
contributes to the nucleating function of TFIID by 1) interacting with TBP, most
of the other TAFs, transcription regulators, and GTFs, 2) contributing to the
interaction of TFIID with promoters, and 3) posttranslational modification of
GTFs and histones. TAF1 acetylates histones H3 and H4, phosphorylates histone
H2B, and ubiquitinates histone H1. TAF1-mediated histone modifications have been
correlated with transcription activation. However, the functional importance of
TAF1-mediated histone modifications in transcription initiation in the context
of metazoan genomes remains unclear. The central hypothesis of this research
project is that the histone modifying activities of TAF1 play a fundamental,
potentially general role in metazoan transcription. The specific aims are to
elucidate the functional importance of the various histone-modifying activities
of TAF1 in (1) cell cycle regulation and (2) body pattern formation in the fly
Drosophila, and (3) elucidate the general functional importance of TAF1-mediated
histone modifications in transcription activation in the context of the
Drosophila genome. In the first aim the results of RT-PCR and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (XChIP) experiments will be correlated to dissect the
functional importance of TAF1-mediated histone modifications in the regulation
of essential cell cycle genes. In the second aim genetic analysis will be
combined with biochemical assays to assess the functional importance of
TAF1-mediated histone modifications in the transcription regulation of
segmentation genes that establish the body pattern of Drosophila. The third aim
will use genome-wide, DNA microarray-based gene expression profiling and XChIP-
on-chip analyses using probes isolated from TAF1-deficient Drosophila cells and
flies expressing mutant TAF1-derivatives lacking one or multiple histone-
specific catalytic activities to uncover the functional importance of
TAF1-mediated histone modifications in transcription in the context of a
metazoan genome. Transcription initiation is one of the most fundamental
cellular processes. DNA in eukaryotic cells is associated with proteins, mainly
histones to form chromatin. The association of DNA with proteins in chromatin
can prevent transcription initiation. The goal of this project is to gain novel
insights into the molecular mechanisms that facilitate transcription initiation
in the context of chromatin. The project will involve undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral researchers and provide novel research tools that will be made
available to the scientific community.