* 0446036
* Characterization of a novel 56 kDa neuropeptide from Drosophila melanogaster
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Qisheng Song, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 02/28/2009
* USD 389,999.00

Insects are encased in a semi-rigid exoskeleton. To allow for growth and
metamorphosis, periodically insects molt and shed their old exoskeleton. After
each molt, the newly formed exoskeleton usually is soft, flexible, and lacks
physical strength to provide protection. Insects cannot survive without the
proper hardening of the exoskeleton after each molting cycle. It has been
reported that a brain neuropeptide regulates the cuticular hardening process.
Despite many efforts over the past four decades, a functional neuropeptide
responsible for insect cuticular hardening has not been cloned and characterized
successfully. Using a specific monoclonal antibody, a 56 kDa neuropeptide (the
p56) has been identified and localized to a pair of posterior lateral
neurosecretory cells in the brain of the housefly, Musca domestica. Preliminary
results from developmental and functional analyses suggest that the p56 could be
a putative neuropeptide responsible for cuticular hardening. Dr. Song proposes
to use biochemical and molecular techniques to (1) purify the p56 from the model
insect, Drosophila melanogaster, for partial amino acid sequencing, (2) clone
and characterize the p56 gene, (3) investigate developmental profiles of the
p56, and (4) identify the role of the p56. Successful completion of the proposed
research will lead to identifying the p56 neuropeptide gene and determining its
role in cuticular hardening. Elucidation of the role of the p56 neuropeptide
will add important new knowledge about the regulation of insect growth and
development, and should be helpful in the design of biorational control agents
to disrupt the cuticular hardening process in insects. This work will also
result in graduate and undergraduate student training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;