* 0446240
* Relationships Between Growth, Aging, and Lifespan
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* S. Kerry Kornfeld, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2009
* USD 420,000.00

Aging is a fascinating process that occurs in many plants and animals, including
humans. Although aging is extremely important, the causes of aging and the
regulation of the aging process are not well characterized. Recently, exciting
discoveries regarding genetic and environmental factors that regulate aging have
come from studies of the Caenorhabditis elegans nematode worm, and these factors
may have evolutionarily conserved roles in vertebrate aging. However, much
remains to be learned about how these genetic and environmental factors regulate
aging. The experiments in this proposal will address this important issue. The
first specific aim is to develop quantitative measures of the growth and aging
of somatic and reproductive systems. Longitudinal studies of wild-type animals
will be used to characterize the relationships between these processes. In
particular, these studies will elucidate the relationships between the growth of
somatic and reproductive systems: are there tradeoffs between the growth of
different organ systems or do these systems grow in concert? These studies will
elucidate the relationships between the aging of somatic and reproductive
systems: is the age-related degeneration of one organ dependent or independent
of the age-related degeneration of another organ? These studies will elucidate
the relationships between growth and aging: does robust growth of somatic or
reproductive systems have an eventual cost and result in accelerated aging?
Finally, these studies will elucidate how growth and aging of these systems
relate to lifespan. The second specific aim is to use these analytic methods to
elucidate the mechanisms of lifespan regulation by genetic and environmental
factors. Cold temperatures extend the lifespan of many poikilotherm animals,
such as C. elegans, and the proposed experiments will characterize the
mechanisms of temperature regulation. Genetic analysis of C. elegans has
demonstrated that an insulin-like signaling pathway and mitochondrial function
significantly affect lifespan regulation. The mechanisms of lifespan regulation
will be elucidated by analyzing the relationships between growth and aging in
these mutants. Together, these studies will elucidate the aging process in wild-
type animals and the regulation of aging by genetic and environmental factors.
Intellectual merit of the proposed activity: Aging is a fundamental biological
process that remains poorly characterized. The C. elegans model system is well
suited to studies of aging, and important insights have already emerged from
studies of this organism. By developing quantitative measurements of the growth
and aging of somatic and reproductive functions and using longitudinal studies
to characterize the relationships between these processes, this proposal is
likely to generate substantial insights into the aging process. By using these
techniques to characterize environmental and genetic regulation of aging, this
proposal is likely to advance the understanding of how the aging process is
controlled. Broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity: The proposed
experiments will integrate research and teaching and provide opportunities for
research training for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students,
including individuals from underrepresented groups. This training will
contribute to preparing the next generation of scientists in our society. The
results of these experiments will be disseminated by publication in scientific
journals and be available to the scientific community and the public. Aging has
profound affects on individuals, and the aging population has profound affects
on society. An understanding of aging may help individuals and society cope with
this enormous challenge.