* 0446846
* Neural Mechanisms of Binding Trait Inferences to Faces
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2008
* James Haxby, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacia Friedman-Hill
* 05/31/2008
* USD 495,001.00

Faces are a major source of socially relevant information about other people. In
the process of face perception, people not only effortlessly recognize familiar
individuals and facial expressions of emotions but also retrieve specific
knowledge about, and feelings towards, the person. While the neural mechanisms
underlying the perceptual analysis of faces are relatively well understood,
little is known about the mechanisms associating a face with a multifaceted
person representation. With funding by the National Science Foundation, Dr.
Alexander Todorov will investigate the neural mechanisms through which the act
of face perception delivers a representation of the person with information
about the person's inferred attributes. The long-term objective of the project
is to identify the distributed neural network of person perception that extends
beyond areas dedicated to perceptual analysis of faces (e.g., fusiform gyrus and
superior temporal sulcus). A special emphasis will be placed on the study of
first impressions. The project will demonstrate the extent to which inferences
acquired from minimal information modulate neural activity during face
perception. The research will investigate how affective trait inferences about
other people are spontaneously retrieved in face perception, the degree of
automaticity of these retrieval processes, and the neural regions engaged in
both implicit and explicit person evaluation. For example, the research will
test whether affective trait inferences can be dissociated from explicit memory
for the information that triggered these inferences, and whether such inferences
can be detected below thresholds of conscious awareness. The research will be
conducted using both behavioral and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
experiments in which the information associated with faces, the conditions of
face perception, and the goal of participants are systematically manipulated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research integrates insights from both social
psychology and cognitive neuroscience and extends both fields. The findings will
be important for social psychologists studying impression formation and social
interaction and for cognitive neuroscientists studying the interplay of neural
systems underlying perceptual and affective analysis of stimuli. The findings
will have implications for social sciences, including behavioral economics and
political science. The project will involve the efforts of both undergraduate
and graduate students. This research will be used to guide students' research
projects in psychology and psychology for public policy classes. Understanding
the cognitive and neural processes underlying impression formation would help to
reduce potential biases and discrimination in diverse settings where person
impressions are of utmost importance and affect important social outcomes and
well-being.&lt;br/&gt;