* 0446168
* Developmental Regulation of Motor Neuron Dendrite Plasticity by Glutamate Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Fiona Inglis, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 05/31/2010
* USD 299,000.00

Nerve cells, or neurons, receive inputs from other neurons predominantly within
their dendrites, highly branched structures emanating from the cell body. In
many neurons, the patterns of dendrites are refined during development, through
a process that is dependent on the activity of the input neurons. This process
has been hypothesized to eliminate parts of the dendrites that receive erroneous
inputs, thus "hardwiring" the neurons for maximal efficiency.

This project employs cultures containing spinal cord motor neurons to
investigate how these neurons use electrical activity to accomplish refinement
of their dendrites. Real-time imaging will be performed to examine how rates of
growth, elongation and elimination of dendritic segments are affected by the
neurotransmitter glutamate binding to specific glutamate receptors on the cell
surface. Fluorescent-tagged glutamate receptors will be introduced into neurons,
to determine whether these are co-localized at areas of dynamic growth or
retraction of dendrites. In addition, level of gene expression for each receptor
will be measured using a quantitative PCR method, to determine how the
availability of each receptor is controlled during the development of motor
neurons. Finally, levels of glutamate receptor expression will be experimentally
reduced, to investigate whether dendrite growth is compromised. These studies
are important because they will provide information regarding how developing
neurons attain patterns of connectivity by altering their ability to respond to
neurotransmitters.

The broader impact of this proposal includes significant enhancement of graduate
and undergraduate scholarship and research at Tulane University. The integration
of current research strategies into graduate and undergraduate training and
classroom discussions will promote neuroscience as a subject for study
throughout the higher education system.