* 0446220
* The Serpin Balancing Act:  Force Transduction, Conformational Changes &amp; Protease Inhibition
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Anne Gershenson, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2008
* USD 429,999.00

Inhibitory members of the serpin superfamily inactivate serine and cysteine
proteases via a unique mechanism which requires formation of a covalent bond
between the protease and serpin, translocation of the protease relative to the
serpin, remodeling of the serpin structure and deformation of the protease
structure. Unlike most biological processes that use ATP as an energy source,
energy for the serpin structural changes and the concomitant protease unfolding
arises from structural defects in the initial serpin conformation which are
resolved by the structural remodeling. Using single molecule Forster resonance
energy transfer (FRET), the relative orientations of the serpin and protease in
the complex can be determined. Single molecule fluorescence anisotropy
experiments will also be performed to monitor the local disruption of the
protease structure. FRET experiments on wild type a1-proteinase inhibitor
(serpin) and trypsin (protease) reveal that there are a number of conformations
present in the inhibitory complex and that the conformational distribution may
be modulated by altering the trypsin stability. By performing FRET experiments
on a number of mutants of both a1-proteinase inhibitor and trypsin, correlations
will be made between the energy stored in the initial serpin conformation, the
energy needed to disrupt the protease structure and the conformational
distribution of inhibitory complexes. The sensitivity of the single molecule
FRET to changes in protease stability will be used to probe the relative
mechanical stability of these different serine proteases and to investigate
whether the conformational distribution of the inhibitory complex is a conserved
aspect of biologically important serpin-protease interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using serpins as mechanical transducers, these experiments
will provide estimates of the energies required for local mechanical unfolding
of serine proteases as well as a window unto the energetics of irreversible
protein remodeling. These studies involve both graduate and undergraduate
students in multidisciplinary research that ranges from molecular biology to
optics. The research involves not only senior undergraduate students, but
students in their first or second year of college providing them with an
opportunity to connect their science courses to actual research in the
laboratory. This project is jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division. &lt;br/&gt;