* 0446081
* Collaborative Research.  Ontogenetic Changes in Swimming Squid: An Integrative Examination of Jet Structure and Muscular Mechanics
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2005,09/30/2006
* Joseph Thompson, St Joseph's University
* Continuing Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 09/30/2006
* USD 166,356.00

PROJECT ABSTRACTCollaborative Research. Ontogenetic Changes in Swimming Squid:
An Integrative Examination of Jet Structure and Muscular
Mechanics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ian K. Bartol (Old Dominion University), Joseph
T. Thompson (Saint Joseph's University), and Paul S. Krueger (Southern Methodist
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Squids are versatile swimmers, having the
ability to hover in one spot, change direction or orientation rapidly with
apparent ease, and ascend/descend almost vertically. Although squids have fins
and arms that are used to varying degrees for propulsion, stability, and
maneuverability, it is the pulsed jet that is the foundation of the locomotive
system. Pulsed jets in squids, which differ from the more familiar undulatory
locomotion of fishes, aquatic reptiles, and aquatic mammals, are generated by
alternately filling an internal mantle cavity with water and ejecting that water
by powerful mantle contractions through a maneuverable funnel. Pulsed jetting is
used by squids of remarkably different sizes, from hatchlings that are only a
few millimeters in length to adults that may grow as large as 18 m. Over this
wide size range, the physics of fluids plays an important role in the evolution
of various jet features (e.g., characteristic vortices known as vortex rings)
that are central to propulsive swimming performance. This collaborative project
investigates how fluid mechanical constraints shape swimming strategies and
muscular mechanics in squid of different life history stages, with the ultimate
goal of assessing how propulsive efficiency changes with size. To accomplish
this, jet flows, body movements, and muscle properties will be examined in two
species of squids, the brief squid Lolliguncula brevis and the oval squid
Sepioteuthis lessoniana. These squids, which vary in total length from &lt; 1 cm
as hatchlings to &gt;15 cm as adults, will be trained to swim in a flow tank
(i.e., an aquatic "treadmill") containing water seeded with light-reflective
particles. As particle-laden water is expelled from the funnel, it will be
illuminated with lasers and videotaped so that the jet velocity can be
determined using a technique known as digital particle image velocimetry (DPIV).
These DPIV data will provide direct measurements of jet features and propulsive
efficiency. Multiple video cameras positioned on a motorized rail system will be
used to collect high-resolution images of the mantle and funnel as the squids
swim, providing valuable data on swimming behavior. Because the contractile
properties of the mantle change with size and have direct effects on jet flows,
detailed measurements of isolated bundles of mantle muscle also will be made
using standard muscle mechanical techniques. The integration of DPIV, swimming
footage, and muscle mechanical data promises to broaden our understanding of
propulsive efficiency in jet-propelled organisms, especially at low size ranges
where little is known about the jet mechanism, and provide insight into the
evolution of ontogenetic changes in musculoskeletal support systems. These data
are relevant not only for biological investigators but also for engineers and
designers of emerging technologies, such as synthetic jets and pulsed-jet micro-
vehicles. This project will engage undergraduate and graduate students in
interdisciplinary research. It will also facilitate minority student
involvement, either through direct participation in experiments or through
educational development in local public schools and aquariums.&lt;br/&gt;