* 0446669
* Self-objectification, Objective Self-awareness, and Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2006
* Diane Quinn, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 05/31/2006
* USD 29,998.00

Self-objectification occurs when people take a third person perspective on the
self, viewing their bodies as objects (Fredrickson &amp; Roberts, 1997).
Previous research has shown that when women are in a state of self-
objectification, they perform worse on a standardized math test (Fredrickson,
Roberts, Noll, Quinn, &amp; Twenge, 1998). The research proposed in this grant
will integrate work on self-awareness theory (Duval &amp; Wicklund, 1972) with
self-objectification processes to explicate the mechanisms by which self-
objectification disrupts performance. Specifically, self-awareness theory
contends that there are two non-overlapping states of self: objective self-
awareness, when a person's attention is focused on the self (one's values,
beliefs, appearance), and subjective self-awareness, when attention is focused
on things external to the self (tasks, other people). By converging these
theoretical viewpoints, the proposed research can identify a primary means by
which self-objectification interferes with performance - through a prolonged
state of objective self-awareness. Study 1 examines whether objective self-
awareness mediates the effect of an experimentally induced state of self-
objectification on attentional resources. Participants will be asked to try on
an item of clothing that either will induce self-objectification (a swimsuit) or
not (a sweater), and then they will complete a measure of objective self-
awareness and a reaction time task. Hypothesized findings are that women
experiencing self-objectification will be slower on the reaction time task, and
this slowness will be due to an increased focus on the self at the expense of
the task. Study 2 examines whether people who are high in trait level self-
objectification are prone to prolonged states of objective self-awareness that
disrupt task performance and engagement. Participants who score in the top and
bottom third of a trait self-objectification measure will come to the lab to
complete an engaging task (a computer game). Half will be subtly made
objectively self-aware by having a mirror in the room. We hypothesize that
people high in trait self-objectification who are made self-aware will be unable
to concentrate on the game and will report less enjoyment as well as lower
performance. By revealing the mechanism by which self-objectification disrupts
performance, this research has the potential to broaden the participation and
achievement of women in educational and professional settings.