* 0446048
* ABA Signaling Networks Controlling the Transition from Embryogenesis to Seedling Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Ruth Finkelstein, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Bruce Alexander McClure
* 02/28/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Production of healthy nutrient-rich seeds that delay their germination until
field conditions are optimal for survival is controlled by integration of
information from internal and environmental signals. One of the major internal
regulators of both seed maturation and germination is the hormone abscisic acid
(ABA). Genetic studies have identified genes that are required for normal seed
maturation and ABA sensitivity of germination and seedling growth. Many of these
genes encode transcription factors, i.e. proteins that bind to DNA and regulate
expression of many other genes. Two of these factors, ABI4 and ABI5, each appear
to regulate less than 10% of all ABA-regulated genes but confer hypersensitivity
to ABA and other stresses when overproduced, suggesting that the relatively
small group of genes they regulate are a core component of response to these
signals. Comparison of ABA-induced genes in lines that either lack or
overproduce these factors identified 16 potential regulatory loci that appear to
be directly regulated by ABI4 or ABI5, in addition to many genes thought to
mediate stress tolerance and a large number of genes of unknown function. The
experiments outlined in this proposal will use genetic and molecular studies to
determine which of these newly identified regulators are important for seed
maturation and specific stress responses. One intriguing possibility suggested
by the preliminary results is that ABA signaling via these ABI loci may enhance
responses to other signals by increasing expression of appropriate receptors.
Broader impacts of these studies include training of postdocs, and graduate and
undergraduate students. Finally, these results may lead to strategies for
manipulation of seed nutritional, germination or storage qualities to prevent
millions of dollars in crop losses.