* 0446488
* The Mahajanga Basin Project:  Late Cretaceous Vertebrates from Madagascar and Their Implications for the Biogeographic History of Gondwana
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* David Krause, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2011
* USD 503,453.00

The face of the Earth changed radically during the Late Jurassic and Cretaceous.
It is during this interval that the southern supercontinent Gondwana fragmented
into isolated landmasses, with dramatic consequences for the associated
terrestrial and freshwater vertebrate (backboned) animals. Reconstructions of
the timing and sequence of this fragmentation are based almost entirely on
geophysical evidence and remain poorly tested on the basis of terrestrial and
freshwater vertebrate fossils. This proposal seeks to continue and expand a
project designed to discover vertebrate fossils in Upper Cretaceous strata
(approximately 65 million years old) of the Mahajanga Basin in northwestern
Madagascar, to place them in phylogenetic, stratigraphic, and sedimentologic
context, and to employ them in testing biogeographic and plate tectonic
hypotheses relating to Gondwana as a whole and Madagascar in particular. The
Mahajanga Basin Project was initiated over a decade ago but is only beginning to
reach its potential. To date, PIs have quintupled the previously known species
diversity of Late Cretaceous vertebrates from the island and have discovered
some of the most complete and spectacularly preserved specimens of Late
Cretaceous vertebrates from the southern hemisphere and, indeed, the world.
&lt;br/&gt;But sampling is clearly incomplete and much remains to be done in the
vast expanses of paleontologically and geologically unexplored Cretaceous rocks
of the Mahajanga Basin. With continued work, PIs are confident that the
vertebrate fauna from the Cretaceous of the Mahajanga Basin will become one of
the best sampled and best known faunas of Cretaceous age from the southern
hemisphere and one of the primary standards against which other Gondwanan faunas
of Cretaceous age are compared. The discovery and rigorous phylogenetic analysis
of additional and more complete vertebrate fossils from Upper Cretaceous
horizons in the Mahajanga Basin of northwestern Madagascar, and their placement
in geological context, will: 1) shed significant new light on the diversity and
evolutionary history of vertebrates from the southern supercontinent of Gondwana
in general and Madagascar in particular, and 2) permit tests of competing
hypotheses about the physical and biotic connections of the component parts of
Gondwana during the Mesozoic and serve to elucidate the biogeographic origins of
the highly endemic extant vertebrate fauna of Madagascar, arguably one of the
greatest unsolved mysteries of natural history. &lt;br/&gt;As in the past, this
project is firmly committed to providing a training ground for both Malagasy
graduate students and for American high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students, as well as postdoctoral associates. Also as in the past, results of
this project will be disseminated to both the scientific community and the
general public in a variety of ways including original publication, media
exposure, the internet, museum displays, and lectures/seminars. PIs will also
continue their efforts to build schools and provide healthcare for children
living in remote areas of Madagascar through an organization, the Madagascar
Ankizy Fund (www.ankizy.org), that they established in 1998.&lt;br/&gt;