* 0446905
* RUI:  Genetic Investigation of Chromosome Segregation in C. elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2008
* Mary Howe, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2008
* USD 326,385.00

All plant and animal life requires that genes are replicated and sorted with
high fidelity as cells divide. In order for a cell to divide, its chromosomes,
the physical entities housing the genes, must be faithfully replicated and the
two copies of each chromosome must be precisely separated and sorted into the
new cells. Failures in chromosome segregation are deleterious to an organism
because an intact genome is essential to normal cellular function. Two cellular
machines, the spindle and the kinetochore, are largely responsible for accurate
chromosome segregation during cell division. Prior research suggests that
spindles and kinetotchores are engineered with internal back-up systems to
insure that chromosome segregation can proceed accurately in the face of genetic
and environmental perturbations. This research project focuses on identifying
the molecular components of the spindle and the kinetochore and understanding
the mechanisms by which these two machines operate and interact. The research
project has three phases. First, a sensitive and specific genetic approach is
used to identify genes encoding components of the spindle and the kinetochore.
This genetic approach is designed to identify genes necessary for both the
primary and back-up systems of chromosome segregation. Next, mapping of these
genes will identify the actual molecular components of the spindle and
kinetochore. Finally, functional analysis of these molecular components will
elucidate the mechanisms that drive accurate chromosome segregation. Functional
analysis will include characterizing the dynamics of individual molecules and
the interactions between different molecules that participate in cell division.
Accurate chromosome segregation is one of the most fundamental processes shared
by plant and animal life, and this project directly investigates the ways in
which cells ensure accuracy as they divide. The project is being done at an
undergraduate institution, so many undergraduate students will be involved in
the research. The PI plans to have the students present their results in
research publications and at conferences.