* 0446835
* Spatial Control of Inositol Phosphate Biosynthesis in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Margaret Johnson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2010
* USD 416,407.00

Inositol phosphates play essential roles in regulating numerous cellular
processes including signal transduction, cell wall biosynthesis, cell membrane
formation, stress response, seed germination, hormone transport, nuclear RNA
export, synaptic membrane trafficking, cell surface protein anchoring, and
receptor-mediated endocytosis. Little is known of cellular mechanisms that
regulate the complex metabolic flux of inositol. Inositol phosphate is
synthesized via the internal cyclization of glucose 6-phosphate. Only one
enzyme, 1L-myo-inositol1-phosphate synthase (MIPS), is known to catalyze this
reaction. The activity of MIPS in Arabidopsis and in other organisms is highly
regulated by inositol. In contrast to existing paradigms of inositol phosphate
biosynthesis, the evidence obtained in this project suggests that the
biosynthesis of inositol phosphate is not restricted to one cellular
compartment, the cytosol. In addition to the cytosol, MIPS was localized in
membrane bound cellular compartments and extracellularly in plants grown in the
absence of inositol. To address mechanisms by which the enzyme is targeted to or
through membranes, MIPS genes were analyzed for sorting signals within primary
structures and upstream open reading frames that were discovered through
sequence analyses. Comprehensive bioinformatics analyses revealed putative
transit peptides that are predicted to target MIPS to cellular compartments
found to express the enzyme. This project will test the hypothesis that
differential gene expression mechanisms selectively target this pivotal
biosynthetic enzyme to or through membranes. The specific objectives of this
project are: (1) to localize MIPS-GFP fusion proteins in protoplasts of
Arabidopsis, (2) to isolate and functionally test tagged cDNAs encoding putative
isoforms of MIPS, and (3) to determine the topology of MIPS in microsomes. This
research will: (1) define some of the mechanisms controlling inositol phosphate
biosynthesis in organelles, (2) determine the orientation of MIPS in membranes,
and (3) provide the foundation needed to functionally dissect the complex
metabolic regulation of inositol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact Resulting
from Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;These studies will be carried out utilizing
three different Arabidopsis MIPS genes. A minority graduate student and a high
school teacher from an underrepresented group will study one of the three genes.
Other graduate students and minority undergraduate researchers will analyze the
two remaining genes. In addition to acquiring valuable research skills to
enhance their teaching abilities, the graduate students and high school teacher
will also have the opportunity to develop professional work ethics while
learning to think critically.