* 0446769
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Variable Input and the Acquisition of Plurality in Two Varieties of Spanish
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2006
* Cristina Schmitt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

A fundamental question in the study of child language acquisition is that of the
relationship between the input the child receives and the mental grammar that
the child constructs based on that input. With National Science Foundation
support, and under the direction of Dr. Cristina Schmitt, Ms. Karen Miller will
investigate the role of variable input on the acquisition of plurality in the
Spanish of Chile and of Mexico City. This investigation addresses two main
research questions: (i) Can ambiguous input caused by variation affect
comprehension while leaving surface production patterns similar to the adult?
(ii) How much ambiguity in the input will cause a child to misanalyze the adult
input? Adult speakers of Chilean Spanish have a tendency to aspirate ([h])
and/or omit ([zero]) final /s/. For this reason, the plural morpheme is realized
sometimes as [zero] and sometimes as [s] or [h], which implies that the Chilean
child receives ambiguous input. In other words, the child hears evidence both
for plural morphology (the [s] or [h] pronunciations) and against plural
morphology (the [zero] pronunciation). On the other hand, in the Spanish of
Mexico City, no such reduction or omission occurs and hence the Mexican child
receives unambiguous input for a plural morpheme; it is always produced (the [s]
pronunciation). This variation therefore allows one to test the hypothesis that
children's early grammars are affected by ambiguity in the input they receive.
This study uses free speech samples, repetition and naming tasks and various
comprehension tasks to test the degree to which children (i) mirror the
linguistic variation of the adult population and (ii) understand plural
morphology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will have an
important social impact on matters concerning education and language testing in
children from socially disadvantaged groups, since many tests of early
children's language abilities do not adequately take social variation or its
effects on learning into consideration.&lt;br/&gt;