* 0446326
* Probing the Impact of Evolutionary Divergence on Structure, Function, Stability and Dynamics of Cytochrome b5
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2008
* David Benson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2008
* USD 558,112.00

Progress in bioinformatics has revealed a single gene in insects and plants that
codes for cytochrome b5 (b5), a membrane-anchored electron transfer heme
protein. Duplication of an analogous gene and subsequent evolutionary divergence
has provided mammals with two b5 isoforms, each playing specialized roles in
distinct sub-cellular organelles. The isoform that resides in the outer
mitochondrial membrane (OM b5) is considerably more stable than its counterpart
in the endoplasmic reticulum (microsomal, or Mc b5), and also has a more
negative reduction potential, a parameter related to function in electron
transfer proteins. The lone b5 from house fly (HF b5) exhibits intermediate
stability and redox properties. This project will build upon successful efforts
over the past several years, aimed at understanding the nature of the divergent
biophysical and functional properties of b5 isoforms, with a new emphasis on the
critical role played by polypeptide dynamics. Hence, these studies are aimed at
probing a hypothesis that dissociation of heme from b5 is governed by high
amplitude low-frequency cooperative polypeptide motions, which differ for b5
isoforms from different evolutionary lineages. To this end, an experimental
approach based on native-state hydrogen-deuterium exchange monitored by NMR
spectroscopy will be combined with an emerging computational methodology
(replica exchange molecular dynamics; REX-MD) that greatly accelerates the
sampling rate of molecular conformations in comparison to previous methods. The
dynamic properties exhibited by the polypeptide in a given b5 isoform are
ultimately governed by the nature and strength of its interactions with the
heme, necessitating that a comprehensive study encompass both the holo (heme-
bound) and apo (heme-free) states of the protein. Consequently, the solution
structure of rat OM apo-b5 will be determined by NMR spectroscopy and compared
to the published structure of rat Mc apo-b5. Insights gained in this manner will
be refined through corresponding REX-MD simulations. The third objective is to
test the developing understanding of factors affecting stability and dynamics in
b5 through the rational design of rat OM b5 mutants with stability greater than
that of the wild-type protein. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing
insight into nature's solutions to tuning the properties of b5 for its roles in
different organisms, results from this project hold promise of a broader impact
by (1) improving general understanding of the factors that stabilize cofactor-
containing proteins from thermophilic organisms relative to those of their
mesophilic counterparts; and (2) the related ability to rationally design heme
proteins with useful applications, such as electron carriers in bioreactors
operating at elevated temperatures. Further, the PIs routinely use recent
findings from the project in the classroom, both to illustrate concepts and to
highlight the reality of how science is done. This can be an effective means of
stimulating undergraduate student interest in undertaking research projects,
both in the PIs laboratories and in those of their colleagues. All
undergraduates participating in the project are encouraged to discuss their
results in house and, when possible, to present their results at regional and
national meetings. &lt;br/&gt;