* 0446542
* Fundamental Predictions of Tryptophan Emission Spectra in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Patrik Callis, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2009
* USD 487,120.00

The objective of this project is to carry out computations to provide a detailed
understanding of the widely exploited phenomenon of fluorescence quenching in
any biological (and other) setting in terms of structure and dynamics. The
project builds on previous support, which led to unprecedented progress in
understanding tryptophan (Trp) fluorescence wavelength variability in proteins
using electrostatics, and on unprecedented progress in understanding of the
enigmatic--and more widely exploited--Trp fluorescence intensity changes
accompanying changes in protein structure, that was primarily focused on the
amide groups. In this project, higher-level computations will be done to greatly
solidify this understanding. The scope will broaden to include less common (but
potent when nearby) quenchers in proteins: histidine cation, disulfide,
cysteine, and methionine. In addition, the generality of the concepts and
methods will be tested by branching out to other widely exploited fluorescent
systems that are often quenched, including flavins, NADH, and fluorescent dyes
attached to proteins and nucleic acids. A convenient twist is that the software
developed by the PI provides a transparent transition from a focus on the
quenching of Trp fluorescence by numerous electron acceptors to quenching of
numerous other fluorophores by Trp as one of the stronger one-electron donors in
biology. A major goal is to expand the method to include realistic evaluation of
the electron transfer coupling element during dynamics simulations, a parameter
that is currently treated as an empirical constant. The PI will work closely
with experimental groups to ensure that the computations are relevant and to
help with interpreting the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quenching is
considered an obscure subject, and the biological community is in need of
rational means for prediction and understanding of this subject. Experiment is
well ahead of theory at this point, and a large amount of potentially revealing
data is being generated. Fluorescence quenching processes are modulated by
protein motions, but structural information gained from the correlation
functions is of little use without an accurate physical understanding of exactly
what is causing the modulations of the quenching. The PI's teaching interests
have led to an integrated grasp of quantum mechanics, kinetics, and
thermodynamics, all of which play important roles in electron transfer
processes. The PI has established a graduate course in the physical chemistry of
electron transfer and works with undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral associates in his laboratory. The PI plans to establish a web site
that will make available analysis software that will aid researchers and
students in making predictions concerning fluorescence quenching in
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;