* 0446292
* Does Composition of the Exopolysaccharide Matrix of Pseudomonas Putida Control Biofilm Architecture and Fitness In Low-water-content Environments?
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Larry Halverson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 06/30/2009
* USD 435,001.00

Intellectual Merit: Bacteria in soil and other unsaturated habitats, such as
lungs or aerial surfaces of plants, generally live as aggregates of cells
(biofilms) within a matrix comprised, in part, of extracellular polysaccharides
(EPS) of their own making. Although there is general agreement that bacteria in
many environments, including aquatic biofilm communities, live within an EPS
matrix, relatively little is known about the function of the EPS layer in
general or even specific polysaccharide components of the matrix. One
possibility that has been often discussed but has been the subject of relatively
few studies is that an EPS envelope may protect bacteria from drying, thus
functioning as a fitness trait in low water content habitats. Soil
microorganisms mediate many critical terrestrial ecosystem processes, including
global biogeochemical cycles, the degradation of organic pollutants, and
beneficial and detrimental interactions with plants, yet we still have a poor
understanding of how water availability influences biofilm development and
metabolic activities and the survival of community members. The goal of this
project is to understand the processes involved in bacterial colonization of
soil and how the environment influences bacterial fitness, including the
mechanisms by which environmental cues are integrated into the regulatory
networks involved in adaptation to those stresses. The central hypothesis that
serves as a framework for this project is that the availability of water to
bacteria is a major force influencing bacterial physiology, growth, and
survival. The hypotheses that will be tested are that modulation of the
composition of the EPS matrix is an active process that is driven by dehydration
stress and that specific EPS constituents hold substantial amounts of water
thereby creating a microenvironment that slows the rate of biofilm drying, which
increases bacterial survival by increasing the time for metabolic adjustment.
Furthermore, stress-mediated modulation of the EPS matrix alters biofilm
developmental processes and architecture, which ultimately influences the
biophysical properties of the biofilm and the metabolic capabilities of
community members. The objectives of the project are to: 1, identify genes
involved in extracellular polysaccharide biosynthesis, assess their regulation
and inactivate them; 2, assess whether extracellular polysaccharides create a
more hydrated microenvironment that protects biofilm cells from desiccation
stress; and 3, assess the role of EPS on biofilm developmental patterns and
architecture in low water content habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: An important component of this research is to fill a major gap in our
understanding of biofilm biology in terrestrial ecosystems, which has had to
typically rely on information obtained from experimental systems that frequently
don't reflect soil conditions. This project will provide multiple opportunities
for research training coupled to instruction and to promote inquiry based
learning strategies. Students will be challenged to identify linkages of this
project to regulatory hierarchies and signal transduction pathways and to the
broader implications of these growth forms on terrestrial ecosystem processes.
Information will be disseminated through publications and presentations at
meetings and through a website that will contain images and descriptions of
unsaturated biofilm development and properties that are not available in
publication format. Furthermore, the results and experimental methodologies will
be incorporated into the undergraduate microbiology curriculum into new lecture
and laboratory courses the PI is currently developing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;