* 0446951
* SGER: When Clones Attack: Can Fish Without Individual Variation Form Dominance Relationships?
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Ivan Chase, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 10/31/2005
* USD 29,970.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Research in animal behavior and the social sciences
shows that differences among individuals - in genetic and non-genetic
characteristics - can help to predict their positions in social structures. But
are these differences necessary - fundamental in some way - to the formation of
the social structures themselves? Could identical individuals not form social
structures? Recent developments in genetic and reproductive technologies make it
possible to investigate these questions, and this proposal describes a series of
experiments designed to do so by examining the formation of dominance
relationships in cloned and non-cloned fish (tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus).
The principal investigator will compare the dynamics of dominance relationship
formation in fish that are: (1) identical in all ways (in both genetic and non-
genetic characteristics), (2) genetically identical but non-genetically
variable, (3) genetically variable but non-genetically identical, and (4)
variable in both genetic and non-genetic characteristics. Comparing these four
groups will allow the principal investigator to determine whether or not
identical individuals can form dominance relationships and hierarchies as
readily as non-identical individuals, and if individual variation is important,
to estimate the contribution of genetic versus non-genetic
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several broader implications of
this project. First, it will help clarify the theoretical basis of social
organization which is of interest not only to animal behaviorists and social
scientists but also to some researchers in the military, artificial
intelligence, and systems engineering. Second, it will provide a model to show
how cloned animals can be used more broadly in investigations of the links
between genetics and social behavior. Third, since this project involves
genetics, cloned animals, and behavior, its results should be of broad interest,
and the principal investigator will make these results available to both general
and scientific audiences. Fourth, this project will provide educational
experiences for SUNY at Stony Brook undergraduates working as research
assistants, many of whom are from traditionally under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;