* 0446706
* The Development of Infants Action Knowledge
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2006
* Amanda Woodward, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul A. Klaczynski
* 08/31/2006
* USD 325,000.00

Effective learning from social partners requires that children interpret other
people's actions not as purely physical motions through space, but rather in
terms of their underlying goals or intentions. With support from the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Woodward will investigate the origins of this
foundational ability during infancy. Recent studies have developed a technique
for using infants' patterns of attention as evidence about their understanding
of the actions they observe. Results from this technique have revealed that
infants understand the goal-directed nature of some actions, including grasping,
tool use, and acts of attention (i.e., looking). The current studies will use
the same technique to investigate the experiences and processes that contribute
to infants' understanding of others' goals. In particular, the studies evaluate
the possibility that infants' own actions provide a basis for the insight that
others' actions are goal-directed. To address this issue, these studies examine
the effect of experimentally induced experience on infants' action knowledge.
Research questions concern the relative effects of first-person and
observational experience, as well as the extent to which infants generalize what
they have learned from these experiences to new situations. These studies will
provide the first systematic investigation of the effects of learning to act on
infants' understanding of others' actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
yield new insights into social knowledge and its dynamic emergence in early
development. By situating infant cognitive development within the larger context
of infants' emerging competence as agents in the physical and social worlds,
this research will provide new insights into processes of cognitive development
during infancy. More generally, this research is part of a growing movement to
study the role of learning in infants' conceptual development. In addition, the
findings will inform understanding of knowledge acquisition in social settings
because concepts of intention support many aspects of social learning. This
research is also relevant to understanding cases in which development goes awry.
Deficits in social reasoning have been implicated in developmental disorders
including autism, asperger's syndrome, and conduct disorder. Discovering the
processes that create social understanding in typically developing children will
inform scientific and clinical understanding of these developmental
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;