* 0446891
* Collaborative Research: Glacial Erosion in the Patagonian Andes: Testing the Buzzsaw
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2005,05/31/2007
* Jonathan Tomkin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2007
* USD 90,632.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The remarkable match between the glacial equilibrium line
altitude (ELA) and summit elevations in many active mountain ranges of the world
has led to the supposition that glaciers act as an erosional buzzsaw. Since most
observed rates of glacial erosion are very high they are thought to be able to
effectively remove most topography tectonically uplifted through the ELA.
However, the glacial buzzsaw idea is based largely on circumstantial evidence.
Only preliminary attempts have been made to theoretically simulate quantitative
predictions of this process. This proposed research aims to test the glacial
buzzsaw hypothesis using modern technical and computational methods.
Understanding the importance of glacial erosion is complicated by the fact that
elevated topographies are often the result of plate convergence, and so an
appreciation of the feedbacks involved between orogenic wedge mechanics and
surface processes is required. Development of a coupled geodynamic and surface
process model that incorporates glacial erosion in an active critical orogenic
wedge is proposed to examine these feedbacks. Preliminary model predictions
indicate that the temporal and spatial patterns of uplift and erosion for both a
weak and strong glacial buzzsaw in an active orogen contrast significantly with
erosion patterns of an orogen that responds to the buzzsaw by passive isostasy.
Testing the model predictions to judge whether glacial erosion acts as a
'strong' or 'weak' buzzsaw will be achieved by applying combined apatite
(U-Th)/He and fission-track low temperature thermochronology to evaluate changes
in erosion rates and spatial erosion patterns following the onset of late
Cenozoic glaciation in the Patagonian Andes - the orogen where the match between
the height of the ELA and summit elevation was first recognized. The Patagonian
Andes are an exceptional natural laboratory. As well as having a suitable and
well-documented tectonic and climatic history, their north-south range provides
an opportunity to study a spatially varying glacial history. Two different
transects will be targeted: one at 39S to 41S (Valdivia, Pucn, Bariloche), and
another between 46S and 51S (Canal Baker, Lago General Carrera, South Patagonian
Icefield). This will include the collection of both near-vertical and trans-
orogen sample profiles. The proposed work will address the following research
questions: 1) Does the glacial buzzsaw hypothesis explain the behavior of
surface erosion in the Patagonian Andes? 2) Was the buzzsaw diachronous or
synchronous along the length of the Patagonian Andes? 3) Is the orogen close to
steady state, or still responding to the drop in ELA? and 4) How accurate are
current models of glacial erosion over regional scales and long time
periods?&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The long-term behavior of the earth
system is dependent on dynamic interactions between climate, albedo, tectonics,
orogenic topography, weathering, and greenhouse gases, such as CO2. In
particular, there has been much speculation about the role that erosional fluxes
from orogenic landscapes might play in moderating the greenhouse effect, given
the important role of silicate weathering in moderating CO2 concentrations in
the atmosphere. Orogenic topography as influences the distribution of
precipitation, and can also change global atmospheric circulation, if the
topography gets high enough, as is presently the case in the Himalaya and
central Andes. Thus, there remains broad interest in the factors that might
influence the evolution of orogenic topography, or limit the maximum size of the
topography. This research will make a significant contribution towards
understanding the role that alpine glaciation plays in controlling the maximum
height of mountain ranges. The multidisciplinary approach of this proposal will
foster a number of national and international educational and research links.
Students and researchers from Louisiana State, Yale, GFZ Potsdam, the
Universidad de Chile will be involved in this project. Students from two US
institutions will have an opportunity to combine field research and theory. The
proposed study has the potential to provide research support for an alumnus of
the NSF funded Geoscience Alliance to Enhance Minority Participation in the
Earth Sciences (GAEMP) project, through co-PI Jonathan&lt;br/&gt;Tomkin's
participation in the program at LSU. The results of the research will be
integrated into a GAEMP summer school program, which emphasizes the value of
ongoing earth science research to minority undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;