* 0446720
* The Role of Dlx Genes in the Development and Evolution of the Teleost Fish Dentition
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* David Stock, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2010
* USD 420,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whether macroevolutionary patterns result
from natural selection or developmental constraints has long been debated. The
proposed research seeks to explain in terms of such external or internal forces
an evolutionary trend toward tooth reduction in vertebrates. Loss of oral teeth
in cypriniform fishes (e.g. minnows) serves as a model of this trend. No member
of the group has regained oral teeth, despite diverse feeding modes and
retention of throat teeth, suggesting tooth loss as a constraint on evolution.
Characterizing the developmental mechanism of this loss will test the constraint
hypothesis; identifying a simple, experimentally-reversible mechanism would
argue against it. Previous comparisons of gene expression in the cypriniform
zebrafish (Danio rerio) and related groups with oral teeth identified an
association between absence of teeth and of Dlx2 transcription factor
expression. This result will be extended to further characterize modifications
of developmental genetic pathways resulting in cypriniform tooth loss.
Objectives are to 1) identify the mechanism of Dlx expression evolution, 2)
identify consequences of loss and gain of Dlx function, 3) investigate
Fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signaling pathways as potential causes of loss of
Dlx expression and oral teeth, and 4) identify any changes in expression of
additional Dlx family members associated with tooth loss and evolution of gene
family number. The primary species to be employed are the zebrafish and the
Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes), the latter of which retains oral teeth.
Transgenic approaches will be used to compare regulation of Dlx2 gene expression
in the two species and to misexpress native or modified Dlx and Fgf proteins.
Expression of the entire complement of Dlx genes (some of which remain to be
cloned) will be examined in the zebrafish, medaka and Mexican tetra (Astyanax
mexicanus). These species exhibit differences in dentition and probably in the
number of Dlx genes present in their genomes as well. Characterization of the
mechanism of cypriniform oral tooth loss will allow comparison with other
instances of vertebrate dental reduction, in addition to elucidating fundamental
mechanisms of tooth development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transgenic lines and
constructs generated will be valuable for studying the role of Dlx and Fgf genes
in the development of other structures. The project will have significant
educational value as well. Results and materials will be incorporated into an
existing course in Evolutionary Developmental Biology, while several
undergraduate students (recruited through universty programs), two graduate
students, and a post-doctoral researcher will receive research training while
executing the project. &lt;br/&gt;