* 0446647
* Facility Support: AfricaArray
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Andrew Nyblade, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2009
* USD 191,482.00

0446647&lt;br/&gt;Nyblade&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from this grant will
partially underwrite the salary of an in-country technician and provide for some
operational expenses and oversight costs associated with the development of the
AfricaArray seismic network. AfricaArray is a new pan-African training and
research initiative in geophysics that emphasizes seismology and has been set up
and is being partially supported by the University of Witwatersrand, the South
African Council for Geoscience (CG), Penn State University and private
industrial funds. The seismic network will consist of 22 new broadband stations
that will complement 17 existing stations (not all broadband) in seven countries
in southern and eastern Africa. Many of the existing short-period stations will
be upgraded to broadband instruments. The AfricaArray technician will be
responsible for network operations outside of South Africa. The CG will handle
operation and maintenance needs within South Africa. The scientific goals of
AfricaArray (funded through a companion Geophysics project EAR-044032) are to
understand the relationship between deep mantle and upper mantle slow seismic
anomalies associated with the African Superplume. It is hoped that data from
this network will allow exploration of plausible chemical and dynamic causes of
the Superplume seismic anomaly and to further elucidate the subsurface
structures associated with the east African Rift zone. The current 17 station
seismic network on the African continents is too broadly distributed to image
these structures with high resolution. An expanded AfricaArray network will
allow more detailed investigations of lower crustal and mantle structures
associated with mantle upwelling, surface uplift, rifting and volcanism.
AfricaArray also hopes to address a long standing problem on the developing
African continent, namely, scientific literacy. This program should further the
training of geoscience students in techniques and data analysis that could
position them for domestic careers in government, industry and education. All of
the AfricaArray data will eventually be archived within the IRIS Data Management
System (DMS). &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;