* 0446880
* Collaborative Research: Calibration of the LateTriassic-Early Jurassic Timescale Using U-Pb Dating of the High-Resolution Magnetostratigraphy of the Newark Supergroup
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2009
* Samuel Bowring, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul E Filmer
* 05/31/2009
* USD 109,735.00

This grant will date sedimentary and igneous rocks from within the Newark
Supergroup in an attempt to both refine the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic
timescale and to test the well-grounded hypothesis that the cycles observed in
the supergroup are controlled by Milankovitch orbital forcing. This grant will
provide a very important test of Uranium-Lead dating in carbonates, clarify the
timing of terrestrial vs. marine extinctions at the Triassic/Jurassic boundary,
and provide much more precise data on the actual dates and progression of the
boundary.

The Newark Supergroup records the Triassic-Jurassic extinction and has been
intensively studied in terms of bio-, cyclo-, and magentostratigraphy. Although
the cyclostatigraphic record is often cited as recording orbital forcing,
absolute age constraints on this high-resolution record are lacking. The only
horizon that has been dated in this sequence is a series of basaltic flows and
intrusions that were dated at 201 +/- 1 Ma. New work at MIT suggests it will be
possible to date zircons from granophyric layers in basalts to a precision of
0.2 Ma or better. These basalts bracket units containing sedimentary carbonates
that appear to have great potential for U-Pb dating. Comparison of the ages will
test the potential for U-Pb dating of sedimentary materials for yielding
accurate ages.

Testing the potential of U-Pb dating of carbonates is a key area for
understanding the distribution of time in thick sequences of rocks that do not
contain volcanic ashes. Geochronological data are needed to address fundamental
questions about Earth processes, many of which involve questions about rates or
correlations. Although magnetostratigraphy and cyclostratigraphy can be used to
subdivide time in the rock record, assumptions about the detailed distribution
of time are impossible without precise calibration. Although the precision of
U-Pb ages of carbonates appears to be limited by geologic complexity (e.g.,
slight initial heterogeneity in the Pb isotopes; mobility of U and daughters
during early diagenesis) the accuracy may well be equal to the stated
uncertainty in the age. If so, the possibility of dating carbonates to 1%
(2-sigma) uncertainty will provide a much-needed geochronometer for sequences
throughout the Phanerozoic for which no air-fall ashes can be identified.

Graduate students at SUNY Stony Brook, MIT and Columbia University will be
involved in this research. Due to the proximity of our institutions to each
other as well as to some of the best studied parts of the Newark sequence we
anticipate a very dynamic collaboration that will provide students with vast
opportunities to use facilities at all three institutions and to enjoy a rich
field experience.