* 0446847
* Improving the Value of CDS-I for the User Community
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Jacquelynne Eccles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 03/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is a longitudinal study of a
representative sample of U.S. individuals and their families. Beginning in 1968,
this is the longest running panel of its kind. The Child Development Supplement
(CDS) of the PSID is an extensive data set on children and their families
collected with the goal of understanding socio-demographic, psychological, and
economic aspects of childhood. The overarching objective of this current NSF-
funded project is to augment the entire PSID-CDS data archive by making
important improvements to the first wave of CDS, collected in 1997. Most of
these improvements will use recent technological advancements in database
software, and have already been applied to PSID data and the second wave of CDS
data. Specifically, the project will (a) provide richer documentation for CDS-I
that takes advantage of recent technological advances in the creation of
electronic codebook databases, allowing CDS-I documentation to be integrated
into the user-friendly, cutting-edge PSID-CDS-II web-based data archive; (b)
create a cross-year variable index that is integrated with and accessible
through the online data center, which will streamline variable identification
and selection; (c) create Common Core of Data (CCD) linkages and variables for
CDS-I children as developed for CDS-II children, allowing users to study
characteristics of schools for the CDS children as of 1997; and (d) provide data
describing the content of media programming watched by children in CDS-I.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute broadly to enhancing
scientific understanding by making the CDS-I data more usable, accessible, and
integrated with the larger PSID and CDS-II databases. The PSID-CDS data are
'intergenerational' in structure with information contained in 33 waves of data
from multiple family members, allowing analysts to fully link information on
children, their parents, their grandparents, and other relatives. The completion
of the project will give researchers and students from a variety of disciplines
access to the data. Furthermore, the activities of this project will contribute
to the emerging e-science cyber infrastructure by providing additional data
tools and expertise via the Internet (www.psidonline.isr.umich.edu) to
researchers so that access to a highly complex data archive is achieved without
regard to geographic location. This open access will lead to greater long-term
economic benefits, better-informed government decision-makers, and accelerated
progress in science itself (see Science, March 19, 2004). Lastly, the data
processing, documentation, and dissemination activities are pedagogical tools
that can be used to teach research concepts to a diverse audience. They have
been used to teach undergraduate and even high school students, as well as
academic researchers from all over the world.&lt;br/&gt;