* 0446461
* Stable sulfur isotope composition of organic matter: Cambrian to Recent
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Michael Engel, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stable carbon isotopes have proven to be a
powerful probe for investigations of the complex interplay between the evolution
of the Earth's crust and biosphere throughout the Phanerozoic. However, detailed
studies of this interrelationship for other light elements that comprise organic
matter (N, O, S, H) in terms of global evolutionary change are lacking. Previous
studies have focused on inorganic sulfur in minerals (sulfates, sulfides) and in
shell carbonate. Thus, how the organic sulfur content of marine organisms varied
through time and its relationship to and impact on the inorganic sulfur isotope
record is based largely on circumstantial evidence provided by this inorganic
sulfur record rather than by a direct probe. A hypothesis will be tested with
respect to documenting changes in the stable sulfur isotope composition of
organic matter during the Phanerozoic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stable sulfur
isotope composition of protein amino acids (methionine and cysteine) in fossil
shells of pelagic organisms can be used as a new proxy for reconstructing
secular changes in the sulfur isotope composition of the oceans. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Stable carbon isotope geochemistry has
played an essential role in improving our understanding of the complex interplay
of the biosphere, hydrosphere and lithosphere as they have evolved through time.
The proposed detailed study of the stable sulfur isotope composition of organic
matter will provide a new approach for assessment of this interplay. To date,
this information has only been acquired indirectly by the study of minerals
thought to reflect biological processes. The stable sulfur isotope compositions
of sulfur-containing amino acid constituents of shell protein in well-preserved
fossils is likely to reflect original sea water chemistry and is less likely to
have been altered by diagenetic processes than evaporites. This approach will
provide the first independent test of the validity of the inorganic sulfur
isotope curves that have been proposed for the Phanerozoic. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The requested funds will be used to support the research of Louise
Totten, a new graduate student in our program. Louise has an undergraduate
degree in chemistry and is thus well suited for this type of project. Students
from Engel's undergraduate courses in Geology and Oceanography are regular
participants in on going research projects in his stable isotope and amino acid
laboratories. It is anticipated that two or more undergraduates will be involved
in this project for their senior theses in science education. &lt;br/&gt;