* 0446850
* Genetics of Linguistic and Non-Linguistic Development
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Karin Stromswold, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

Between 5 to 10% of apparently normal children have difficulty acquiring written
or spoken language. Twin studies are the most common type of study used to tease
apart the impact of environmental and genetic factors on language development.
Because identical twins share 100% of their alleles and fraternal twins share
only 50% of their alleles, if identical twin pairs' linguistic abilities are
more similar than fraternal twin pairs', this suggests that genetic factors play
a role in language. Furthermore, the rate of language impairments and delays is
twice as high for twins as singletons, probably reflecting pre- and postnatal
environmental hazards associated with twinning. Thus, twin studies can be used
to investigate how specific environmental factors affect language development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use longitudinal data from 450 twin
pairs to investigate how genetic and prenatal and postnatal environmental
factors affect linguistic and nonlinguistic development. The project will
address the following key questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. How great a role do genetic
factors play in the linguistic and nonlinguistic development of linguistically
normal and language-impaired children?&lt;br/&gt;2. How specific to language (or
subcomponents of language) are these genetic factors?&lt;br/&gt;3. To what
extent do prenatal and early postnatal environmental factors affect linguistic
and nonlinguistic development?&lt;br/&gt;4. How developmentally stable are the
effects of these genetic and environmental factors?&lt;br/&gt;5. How do
interactions among environmental and genetic factors affect normal and language-
impaired children's linguistic and non-linguistic development?&lt;br/&gt;The
direct and indirect costs of language-related learning disabilities are enormous
to the impaired child, their family and society. This study may help uncover
which environmental factors protect children from impairments and which increase
their risk. This study may also provide needed insight into the ways in which
genetic factors and environmental factors interact to raise or lower the risk of
linguistic and nonlinguistic impairment. Armed with this knowledge, clinicians
and teachers may be able to tailor therapeutic and educational practices so as
to maximize each child's potential. &lt;br/&gt;