* 0446998
* Tracking the Time Course of Integrative Semantic Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2008
* Shelia Kennison, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 04/30/2008
* USD 272,593.00

Studies in language comprehension have shown that readers interpret sentences
word by word, rapidly integrating the meaning of each new word with the
preceding context. With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Shelia
Kennison will investigate the factors influencing how quickly skilled readers
can integrate the meaning of individuals words within sentences. The research
will test the hypothesis that semantic integration is carried out more rapidly
for some words than for others. In the research, participants will read
sentences while their eye movements are recorded. Eye movement recording is the
most precise technique for measuring the processing difficulty experienced
during reading. With this methodology, it is possible to measure the initial
processing of a word separately from any reprocessing that may occur. The
research will identify the characteristics of words that are associated with
early (versus late) semantic integration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
important because it will broaden our knowledge of how readers coordinate
multiple sources of information during comprehension, including syntactic,
lexical, and semantic sources of information. The research will also add to our
knowledge of the complex cognitive processing involved in perception, memory,
and language. The broader impacts of the research include applications to the
field of language disorders. By understanding how skilled, unimpaired readers
integrate the meanings of words in sentences, researchers will be better able to
identify individuals who carry out semantic processing abnormally. The research
may also lead to a better understanding of the different ways language
processing can be impaired and may contribute to the development of
interventions designed to help impaired individuals increase their reading
proficiency.&lt;br/&gt;