* 0446759
* Children's Emotional Reactivity and Harsh Parenting Reciprocities During Preschool: Consequences for Emotion Regulation in Peer Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Laura Scaramella, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 05/31/2009
* USD 279,973.00

Increasingly, emotion regulation is identified as a critical task of early
childhood. Children who enter kindergarten or first grade emotionally well-
regulated often experience few social or behavioral problems with this
developmental transition; emotionally well-regulated children are able to focus
attention on academic demands and to resolve peer conflicts autonomously. In
contrast, children who enter school unable to control angry emotions may be at
increased risk for social and emotional problems throughout childhood and
adolescence. Dr. Laura Scaramella investigates the expectation that during the
preschool years, children's propensity towards angry emotional reactivity
interferes with their development of competent emotion regulation by disrupting
parenting. First, the intense emotional arousal associated with angry reactions
may be more difficult for children to regulate on their own. Second, children's
unregulated anger likely evokes similar angry responses from parents, or harsh
parenting reactions that further interfere with children's ability to regulate
emotional arousal. Failing to learn how to regulate angry emotional arousal
during early childhood leaves children unprepared to cope with interpersonal
conflicts in socially accepted ways upon entry into school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research studying children's development of
emotion regulation has relied on well-educated, middle-class samples.
Economically disadvantaged children are over-identified in terms of emotion
regulation problems (e.g., externalizing problems), yet understudied in terms of
social interactional processes affecting the acquisition of regulatory
competence. Prospectively collected data from Head Start preschool children,
their mothers, and younger siblings over 2 years will be used to test the
expectation that harsh parenting and children's emotional reactivity interact to
affect children's acquisition of emotion regulation. Specifically, emotionally
reactive parenting (i.e., harsh parenting) and emotionally reactive child
behavior (e.g., difficult temperament) lead to emotional dysregulation in
children through reciprocal interactive processes. This study examines the
previously untested notion that children generalize emotion regulatory
strategies learned during interactions with mothers and siblings to peer
interactions, leaving them vulnerable to emotional, behavioral, and academic
problems upon entry to school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clarifying processes that
lead to emotion dysregulation and understanding the social consequences of
unregulated emotion among at-risk children is an important research goal. First,
basic developmental process research often relies on low-risk samples (e.g.,
middle- to upper-class, well-educated families). The current study examines
parental influences on children's acquisition of emotion regulation with an at-
risk sample. Second, this study has important implications for prevention and
intervention efforts. Understanding how parent-child interactions affect
children's acquisition and generalization of regulatory efforts may improve the
efficacy and accuracy of interventions designed to diminish children's risk for
social-emotional problems during childhood.&lt;br/&gt;