* 0446179
* Rab7 and Accessory Protein Function in Endocytosis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2010
* Larry Sklar, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 03/31/2010
* USD 664,026.00

This project addresses three specific aims relevant to understanding late
endocytic transport and sorting in mechanistic detail. This work is relevant for
understanding membrane transport mechanisms and the regulation of receptor
trafficking. Studies in Dr. Wandinger-Ness's laboratory have identified Rab7 and
its interacting partners (lipid kinases and phosphatases and a proteasome
subunit) as a key regulators of late endocytic transport and sorting. They have
also demonstrated that late endosomal motility on microtubules is bidirectional
and dependent on functional Rab7. Since individual Rab GTPases have largely
distinct rather than shared effectors, a comprehensive understanding of membrane
trafficking will require the detailed study of individual transport steps and
molecules involved. Having identified several key components in late endocytic
transport and sorting with support provided by MCB9982161, her plan is to
establish in mechanistic terms how these components function together to
orchestrate and regulate late endosomal transport and sorting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planned studies will examine phophoinositide metabolism,
proteasome function and microtubule transport all in the context of how these
are coordinately regulated by Rab7 and its interacting partners on late
endosomes. Based on evidence that the hVPS34 lipid kinase and its p150 adapter
form mutually exclusive complexes with the myotubularin 1 lipid phosphatase or
with Rab7, Dr. Wandinger-Ness hypothesizes that these selective interactions
serve to coordinately regulate local phosphatidyl inositol 3-phosphate (PI3P)
levels. In Aim1, she will use in vitro and in vivo assays to test the postulate
and establish the mechanisms governing late endosomal phosphoinositide
metabolism. Because phosphatidyl inositides play a central role in transport by
serving as membrane platforms for recruiting molecules that facilitate membrane
fusion and intraluminal vesicle formation, addressing how phosphoinositides are
synthesized and turned over will provide new insights into how this aspect of
transport is regulated. XAPC7 is an alpha subunit of the proteasome that has
been shown by Dr. Wandinger-Ness to complex with Rab7. Based on her initial
published data, the proteasome seems to negatively regulate transport, but the
exact function of the proteasome on late endosomes remains unclear. Aim2 is
geared toward determining the function of the proteasome in the regulation of
transport. It is expected that these studies will interface with the growing
literature implicating ubiquitination and proteasome activity in the proper
trafficking and downregulation of membrane signalling receptors. Finally, data
from Dr. Wandinger-Ness' own work and others demonstrate that functional Rab7
and its interacting partner RILP are important for centrosome-directed late
endosomal motility on microtubules. Aim3 will explore how the dynactin
associated/RILP complex and the KIF1Bb kinesin motor may cooperate to regulate
bidirectional late endosomal motility. Together, these studies promise to offer
a more comprehensive understanding of late endosomal transport and sorting that
is a fundamental facet of the life of eukaryotic cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, NSF funding of this project will continue to facilitate resource
development as exemplified by past contributions in reagents, educational
training and resource development. The studies will continue to expand the
repertoire of reagents that Dr. Wandinger-Ness has already freely disseminated
to over 100 investigators, resulting in numerous citations. The research serves
as an underpinning for educational innovation in an interdisciplinary graduate
training program. Prior NSF funding provided seed monies for the establishment
of a state-of-the-art microscopy facility at the University of New Mexico that
is now heavily utilized by students and fellows in various Federally funded
research projects. Finally, the project has with prior support been central to
the training of a total of 21 undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, more than half of which are women and underrepresented
minorities. It is expected this extensive training track record will be expanded
with this renewal support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;