* 0446112
* RUI: Dissecting Neuroendocrine GnRH Pulsatility in the Rat Hypothalamus
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Mike Woller, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Cedric L. Williams
* 02/28/2009
* USD 232,565.00

This project investigates the role of cell-cell communication in coordinating
the secretion of the main hormone that controls all aspects of reproductive
function, Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone (GnRH). GnRH controls the production
and release of the sex hormones (Testosterone in males, Estrogen and
Progesterone in females) and the production of gametes (sperm in males, eggs in
females) in all vertebrate species studied to date. The main hypothesis is that
one or more molecules are involved in coordinating the brain cells that release
GnRH. The investigation of molecules that likely control GnRH release using both
cell and tissue culture of rat brains, and microscopy and electron microscopy to
look at anatomical relationships between the GnRH neurons. The culture system
places brain tissue into a chamber and pumps artificial cerebral spinal fluid
past the tissue constantly for hours. The fluid is collected after it baths the
tissue, divided up in 10 minute samples and measured using an extremely
sensitive assay that measures the GnRH released in our culture system. GnRH
release profiles are then plotted over time. Preliminary results that suggest
the first metabolite of the 10 amino acid signal molecule GnRH (GnRH1-5 made up
of the first 5 amino acids of GnRH) is capable of stimulating GnRH release in
culture and in whole animals. Determination of the mechanism that controls
release of GnRH represents a fundamental science question impacting population
control (both contraception and fertility) for all vertebrate species. Even more
fundamental is the question of cell-cell communication between the GnRH neurons
involved in generating the signal needed for reproductive function. This work
will directly involve 15 undergraduate researchers, and indirectly affect many
others through involvement in other aspects of this project, participation in
our REU summer research program, and peer mentorship by students directly
impacted in this proposal