* 0446359
* Functional analysis of the FIERY1 Signaling Network
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Liming Xiong, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 01/31/2009
* USD 411,000.00

Drought, extreme temperatures, and high soil salinity are common adverse
environmental conditions that can greatly impair crop productivity.
Understanding how plants sense and respond to these abiotic stresses will help
in the breeding or engineering of a new generation of stress-tolerant crop
plants. One early response of plants to abiotic stress is the activation of
stress-responsive genes. The products of these genes can collectively enhance
plant stress tolerance. To find out how the expression of these genes is
regulated, genetic studies were conducted with the model plant Arabidopsis. The
FIERY1 gene was identified in these studies as a negative regulator of stress
gene expression. It is also required for tolerance to chilling, freezing, and
salt stresses. However, the FIERY1 protein is very complex in that it possesses
both an inositol polyphosphate 1-phosphatase activity and a bisphosphate
nucleotidase activity in vitro; these activities and their role in signal
transduction are unclear. The current study will 1) define the cellular
functions of FIERY1 using a combination of cell biology, molecular biology,
biochemistry and physiological approaches; and 2) result in the isolation of
signaling components in the FIERY1 network that mediate phytohormone signaling
and plant developmental adaptations to stress. This project will yield insights
into important cell-signaling processes that regulate plant development and
response to the environment. The study may also define better strategies to
engineer crop plants for enhanced tolerance to adverse environmental conditions.

Broader Impacts

The FIERY1 gene is widely conserved in organisms. The human homolog of FIERY1 is
thought to be a therapeutic target of lithium treatment for bipolar disease,
which seriously affects about one percent of the U.S. population. Thus,
understanding the function of FIERY1 in plants has implications for the
identification of new therapeutic targets for treating depression in humans.
Concerning human resources, the PI will support public education activities that
are regularly held at the Danforth Center. Undergraduate and high school
students will also participate in the study. These outreach activities will help
the public to appreciate the importance of plant biology research to agriculture
in the U.S. and throughout the world.

