* 0446315
* Molecular and Cellular Biology of Biotrophic Interactions in Rice Blast Disease
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2007
* Barbara Valent, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2007
* USD 492,107.00

Title: Molecular and Cellular Biology of Biotrophic Interactions in Rice Blast
Disease&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Successful pathogenesis by plant-infecting fungi
often requires an initial period of plant-fungal coexistence, and yet little is
known about how a fungus suppresses plant defense mechanisms and establishes
itself inside the plant. Rice blast disease occurs when the fungus, Magnaporthe
grisea, punctures through the outer plant surface and produces specialized
bulbous invasive hyphae inside living rice cells. This project will focus on
microscopy coupled with fungal and plant gene expression analyses of the first
and second invaded rice cells. Live-cell fluorescence confocal microscopy will
be used to define the nature of the plant cytoplasm-fungus interface as invasive
hyphae fill the first epidermal cell, approximately 24 to 35 hours after
inoculation. Laser Microdissection (LM) and whole genome microarrays, of both
fungus and rice, will provide a deep analysis of biotrophic fungal gene
expression and of rice cell responses. Similar coupled microscopy and LM-
microarray analysis will be performed after 35 hrs when the fungus has
completely filled the first epidermal cell and is sending invasive hyphae into
all neighboring cells. Cellular and molecular interactions in a successful
biotrophic infection will be compared to the near-isogenic interaction in which
fungal growth is blocked by Pi-ta resistance gene-mediated hypersensitive
resistance. This research will identify genes showing differential expression in
biotrophic hyphae or in plant cells responding to these hyphae. Expression
patterns will be confirmed for differentially-expressed fungal genes. Functional
analysis of biotroph-specific fungal genes will include live-cell microscopy of
infection by gene-disruption mutants to link molecular and cellular
phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Understanding the cellular and
molecular mechanisms that determine if crop plants succumb to or resist disease
will lead the way to developing durable disease resistance. Food security in the
coming century depends on decreasing the potential for rice blast disease to
cause catastrophic losses to rice production. In addition, studying biotrophic
blast infection will aid research on other hemibiotrophic and biotrophic fungi
that cause many plant diseases threatening agriculture. Success in using LM to
define temporal and spatial details early in development of rice blast disease
has the potential to revolutionize studies of fungus-plant interactions. This
technology has exciting potential to enable a deep molecular analysis of plant
infection structures formed by obligate pathogens such as the rust fungi, which
fail to grow outside of plant tissue. This project will provide a stimulating
learning and research experience for graduate and undergraduate students at
K-State. The strikingly visual picture of an important fungus-plant struggle
that emerges from this research will be presented in lectures at high schools
and community colleges. A special challenge lies in attracting kids from an
increasingly urbanized population to careers in agricultural research on
organisms that are critical for food security in the US and worldwide. This
research will be published and made available on the Valent Lab Web Site
(http://www.oznet.ksu.edu/plantpath/valentlab/) or on M. grisea community web
sites such as the NSF-funded "MGOS" database (http://www.mgosdb.org/&lt;br/&gt;