* 0447416
* Research Infrastructure for Nevada's Growth - Targeting Research with Uniqueness and Excellence
* O/D,EPS
* 08/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Gayle Dana, Nevada System of Higher Education
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2009
* USD 9,000,000.00

Proposal: EPS-0447416

Proposal Title: Research Infrastructure for Nevada's Growth - Targeting Research
with Uniqueness and Excellence

Institution: University and Community College System of Nevada

The Nevada EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement award will build capacity
and capability for national competitiveness in three focus areas, which are very
relevant to the fragile desert environment of the state and the challenges being
posed by a burgeoning human population is this increasingly arid landscape. The
focus on Environmental Processes in Arid Soils will develop two unique
experimental system facilities (outdoor weighing lysimeters and indoor two-
dimensional cells) to explore such questions as (1) what is the response of
desert soil microbial populations to changes in water content? and (2) how does
soil heterogeneity influence water use and carbon uptake by desert ecosystems?
The second focus on Sensor Technology will emphasize devising methods to
synthesize chemical and genetically engineered biological material for
biosensors and developing electrochemical, flourescence, and optical-fiber-based
sensors. The third focus on Cognitive Information Processing will enable
advances in the science behind intelligent computer systems that learn, mimic
human thought, and interact with their environment; potential applications
include identification of people, object recognition and tracking, control of
mechanical systems, and bioinformatics. This third focus area is relevant not
only to Nevada's needs and enhanced research competitiveness but also to
national issues of homeland security. Common, shared use equipment and
facilities established by this project will foster collaborative research
efforts both within and among the three focus areas and among faculties at the
participating institutions, Truckee Meadows Community College, the University of
Nevada Reno, the University of Nevada Las Vegas, and the Desert Research
Institute.

Outreach efforts to middle schools and high schools in the two very large school
districts serving Reno and Las Vegas will attract more students, especially
those from underrepresented groups and/or underprivileged backgrounds, to higher
education and to science and engineering studies and careers. A summer intensive
program will ease the high school to college transition and a mentorship program
with significant support for undergraduate research experiences will increase
the retention rate for majors in the sciences. A Phase 0 SBIR program will offer
assistance with development and writing of more successful SBIR proposals to
different agencies. These efforts, along with the investments to enhance
research competitiveness, should assist in developing a more technology-based
economy for Nevada.