* 0447550
* CAREER:  Milkweed-Herbivore Interactions:  Advancing Community Ecology and Student Community Outreach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Anurag Agrawal, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2011
* USD 565,800.00

In this project, the researchers will investigate mechanisms that promote the
coexistence of insect species that share plant species as their food source.
Identifying and understanding the factors that allow for the coexistence of
species is central to ecological theory. This research will focus on insect
species that rely on milkweeds, a diverse and charismatic group of plants. The
investigator will test the long-standing hypothesis that each insect species
thrives under different (but not all) conditions and that such "trade-offs"
prevent any one species from excluding all others. This hypothesis will be
experimentally tested in natural populations in New York State. Milkweed plants
exhibit high levels of genetic variation for six defensive and nutritional
traits (chemical toxins, latex, nitrogen levels, etc). These traits can
negatively affect herbivore species and are often strongly modified (or
"induced") following initial attack by insects. Thus, the resource base for
insect communities is highly dynamic. The investigators will test whether trade-
offs in the performance of insects on different plant phenotypes (generated by
genetic variation or induced defenses) allow variation in plant populations to
maintain insect diversity. This research will also test the prediction that
insect species that are less vulnerable to plant defenses will have a high
susceptibility to predation or have a low ability to colonize new plant patches.
Using novel field manipulations, these factors will also be tested as mechanisms
promoting diversity.

The insect-milkweed system is highly suitable for the development of laboratory
and teaching tools for K-12 education, and the investigator will be involved in
a variety of activities designed to bring science to K-12 classrooms and to
develop teacher training tools.