* 0447258
* Increasing US Participation in the 3rd International Steroids and Nervous System Conference to be Held in Torino, Italy 2/13/05 to 2/17/05
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2006
* Cheryl Frye, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 01/31/2006
* USD 7,600.00

This symposium is on "Increasing U.S. participation in the 3nd International
Steroids and Nervous System Conference". This conference will update our current
knowledge by describing new research on the relationships between steroid
hormones synthesized in different organs and the nervous system. Participants in
this program will include undergraduate students, graduate students, post-
doctoral fellows, and faculty. The symposium will engage participants in
discussions regarding novel aspects of neuroactive steroids, sexual
differentiation, neuroplasticity, corticosteroid effects and stress, synthesis
and interactions, and non-classical mechanisms of steroid action. Symposia,
poster presentations, meet the professor lunches, and organized discussions on
international research opportunities will encourage interactions between
students, junior scientists, and senior scientists that are internationally
recognized for their accomplishments. The organizing committee is committed to
fostering the development of young scientists. Funds will help defray travel
costs for trainees and participants to attend the meeting. The impact of this
meeting will extend to numerous fields of study, such as neuroendocrinology,
behavioral neuroscience, animal behavior, and population biology. This meeting
is a follow-up to the 1st and 2nd International Meeting on Steroids and the
Nervous System (NSF Supported), which were unqualified successes. Proceedings
from the present meeting will be published in Neuroscience and evaluation
surveys will be analyzed.