* 0447647
* CAREER: Alternative Mechanisms of HINT Domain Autoprocessing: An Integrated Undergraduate Research and Education Program
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2010
* Kenneth Mills, College of the Holy Cross
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2010
* USD 794,482.00

Some proteins are processed by self-splicing. Inteins are invervening
polypeptide sequences that facilitate their own excision from flanking
polypeptides (exteins) as well as the ligation of the exteins by a peptide bond.
The research project supported by this award explores unanswered questions about
the mechanism by which HINT (Hedgehog-INTein) domains facilitate post-
translational autoprocessing. This interesting case of biochemical catalysis
will be explored by the study of inteins that splice by alternate mechanisms.
For instance, the first step of protein splicing is an amide to ester
rearrangement, and this project will study how inteins promote this
thermodynamically unfavorable reaction by in-depth kinetic analysis of a non-
canonical intein and by NMR and site-directed mutagenesis studies of a hedgehog
protein. The third step of protein splicing, asparagine cyclization coupled to
peptide bond cleavage, will be studied by characterization of an intein that
likely splices via cyclization of glutamine. The goal of the research program is
to understand in detail the means by which HINT domains facilitate these two
unusual chemical reactions, and how they coordinate these separate steps to make
splicing an efficient process that avoids unproductive side-reactions.

This awardee will also make significant educational contributions to the
Biochemistry Concentration and both introductory and upper-level courses at the
College of the Holy Cross. One component will be the design and implementation
of new labs for the Discovery Chemistry curriculum, which introduces students to
science through the lab rather than through textbooks alone. Upper division
courses will prepare students to be life-long learners by integrating the
primary literature and emphasizing written and oral presentations, and upper
division lab courses will integrate research into the classroom. New programs
will be introduced to improve the vitality of the Biochemistry Concentration to
better prepare Holy Cross students for graduate studies, including a journal
club, a new seminar series, membership in a professional society, and travel to
local and national meetings and symposia.

The broader impacts of this program include contributions to both research and
education. The research program will broaden the understanding of intein
chemistry in particular and biochemical catalysis in general. This knowledge can
be applied in devising innovative schemes in protein engineering. This program
will improve the research training and educational preparation received by the
undergraduate student body, particularly students in the Biochemistry
Concentration. The goal of the educational projects is to better prepare these
students to read the literature, fully appreciate the importance and excitement
of their research experiences, be confident with presenting their work orally
and in writing, and give back to the scientific community through outreach.
These projects will help to ensure the continued vitality of the strong
tradition of research at Holy Cross, and the richness of the experience that
Holy Cross students have as undergraduates will resonate in their careers as
graduate students, scientists, and teachers.