* 0447128
* Collaborative Research: Marine Metadata Interoperability Project
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* John Helly, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2007
* USD 48,591.00

This project is an effort to improve the ease of use of data from ocean
observations by developing broader agreement within the ocean science community
on "best practices" for marine metadata. It brings together a number of segments
of the ocean science community in an effort to document current usage, to
develop a consensus on "best practices", and to test the best practices and
their effectiveness at promoting cross-platform, cross-disciplinary data
exchange in a test-bed activity. The goal is to reduce the burden of metadata
generation, increase the use of metadata, and develop a general metadata
structure that supports a wide variety of data usage. The test-bed will provide
an end-to-end demonstration of the use of metadata "best practices" in an
environment with heterogeneous data types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The volume and
variety of ocean data from modern observing systems are expanding rapidly and it
becomes difficult to find or effectively use these data without assistance from
modern data management and data analysis tools. These tools place the burden of
searching for and manipulating data onto computer programs. To be able to
successfully do this requires that datasets include descriptions of the data
they contain, and details of how they have been obtained and processed, that are
stored in a form that can be understood by these programs. To be machine-
readable, this metadata must conform to semantic and syntactic standards that
are understood by the programs. This project aims to combine the best of
existing practices for generating metadata into recipes for voluntary de facto
community standards. Experience with how to develop metadata and associated
ontologies has emerged in a number of fields and this will be fused with
existing marine metadata practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
project will develop a more comprehensive approach to ocean metadata and
facilitate its adoption by marine scientists. More complete metadata that
conforms to a community standard will enhance the ability of many users to
employ ocean observations more effectively. The impact is likely to be felt most
directly by the academic research and "operational" ocean nowcasting or
forecasting communities. Indirectly, this is likely to benefit a number of ocean
data users such as coastal ocean resource managers and commercial users by
easing and expanding their access to relevant data.