* 0447613
* CAREER: A Network Information Theoretic Approach to Wireless Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2010
* Sennur Ulukus, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* William H Tranter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

With the recent advances in theory, technology and applications
of&lt;br/&gt;wireless communications a vision of the next generation
wireless&lt;br/&gt;systems arises to be that of communicating arbitrarily
correlated&lt;br/&gt;data, in arbitrarily structured networks, in challenging
physical&lt;br/&gt;layer conditions, using wireless devices that are more
flexible in&lt;br/&gt;terms of their transmitting/receiving capabilities and in
terms of the&lt;br/&gt;boundaries between the layers of their protocol stack.
The goal of&lt;br/&gt;this research is to develop a comprehensive information
theoretic&lt;br/&gt;framework for determining the ultimate capacity limits of
such&lt;br/&gt;networks and for developing efficient coding, transmission,
reception&lt;br/&gt;and decoding schemes to be used in such
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is structured into four heavily
interrelated parts:&lt;br/&gt;network, data, tools, and channel. This research
investigates the&lt;br/&gt;capacity regions and capacity achieving
transmit/receive&lt;br/&gt;coding/decoding schemes of basic network structures
that are building&lt;br/&gt;blocks of general ad-hoc multi-hop wireless
networks, with an emphasis&lt;br/&gt;on the interference channel. This research
develops principles of&lt;br/&gt;communicating correlated and common data.
Specifically, the&lt;br/&gt;investigator determines the optimum coding and
transmission schemes&lt;br/&gt;for correlated/common data and also studies the
trade-offs between&lt;br/&gt;performance and complexity; in particular, the loss
in performance&lt;br/&gt;when the source-channel separation principle is
enforced. This&lt;br/&gt;research develops new tools and integrates and jointly
optimizes some&lt;br/&gt;of the existing tools; the emphasis is on the joint
optimization of&lt;br/&gt;user cooperation and power control. This research
integrates the&lt;br/&gt;fading nature of the wireless communication channel
into all of the&lt;br/&gt;problem formulations. The existence of fading in the
channel can be&lt;br/&gt;both challenging and fortuitous, more the latter, if it
is carefully&lt;br/&gt;exploited to the advantage of the network capacity. The
investigator&lt;br/&gt;incorporates the existence of the channel fading into the
capacity&lt;br/&gt;evaluations (hence, ergodic and outage capacities), into
coding and&lt;br/&gt;transmission schemes for common/correlated data, and also
into the&lt;br/&gt;development of the
tools.&lt;br/&gt;------------------&lt;br/&gt;