* 0447741
* CAREER: E-textile-based Wearable Computing for Sensing User Motions
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Thomas Martin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 05/31/2011
* USD 452,000.00

CAREER: E-textile-based Wearable Computing for Sensing User
Motions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ideally, a
wearable computer should always be available to the user,&lt;br/&gt;should not
interfere with the user's movements, and should be invisible&lt;br/&gt;to those
around the user. Electronic textiles (e-textiles), an
emerging&lt;br/&gt;technology that blends fabric with electronics, has the
potential to&lt;br/&gt;meet these goals. Interconnections and components are an
intrinsic&lt;br/&gt;part of the cloth, enabling the creation of "smart" garments
that have&lt;br/&gt;the appearance and feel of normal clothing while providing
sensing and&lt;br/&gt;computing capabilities. This NSF CAREER project addresses
the research issues involved&lt;br/&gt;in designing e-textile garments that can
sense their own shapes and&lt;br/&gt;the positions of their sensing/processing
elements. The major&lt;br/&gt;outcome of the research component of this project
will be a complete&lt;br/&gt;e-textiles design framework that will permit
e-textiles to function&lt;br/&gt;robustly across a wide range of applications
and the full spectrum of&lt;br/&gt;the user population. The education component
of this project integrates&lt;br/&gt;e-textiles research into the classroom and
develops novel educational&lt;br/&gt;modules for improving the debugging skills
of students based upon Kolb's&lt;br/&gt;learning cycle and Felder's learning
styles. The project's intellectual &lt;br/&gt;merit is that it enables
e-textiles to reach their full potential&lt;br/&gt;for wearable computing,
creating a better platform for existing wearable&lt;br/&gt;computing
applications and being an enabling platform for applications&lt;br/&gt;that are
not feasible with existing technology. The project also
has&lt;br/&gt;significant broader impact, by enabling novel applications in the
areas&lt;br/&gt;of health care for the elderly and people with disabilities,
industry,&lt;br/&gt;emergency response, and untethered motion tracking. The
collaborative&lt;br/&gt;nature of the project provides students with
multidisciplinary research&lt;br/&gt;experience, enhancing their contributions
to the future growth of the&lt;br/&gt;field. Finally, it is expected that
e-textiles can help reinvigorate&lt;br/&gt;the Virginia textile
industry.&lt;br/&gt;