* 0447287
* Collaborative Research Project: Pilot Hydrologic Measurement Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Richard Hooper, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2010
* USD 336,990.00

0447287&lt;br/&gt;Hooper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve a more comprehensive
understanding of hydrology that embraces the full hydrologic cycle as well as
the role of hydrology in related environmental and earth sciences, the
hydrologic science community formed the Consortium of Universities for the
Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI). CUAHSI has prepared a science
agenda that identifies the interfaces among traditional boundaries among the
atmosphere, land surface, groundwater and surface-water subdisciplines as the
most promising areas for research. Substantive progress will only be achieved
with multidisciplinary approaches applied at larger spatial scales to obtain
coherent data sets than have typically been done in the past. CUAHSI envisages
four mutually supportive infrastructure elements to meet this goal: 1) a network
of hydrologic observatories, 2) an information system, 3) a measurement
technologies program, and 4) a hydrologic synthesis facility. This project
requests funds to provide a core support for the development and management of
these facilities as well as to initiate the observatories and synthesis
facility.&lt;br/&gt;Because this scale of coordinated research has not been
previously attempted by the hydrologic science community, we propose to begin
with a 'paper prototype' of a single river basin (a hydrologic observatory)
designed to address a small set of specific hypotheses carefully chosen to yield
a data set that will provide a robust characterization of the basin. Thus a data
set sufficient to answer important questions and broad enough to be useful for
many studies will emerge. The prototype will identify both the scientific and
economic synergies from coordinating research in a single river basin. The Neuse
River has been chosen as the site for this prototype.&lt;br/&gt;The second
proposed activity is to initiate a hydrologic synthesis facility, envisioned as
a place where hydrologic scientists from various disciplines can come together
conveniently and at low marginal cost to tackle central problems in the field. A
workshop to design the facility and funding for an initial synthesis project,
including a competition for its selection, are proposed.&lt;br/&gt;This project
will permit hydrologic science to make fundamental advances by providing
facilities with capabilities currently unavailable to the community. These
activities have been chosen to provide the greatest return on investment to move
hydrologic science to a new plane of understanding. The benefits to society of
improved hydrologic understanding are manifold, including more reliable
forecasting of conditions and wiser management of water
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;