* 0447696
* Ultrafest:  Workshop on the Use of Ultrasound in Linguistic Research
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2006
* Diana Archangeli, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2006
* USD 16,718.00

How does your tongue move when you talk? Scientists have long known that minute
differences in tongue configuration may produce significantly different sounds.
Yet study of tongue movement faces a significant challenge - the tongue is
hidden inside the mouth. The National Science Foundation will provide partial
support for the third Ultrafest workshop to be held at the University of
Arizona. Recent advances in ultrasound technology suggest it as more practical
and user-friendly than the familiar alternatives (like x-rays, palatography,
magnetic resonance imaging, etc.): It is noninvasive, nontoxic, relatively
inexpensive (once the initial machine cost is covered), and produces real-time
video images. Ultrasound study oriented towards understanding tongue movement
during normal and abnormal speech is in its infancy. This workshop brings
together the world's scientists who are using ultrasound to study language
articulation, to share descriptions of each lab's research foci, to explore
methodological and data analysis issues, and to present results of current
research projects. The format is that of a workshop rather than a more formal
conference, with faculty, post docs, and students sitting round the table
together sharing ideas. Critical methodological issues include (a) rate of data
extraction (speeding up both extraction of frames from the video and
identification of data points showing the edge of the tongue in each frame); (b)
image adjustment to eliminate effects of subject movement during the recording
session; (c) image improvement to enhance the quality of the tongue profile and
to add the palate in the appropriate place to the tongue image; (d) analytic
challenges (for each different type of research question, what should be
measured and how should statistics be calculated?).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasound in language research is an innovative
application of an existing technology. As a phonetic tool, ultrasound can bring
about a veritable explosion of new data with which to revisit old research
questions and pose new ones. To achieve this, as with any new research
methodology, it is critical to develop and test standards to improve
replicability and reliability of results. The workshop approach is designed for
maximum open interaction among the participants geared to exploring and
improving solutions to shared problems.&lt;br/&gt;