* 0447660
* South Carolina 2004 Research Infrastructure Improvement Grant
* O/D,EPS
* 06/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Mark Kindy, South Carolina Research Authority
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,800,000.00

The goals of the South Carolina EPSCoR (SC EPSCoR) are (1) to improve the
State's research and development (R&amp;D) competitiveness through the
utilization of science and technology resources in its major research
universities; and (2) to promote productive, long-term partnerships among
academic, government, and the private R&amp;D sectors. Consistent with these
goals, as well as with EPSCoR's overall mission, the proposal submitted by the
South Carolina Research Authority will focus on three major research areas:
biological engineering and biotechnology; genomics/proteomics with an emphasis
on agricultural/plant genomics; and neurodevelopment, cognition, and brain
function. In order to accomplish its goals, South Carolina will recruit 15
tenure track faculty to complement existing strengths in the targeted areas,
purchase start-up and shared equipment to support the new hires and expand
interuniversity collaborative research activities, and develop the research
capacity at two of South Carolina's Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of a long-term statewide strategic
plan development process for academic R&amp;D, the SC EPSCoR will build
biological engineering and biotechnology infrastructure at University of South
Carolina and Claflin University, respectively; develop excellence in plant gene
discovery and bioengineered products at Clemson University; and establish a
Phenomics Neuroscience Center at the Medical University of South Carolina for
the state-of-the-art investigations of brain and neural function. New faculty
and equipment proposed for South Carolina State University, the State largest
HBCU, and Claflin, the oldest private HBCU, will expand their primary mission of
undergraduate education to include research and provide thereby research access
to undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the proposal
pursues both the integration of research efforts at various institutions to make
them competitive for other federal support, and the enhancement of graduate
programs in biological engineering, neuroscience, plant genomics, and
biotechnology through outreach activities. Post-doctoral fellows will receive
training in instruction while bringing research issues and projects to the
undergraduate classroom of predominantly undergraduate institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of education and outreach activities, the SC
EPSCoR proposes the continuation of the Collaborative Research Program (CRP),
and the Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase 0 initiative. The goal
of the CRP is to build sustainable research clusters among South Carolina's
institutions of higher education. The SBIR Phase 0 program will support small
business that have targeted a specific SBIR solicitation and have the potential
to yield a successful Phase I proposal.&lt;br/&gt;