* 0447282
* CAREER:  Novel Superconducting and Magnetic NanoComposites
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2005,01/31/2006
* Ruslan Prozorov, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2006
* USD 160,000.00

This CAREER project focuses on comprehensive experimental and theoretical
studies of novel magnetic nanocomposite materials. An innovative method based on
heterogeneous sonochemistry allows for controllable in situ synthesis of highly
magnetic nanoparticles embedded in bulk ceramics. Two major classes of
nanocomposites will be studied: 1) Superconducting nanocomposites based on high-
Tc ceramics, in which embedded nanoparticles act as efficient magnetic pinning
centers leading to a substantial increase in the critical current. The
interaction of such ferromagnetic nano-inclusions with surrounding
superconductor and Abrikosov vortices will be studied in detail. Several novel
effects, such as dynamic pinning and spontaneously generated vortex loops, are
expected. 2) Soft magnetic nanocomposites for high-frequency high-temperature
applications with refractory ceramics as the structural component and highly
magnetic nanoparticles as the active superparamagnetic component. The
enhancement of a dynamic resonant permeability and collective effects of
superparamagnetic nanoparticles at high frequencies will be investigated in
these nanocomposites. The practical outcomes of this CAREER project will be the
development of materials for more efficient use of energy in electrical
transmission and power-electronics devices. The project provides excellent
interdisciplinary research opportunities to students at all levels. An
undergraduate solid-state physics course will have an advanced laboratory with
experiments based on this project. The use of experimental techniques, such as
low-temperature magneto-optical imaging and tunnel-diode susceptometry (with
only a few such systems available worldwide), will provide invaluable experience
to the students and help in their future careers. A unique summer research
program will be organized for minority students (HBCU students, AMP and GAANN
scholars), as well as high-school students. Each year, a student workshop will
be organized with invited guests from scientific collaborations involved in this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a unique
opportunity to study fundamental properties of advanced materials and to develop
cutting-edge technologies. The practical outcome will be the development of
materials for more efficient use of energy in electrical transmission and power-
electronics devices. To ensure maximum performance, the fundamental physical
properties of these new materials must be thoroughly studied and optimized. This
research is particularly urgent In light of recent national power blackouts. The
project consists of several research components which will be carried out
primarily by students. Minority students (HBCU students, AMP and GAANN scholars)
and high-school students will have the opportunity to conduct real-life
research, perform data analysis, and present their findings at workshops and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;