* 0447391
* Montana Flora Online:  Constructing a Web-Searchable Database of the Vascular Plant Collections of the University of Montana Herbarium (MONTU)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Elizabeth Crone, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 02/28/2010
* USD 345,460.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Montana under the direction of
Drs. Lila Fishman and Elizabeth Crone for partial support of a web-searchable
database of the Montana Flora based on the specimen collections of The
University of Montana Herbarium (MONTU). MONTU is a unique resource for
scientists, managers and educators in Montana and nationwide. It has the largest
collection of vascular plant specimens from the Northern Rocky Mountain region
and is a unique repository of historical, taxonomic, biogeographical and
ecological information about Montana plants. The proposed project will enhance
the utility of the UM Herbarium collection to both scientists and the wider
public. The project will transfer the georeferenced label data from MONTU's
72,000 Montana vascular plant specimens into a powerful database program,
integrate the specimen data with photo archives and dynamic distribution maps,
and present the integrated information in a simple and flexible online format.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a web-searchable database of the MONTU
specimens will improve management of the collection, accelerate an ongoing
effort to write an illustrated Flora of Montana monograph, add valuable missing
information to regional and national databases of biotic diversity, and enhance
taxonomic, ecological and evolutionary research at UM and nationwide. The
databasing project also provides new opportunities for integration of the
Herbarium into teaching and training at the University level. The online
accessibility of specimen locality data enlarges the utility of the Herbarium
from botany/plant identification to a range of ecology and conservation classes
across multiple Divisions. In addition, the databasing project will provide
training for students in data entry, georeferencing, collections curation and
plant taxonomy, provide computer databasing and web design training for
undergraduate students, and provide curatorial, plant taxonomy and mentoring
experience to graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MONTU vascular plant
database will be a valuable resource for the management of federal, state tribal
and private lands throughout the region. Managers of public lands, which make up
the majority of Montana's area, currently rely heavily on plant taxonomy and
distribution information from the UM Herbarium. The specimen database and
interactive maps will greatly increase the accessibility of specimen data to
these established users and will broaden access to a larger audience. By
combined specimen data with maps and photos, the online Montana flora database
will also be an excellent resource of K-12 education, creating the opportunity
for classroom research projects using Herbarium data to generate and test
hypotheses about the local flora. To ensure the greatest awareness of Herbarium
database and train potential users, the project also includes two workshops in
the final year. One will demonstrate uses of the MONTU and similar databases to
tribal land managers from throughout the state and one will introduce the
database and Herbarium-related classroom projects to local teachers.&lt;br/&gt;