* 0447691
* New Mexico EPSCoR RII (NM NEW) Proposal
* O/D,EPS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* James Gosz, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2009
* USD 7,312,499.00

EPS 04-47691 University of New Mexico Gosz, James New Mexico EPSCoR RII (NM NEW)
Proposal

The New Mexico EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement plan focuses on two
topics of importance to the state and the nation: hydrology and nanoscience. In
hydrology, the goal is for New Mexico to become national and world leader in
instrumentation and algorithm development for regional hydrolic modeling and
Evapotranspiration (ET) estimation in semi-arid environments. The project will
create a high density ET network with real-time, state-of-the-art
instrumentation, integrating with real-time remote imagery and state-of-the-art
modeling unmatched in the nation. In the nanoscience area, New Mexico will
establish two research groups. The nano-water interface group will study the
structure and properties of water and aqueous solutions that are confined to or
in contact with nanostructured materials. The knowledge gained will be used to
develop improved water purification and sensing methods. In the nanomaterials
energy systems area, investigators will explore how nanomaterials and nanoscale
phenomena can be used for energy production, conversion and storage.
Participating institutions include: the University of New Mexico, New Mexico
State University, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, Eastern New
Mexico University, New Mexico Highlands University, Western New Mexico
University, and San Juan College. Collaborations with Sandia and Los Alamos
National Laboratories will benefit from world-class capabilities associated with
those facilities.

As the nations' first "minority-as-majority" state, New Mexico is investing
significant resources into an education and outreach component to address the
specific challenges faced by the state's rural and minority populations. New
Mexico will build on successful programs and establish new ones to make science
education more accessible and attainable and encourage students to graduate from
high school and continue on to college. A variety of activities will increase
the skills and knowledge of middle and high school teachers so they can
incorporate inquiry-based and locally relevant hydrology and nanoscience
experiences into their classrooms. At the college level, undergraduate student
research internships, graduate student support and teacher research internship
programs will allow exploration of new research experiences at regional
universities and community colleges.

