* 0447534
* CAREER: Evolution and Ontogeny of Conditional Mating Tactics in a Model Avian System
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Alexander Badyaev, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 01/31/2011
* USD 623,656.00

CAREER: EVOLUTION AND ONTOGENY OF CONDITIONAL MATING TACTICS IN A MODEL AVIAN
SYSTEM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest puzzles remaining for
evolutionary biology is to understand the evolution of animal behaviors.
Particularly, the evolution of plasticity in mating behaviors is, at once, the
most commonly- documented and the least understood phenomenon. Whereas growing
number of observations show that individuals can modify their behaviors
adaptively in even the rarest of environmental circumstances, current theory
shows that the evolution of such plasticity, especially in rare and
unpredictable environments, is unlikely. The resolution of this paradox requires
a novel integration of genetic, physiological, and behavioral approaches to a
natural system where plasticity in behavior is well established. The proposed
research program will be the first to explicitly integrate these diverse
approaches in an experimental study of evolution of plastic and reversible
mating tactics in natural populations of birds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator proposes integrative research and educational
opportunities that will take advantage of distinct parental behaviors observed
in the most common of the backyard birds in the North America - the house finch
(Carpodacus mexicanus). Males of this species either provide or withhold
parental care depending on the elaboration of their sexual ornamentation.
Because males molt into a new plumage every year and live for several years, the
same individual can show different parental strategies at different times of his
life, thus offering a unique opportunity to examine evolution of plasticity in
behavior. The central goal of the proposed work is to elucidate the links
between ecology, physiology, genetics, and behavior in order to understand how
parental behaviors become connected with sexual ornamentation in response to
environmental cues throughout a male's lifetime. The explicit aim of this
research program is to utilize this well-established natural phenomena to
provide the long-term educational and training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students at the University of Arizona and University of Montana to
prepare them for independent and innovative research at the at the forefront of
current approaches in biological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research sites
for the proposed study are on the campuses of universities and in urban areas
and provide an abundant opportunity for training high school students, school
teachers, and for general public outreach. High visibility and active public
participation thus far facilitated wide dissemination of scientific research and
discoveries through established media contacts, from local newspapers to
national television networks. Moreover, close relationships built with
scientific outreach programs of local schools will provide further opportunities
for the recruitment of students for future undergraduate and graduate education.
Ultimately this work will provide significant new insights into our
understanding how behavioral plasticity evolves. More generally, these data will
increase our understanding of the processes that enable rare and novel behaviors
to appear, persist, and spread in animal populations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;