* 0447773
* CAREER:    Combinatorial Algorithms for Pattern Discovery with Applications to Data Mining and Computational Biology
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2011
* Stefano Lonardi, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2011
* USD 422,277.00

The exponential growth of the web, the recent technological progresses in
molecular biology, the launch of massive-scale digital library projects, and the
ability of exchanging information at our fingertips, have all contributed to the
creation of an unprecedented quantity of textual data in digital form. Plain or
semi-structured text is still the most versatile format in which to exchange
information and there is so much of this data that is likely that the large
majority of it will never be read by anyone, unless the way in which we access
information drastically improves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major limiting factor
in handling large textual datasets is typically related to space rather than
time. When the amount of data is too large to be stored in main memory, computer
scientists have to resort to algorithms capable of dealing with compressed
representations of the data (called 'sketches' or 'indexes'). For textual data,
the construction of the sketch typically involves keeping statistics on
substrings or related associations or rules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first set
of objectives of this project is centered around a new sketch based on a novel
family of gapped patterns. We are applying the new index to three selected
problems: databases; data compression; and computational biology. In the second
set of objectives we are extending the pattern discovery problem to two-
dimensional matrices. The discovery problem associated with two-dimensional
patterns has a wide spectrum of applications including the analysis of gene
expression data, recommender systems and collaborative filtering, identification
of web communities, load balancing, and discovery of association
rules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education goal of the proposal is to establish
the algorithmic and the fundamental software development component of an
interdisciplinary bioinformatics curriculum. Funds from this proposal are being
used to enhance these activities through the development of new courses in
computational genomics for in-depth training on individualized research topics.
Since UCR is a minority-serving institution, this plan will also have an impact
on the education of under-represented students.&lt;br/&gt;