* 0447854
* Collaborative Research:  A Simulation Approach To The Evolution of The G-Matrix
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Stevan Arnold, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 03/31/2009
* USD 38,536.00

In this project, three investigators will collaborate on computer simulation
studies of G-matrix stability and evolution. The G-matrix is a statistical
description of ghe pattern of genetic variances and covariances among
quantitative traits. It is the central concept of inheritance in theoretical
models for the evolution of characters that are affected by many genes. Many
important characters are in this category (e.g., body size, intelligence,
susceptibility to some kinds of disease). Consequently the stability and
evolution of the G-matrix are important issues because they affect our ability
to predict how such characteristics evolve. One aim is to determine how randomly
varying selective pressures affect G-matrix stability. Another aim is to
determine how details of genetic architecture (mutation, linkage, dominance, and
epistasis) affect both the stability and evolution of the G-matrix. The
overarching goal is to determine the conditions under which the G-matrix is
likely to be stable or unstable, with a focus on selection regimes that are
likely to prevail in nature.

In the course of this project we will train graduate and postdoctoral students
by including them in our planning and writing sessions. We will also build a
website that will enable students, teachers and researchers to run simulations
of G-matrix fluctuation and evolution.