* 0447616
* Finite Element Analyses of the Mammalian Skull: The Impact of Biting Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Elizabeth Dumont, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2009
* USD 333,076.00

Biting Style and the Biomechanics of Feeding in Mammals Elizabeth R. Dumont
(PI), Ian R. Grosse (Co-PI) University of Massachusetts, Amherst

The evolutionary history of mammals is largely a story about exploiting an ever
broader array of food resources. While the first mammals were insect-eaters,
modern mammals specialize in diets ranging from insects to fruits, foliage,
meat, and plankton. This diversity in diet is reflected in the shape of the
skull - the primary 'tool' that mammals use to bite and chew food. Importantly,
however, the underlying mechanism driving the evolution of this diversity is
unknown. This study explores the importance of the biomechanical link between
the forces generated during biting and the anatomy of mammal skulls that safely
and optimally bear and disperse these forces. Further, this study investigates
the role of this relationship in the evolution of diversity in skull shape.
Previous analyses of mammalian feeding have taken one of two approaches, each of
which has inherent limitations. Broad comparative studies document correlations
between skull shape and diet, but fall short of testing the causal mechanisms
underlying the correlations. On the other hand, detailed experimental studies
document how bones and muscles behave during feeding, but the experimental
conditions are often far from natural. This study will be the first to combine
data on biting behavior and bite force gathered in the field with biomechanical
experiments carried out in the laboratory. The first aim is to investigate how
different biting styles apply loads to the skull and how those loads are
dispersed. Causal links between routine biting behaviors and morphology will be
identified by comparing the loading regimes imposed by different biting styles
within species. The second aim is to address two other unresolved issues
regarding feeding in mammals: the extent to which skull shape is limited by
other sensory systems (in this case, vision), and the strength of the facial
skeleton relative to forces generated during feeding. Answers to these issues
may explain why some lineages of mammals exhibit a wider variety of skull shapes
than do others. Initially, the forces generated by biting will be measured and
the feeding behavior of mammals will be documented in the field. Next, the
mechanical implications of these behaviors will be investigated in the
laboratory using finite element (FE) modeling and analysis, a physics-based
numerical technique widely used by engineers to assess the mechanical behavior
of physical systems. FE analysis (FEA) provides a truly novel perspective on
form-function relationships, but is not yet accessible to most biologists. An
objective is to make FEA more accessible by accomplishing two specific
methodological aims: 1) determine the extent to which FE models of mammal skulls
can be simplified and still yield sufficiently accurate results, and 2) develop
protocols for efficiently translating CT-scans into three dimensional FE models.
These results will be communicated to the biology community through peer-
reviewed scientific publications, presentations, and workshops. This
collaboration between a functional anatomist and a mechanical engineer offers an
excellent opportunity to train graduate students and to expose undergraduates to
collaborative, interdisciplinary research in biomechanics, comparative anatomy,
and mechanical engineering. Graduate Research Assistants will conduct their own
original research, and help the PIs to mentor 4-6 undergraduate research
projects. These projects will serve as a springboard to graduate studies in
biology and/or engineering.

