* 0447019
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Early Triassic Ocean Chemistry, Stratigraphy, and Paleobiology During the Protracted Biotic Recovery from the Permo-Triassic Mass Extinction
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* David Bottjer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/29/2008
* USD 150,001.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most devastating mass extinction since the
origin of animals occurred at the end of the Permian Period (c. 251 million
years ago) when over 80% of all marine species went extinct. The marine realm
remained perturbed into the subsequent Triassic Period for several million years
after the extinction events, but the details are poorly known and may help us
more completely understand the extinction. Unusual geologic features reminiscent
of earlier times in Earth's history, such as seafloor precipitated aragonite
fans, subtidal stromatolites, and remarkable excursions in seawater d13C and
d34S, indicate that atypical ocean chemistries and environments persisted into
the Early Triassic, but their exact nature is not well-understood, given the
boundary-centric nature of previous studies. We will investigate connections
between unusual biotas, anachronistic lithofacies, strong isotopic shifts (d13C,
d34S) and the protracted animal recovery in the Early Triassic (the geologic
period following the mass extinctions). The western U.S., our proposed study
area, resided on the eastern margin of the giant Panthalassic Ocean during this
geologic time and thus provides a global comparison with ongoing research
elsewhere (China, Europe, etc.). Our preliminary 87Sr/86Sr work in the western
US demonstrates that samples are well preserved and that 87Sr/86Sr provides sub-
stage time correlation potential. Sulfur-rich deposits that reflect seawater
conditions are rare in the rock record. We will surmount this problem by using a
new technique to extract sulfur isotopic information from normal marine
limestones (the so-called "carbonate associated sulfate" or CAS), which are
common around the world. The assembled dataset will likely be the first of its
kind and reveal features that may give insight into the mass extinction not
previously recognized. &lt;br/&gt;