* 0447315
* Curation and Databasing of the Gordon Alexander Othoptera Collection at the University of Colorado
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2007
* Cesar Nufio, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 12/31/2007
* USD 208,201.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Colorado under the direction of
Dr. M. Deane Bowers for partial support of a project to curate and database the
Gordon Alexander collection of grasshoppers. This collection is composed of over
19,000 grasshoppers from the Rocky Mountain and plains regions of Colorado that
were originally collected under the auspices of a 1958 - 1960 NSF grant.
Approximately 75% of this collection is composed of representative specimens
from over 65,000 grasshoppers, representing 95 different species, that were
processed during the tenure of this grant. The remaining 25% is composed of
specimens from other studies conducted in Colorado and neighboring states during
the 1930's to 1960's. Given the recent and dramatic impacts of humans in this
region, this collection is of particular importance for understanding the
communities in existence before these changes occurred. The goals of this
project are 1) to curate the collection in order to preserve it and make it
accessible to researchers; 2) to database the collection; and 3) to make the
information from this collection available to researchers as well as lay-people
by publishing the data from this collection online. In order to accomplish these
goals, the Entomology section requires funds to support curatorial staff and
students to coordinate and implement the project. The Entomology section also
requires additional curatorial supplies, a microscope and computer equipment, to
properly curate and database all specimens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alexander
grasshopper collection will be curated and databased and information from this
historically important collection will be posted online via a new website
developed under the auspices of the grant and through publishing the data on
global biodiversity networks. The Alexander collection will be made available in
a format that will allow professional researchers and the public access to data
that can be used for education and outreach-related projects. Participation in
this project by students will be extensive. Graduate students will be trained in
museum skills, insect taxonomy, curation, databasing, and use of computer
programs that are important for making collection data available over the
internet. Undergraduates and the general public will have also have access, via
the internet, to a relational database that will allow them to examine
Alexander's survey and collection data, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
make the Alexander Collection readily available to researchers, land managers,
educators and students. In addition to making the collection and its specimen
information available for study, the data can be used by researchers to examine
the effects of land use practices and climate change on communities and species.
Furthermore, the Education section of the Museum will ensure that the collection
and the internet material will be used in public outreach and education to the
public. &lt;br/&gt;