* 0447814
* CAREER:  Learning Local Feature Relevance for Pattern Classification and Clustering
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Carlotta Domeniconi, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Edwina L. Rissland
* 01/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Pattern classification is a broad research area with numerous applications
ranging from science, engineering, target marketing, medical diagnosis and
electronic commerce to weather forecasting. While pattern classification has
shown promise in many areas of practical significance, it faces difficult
challenges posed by real world problems, of which the most pronounced is the so-
called curse of dimensionality: that is, the fact that the sample size required
to perform accurate prediction on problems with high dimensionality is beyond
feasibility. The goal of this project is to develop novel classification and
clustering techniques to mitigate the curse of dimensionality and to reduce bias
by estimating feature relevance and selecting features accordingly. In
particular, this project has the following specific, measurable objectives: (1)
to develop non-linear and flexible metrics for distance-based classifiers via
kernel methods; (2) to construct effective ensembles by exploiting local feature
relevance to perform adaptive sampling in feature space, and (3) to develop
adaptive metrics for subspace clustering by measuring local correlation of data
with respect to different dimensions.

Given that so many problems of practical interest are high dimensional, this
research will have significant impact in fields and applications as diverse as
bioinformatics, security and intrusion detection, information and image
retrieval. The PI's collaborative effort with biologists for the analysis of
microarray data has the potential to contribute new data mining techniques to
the HIV genomic knowledge domain, which in turn could eventually contribute to
the customized diagnosis and treatment of AIDS.

This project involves the training of both undergraduate and graduate students
and includes a joint seminar course with the Department of Molecular Biology at
George Mason University. The PI aims to facilitate the involvement of
underrepresented groups in the science and engineering fields through her active
participation in training activities and workshops in cooperation with the
Multicultural Research Center at George Mason University.

