* 0447788
* CAREER:The High Light Inducible Polypeptides (HLIPs) in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803: Regulation and Function in Cell Survival under High Light Intensity
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2011
* Qingfang He, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2011
* USD 633,334.00

Photosynthetic organisms optimize utilization of light in different
environments. Little is known about the protective mechanisms by which these
organisms cope with excess absorption of light energy under high intensity
light. Understanding these mechanisms will help in developing crops that are
able to thrive even under harsh environmental conditions. The project focuses on
regulation and function of four high light inducible polypeptides (HLIP) and
using them as research tools to study the molecular mechanisms of cell survival
under high intensity light in Synecocystis sp. PCC 6803. First, the regulators
that control the expression of hli genes (encoding HLIPs) will be sought by
screening for mutants defective in hli regulation using genetically engineered
strains that carry sacB or gusA coding sequences under the control of hli
promoters. Secondly, the functions of HLIPs in cell survival under high
intensity light will be determined by mutant studies, and by screening for
suppressors that restore the viability to a quadruple hli deletion mutant that
dies in high light. Thirdly, the HLIP complexes will be determined by combining
means of bio-separation, mass spectrometry, protein cross-linking and mutant
dissection. These studies will contribute significantly to the understanding of
the molecular mechanisms of high light acclimation in photosynthetic organisms.
HLIPs are preserved in higher plants including crops and they are considered as
potential stress reducers; therefore, the research will generate important leads
for potential application of HLIPs to enhance crop production.

Broader impacts: The project is designed to actively involve undergraduate and
graduate students from underrepresented groups (mainly African-American) to make
significant contributions to the understanding of the mechanisms of
photoprotection. Part of their training will include writing papers and making
presentations at scientific meetings at which the results of the studies will be
disseminated. This project also include participation in an existing program
(Teaching Enhancement Affect Minority Students at the University of Arkansas at
Little Rock) that focuses on increasing the enrollment and retention of minority
students and helping them to enter graduate and professional schools. In
addition, laboratory-based courses will be created. These courses will provide
students with opportunities for critical thinking and scientific discovery, and
help students to gain research experience and parlay it into a job in either
biotechnology or education.