* 0447585
* Collaborative Research:    Line-Active Amphiphiles for Nanostructure Stability
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2005,10/31/2009
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 10/31/2009
* USD 333,516.00

This project aims to advance a fundamental understanding of how line-active
molecules (which we call linactants) can be used to modify the line tension of
nano- and meso-scale features within molecular monolayers. The ability to
control line tension will be critical to the stabilization of objects created
using next generation nanolithographic methods; in addition, linactants will
permit the creation of self-organized 2D features that are analogous to 3D
micelles or microemulsions. The strategy will be based on molecular aggregation
within two- and three-component monomolecular films prepared by Langmuir-
Blodgett (LB) deposition and related self-assembly methods. Key components
include the rational design and synthesis of line-active molecular species that
play a two-dimensional (2D) role analogous to that of amphiphilic surfactant
molecules in three-dimensional (3D) micelles, bilayers, and microemulsions. In
the same manner in which a 3D surfactant possesses hydrophobic and hydrophilic
regions, these linactant molecules will possess two molecular "tails"; each tail
will interact favorably with one of the other chemically dissimilar monolayer
components. One approach will involve two-tailed 2D linactants having one
hydrocarbon and one chemically and/or structurally dissimilar tail (e.g.,
partially fluorinated). Specific experiments include the systematic
characterization of line activity (line tension isotherms), kinetic
stabilization of 2D emulsions, as well as the exploration of two- and three-
component monolayer phase diagrams. This collaborative research project, which
encompasses two distinct disciplines at two separate universities, seeks to
broaden the participation of both women and minorities in science and education.
Proposed co-workers include three women (one undergraduate and two graduate
students) and two minorities (one undergraduate and one graduate student). All
participants will be encouraged to join their local professional societies and
to attend local and national meetings to advance our dissemination efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As devices and materials are made smaller and smaller, the
influence of surfaces and interfaces becomes increasingly important. In
particular, the influence of surface tension leads to instabilities, such as
coagulation or the degradation of nanoscale patterns. For this reason, the
fabrication of nanoscale structures requires the addition of molecular
stabilizers -- molecules that partition at surfaces and reduce the surface
tension. The science behind such stabilizers is reasonably well understood for
traditional three-dimensional materials, such as colloids and emulsions.
However, no such science exists for molecules that are necessary to stabilize
two-dimensional nanostructures (i.e., nanoscale patterns fabricated on
surfaces). The stability of such surface nanopatterns is required for future
applications in molecular electronics and biosensor technologies. This project
will pursue a rational approach to develop this science of surface nanostructure
stabilization. This collaborative research project, which encompasses two
distinct disciplines at two separate universities, seeks to broaden the
participation of both women and minorities in science and education.&lt;br/&gt;