* 0447401
* Improving Selby Preserved Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Bruce Holst, Marie Selby Botanical Gardens
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 05/31/2008
* USD 76,356.00

&lt;br/&gt;An award has been made to the Marie Selby Botanical Gardens (MSBG)
under the direction of Mr. Bruce Holst for partial support of moving its
Herbarium and associated materials to the main campus of the Gardens, improving
the preservation of the collection by replacing the current acidic herbarium
folders, and providing much needed additional storage space. In addition to
relocating the Herbarium, with its 90,000 dried and mounted plant specimens, the
Spirit Collection with 26,000 plant specimens stored in glass vials of
preservative fluid will also be relocated. The move is a component of the master
site plan and provides an opportunity for much-needed collections improvement
and expansion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help preserve a
scientifically significant taxonomic resource. The Selby Gardens Herbarium is a
library of plant specimens used by taxonomists for plant identification and
classification, which provide the base-level knowledge critical to conservation
and the biological sciences. MSBG collections are particularly strong in regards
to the number of epiphytic plants, such as orchids and bromeliads that live upon
host plants, but which are not parasitic. In addition to on-site and off-site
loan availability, many images of these specimens are available now in the
virtual Herbarium on the Internet (www.selby.org). Together the Herbarium and
Spirit collections preserve specimens of orchids, bromeliads, gesneriads,
aroids, and ferns, among others, for scientific study. MSBG has an active
research program in plant classification and in other biodiversity-related
research, such as alpha taxonomy (describing and naming plant species) and
floristic inventories. Research programs involve research associates, visiting
scientists, and interns. Hands-on learning opportunities prepare interns
planning to work in taxonomy, ecology, horticulture, or environmental education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Herbarium collections contain irreplaceable records of
plant life on earth that provide, for instance, knowledge on the distribution of
rare or endangered species, enabling greater opportunities for preservation.
These collections are one of the most vital resources used by scientists to
advance knowledge and understanding within the fields of plant classification,
inventories, and conservation. The societal benefits of the project include
facilitating the work of MSBG of maintaining public plant identification
centers. Plant identification has societal impact because some plants are
edible, but others contain poisonous compounds that, if ingested, can be lethal.
Plant identification has an economic impact by allowing plant breeders/producers
to correctly name their products. The upcoming move and related curatorial care
will improve access to the Herbarium and will acquaint the public through tours,
open houses, and greater visibility to garden visitors. The direct benefit is an
increased understanding by society of the crucial role that plants play in
providing the energy necessary to sustain life on earth, and much of its beauty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;