* 0447873
* CAREER:    The Dynamics of Network Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Tilman Wolf, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2011
* USD 409,600.00

Computer networks and particularly the Internet are suffering from the lack of
security, quality of service, and manageability. A key issue that leads to this
situation is the limited flexibility of packet processing in the data path of
routers. Novel edge routers that use embedded network processors can be
programmed and dynamically reprogrammed for custom packet processing to adapt to
changing requirements and to provide a range of advanced network services. The
goal of this project is to explore the dynamic aspects of network processing
with three objectives. First, the project will focus on development and
prototyping of a run-time environment for network processors that supports
several network processing applications and allows dynamic reconfiguration of
the workload. Second, the research will include modeling of packet processing
delay and exploring its impact on networking. Network models and simulation need
to consider the impact of processing delay in order to accurately reflect the
reality of modern networks. Finally, the project will also include the
development of a network service protocol for access and control of network
processing. The control protocol allows end-systems to identify the processing
that is performed on a data stream and to control this functionality to limit
the increase in system complexity due to network processing functions. This
project presents a novel approach to providing dynamic support for network
processing systems, understanding its impact on the network, and providing an
interface to expose and control its functionality. The results from this work
will be implemented on a prototype system and will be made available to other
researchers