* 0447794
* Linking Visual Phenotypes with Genotypes in Plants - Content Management, Knowledge Sharing, and Database Retrievals
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Chi-Ren Shyu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Missouri-Columbia is awarded an early career development grant
for Dr. Chi-Ren Shyu to develop new approaches to knowledge federation of visual
phenotypes that can function and flourish in today's landscape of diverse,
constantly changing and inconsistent databases, schema, and terminology. The
knowledge-sharing hub proposed in the project has the ability to use disparate
computational resources to reliably exchange data and computations with little
intervention from the user. A second challenge is to develop methods that answer
the researchers' hybrid queries, which are combinations of scientific expertise
and algorithms that detect and retrieve information related by image features,
semantic description, map location, and patterns of DNA sequences, even when
those data are not currently correlated with each other in the partner's
databases. The proposed hybrid query system will be the first and only in the
research community that allows a researcher or an educator to submit an image of
a mutant to the database and ask, "What genes or environmental factors cause
this visual phenotype?" The [roject includes an educational component with two
unique aspects: One focus is on training of undergraduate and graduate students
and creating courses for them that are closely aligned with the research
activities. The new courses, titled "Content Management in Bioinformatics," and
"Computer Vision and Image Understanding in Bioinformatics" will be pioneering
courses in computational biology curriculum design. The other focus will
leverage the proposed research activities to create, in conjunction with
traditional computer science courseware, scientific data repositories for
computation and biology education.