* 0447804
* SGER: Model Intercomparison: Thermohaline Circulation and Its Relation to Surface Fluxes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Shan Sun, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Walter A. Robinson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 24,424.00

Three climate modeling centers in the U.S. (CCSM (NCAR), GFDL and GISS) will be
releasing in September 2004, model simulations of the global climates of the
late 19th and 20th centuries. These will be available as input to the next
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Assessment Report and also for
general studies by climate scientists. The is a research project to use these
model data sets, along with the best available observations of the past climate,
to analyze the ability of global climate models to simulate the climate of the
late 19th and 20th centuries. The thermohaline circulation (THC) in the Atlantic
plays an important role in regulating climate by accounting for nearly half of
the poleward heat transport. However, there is a dearth of analytic tools for
displaying quantitative details of the THC in a model. The PI will extract
regional details of the 3-D circulation in potential density space (i.e.,
isopycnal as well as diapycnal mass flux components) from the archives of the
models, using the method he has already developed. The PI has gained
considerable experience in applying the same technique to output from z
coordinate models. In other words, well-tested algorithms are available today
for converting z coordinate model fields to isopycnal coordinates in a manner
allowing isopycnal and diapycnal mass fluxes to be extracted. His study aims to
shed light on the role of THC fluctuations in mediating atmosphere-ocean
interactions on decadal time scales in the various coupled models. He will also
investigate decadal variability linked to anthropogenic forcings in the past
century, hoping to provide a stepping stone for follow-up studies of mechanisms
which in the Third IPCC Assessment led to the large fluctuations in THC strength
in greenhouse gas-forced simulations.

Broader Impacts: The Ocean's THC circulation strongly influences the climate of
the North Atlantic and Western Europe. Its stability may be affected by global
warming. This research has the potential to improve understanding of the physics
that control the strength of the THC and thus, possible large-scale climate
changes in the future. This would be important information for better-informed
environmental policy decisions.

This is a grant under the U.S. Climate Change Science Program's, Climate
Variability and Predictability Program (CLIVAR).