* 0447075
* CAREER:     Models and Cryptographic Protocols for Unstructured, Decentralized Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2013
* Jonathan Katz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 01/31/2013
* USD 480,000.00

TITLE: CAREER: Models of Cryptographic Protocols for Unstructured, Decentralized
Systems&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of Maryland, College
Park&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Katz, Jonathan&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NUMBER:
CNS-0447075&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; ABSTRACT FOR
AWARD&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unstructured, decentralized systems --- including ad-
hoc/sensor networks and peer-to-peer networks --- are emerging as a central
focus of computer science research. Methods for securing these systems are
critical; however, these systems differ markedly from classical distributed
systems (which are, in comparison, more ``structured'' and well-organized) and
thus current cryptographic models and mechanisms are simply not sufficient for
addressing the full range of security requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work aims to provide solid theoretical foundations as well as novel
cryptographic protocols and primitives for this new area. In particular,
research focuses on (1) new models for formally reasoning about, and rigorously
proving the security of, various applications within unstructured, decentralized
systems; (2) issues of ``trust'' and ``reputation'' within such systems; and (3)
new cryptographic protocols emphasizing both efficiency (for potential use by
resource-limited devices within, e.g., ad-hoc networks) as well as new security
concerns (such as anonymity) arising in multi-user distributed
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The models and techniques developed as part
of this work are expected to be broadly applicable to security problems arising
in many distributed systems, and it is hoped that this work will serve as an
impetus for future research in this area, while providing suitable tools and
frameworks within which such research can be performed. Results will be
incorporated into graduate-level courses and presented at a ``crypto reading
group'' being organized at the University of Maryland; they will be further
disseminated to a wide audience at conferences and via publicly-available
lecture notes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;