* 0447413
* Compactorization, Reorganization, and Electronic Cataloging of the University of Hawaii Herbarium Collections.
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2007
* Michael Thomas, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 01/31/2007
* USD 83,105.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Hawaii under the direction of Dr.
Will McClatchey for partial support of Compactorization and Reorganization of
the University of Hawaii Herbarium Collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Hawaii at Manoa supports two small herbaria, HLA (H. Lyon
Arboretum herbarium) and HAW (Department of Botany herbarium). Together these
herbaria contain ~42,000 mounted (and 14,000 unmounted) specimens mostly from
the Pacific Islands. Specimens include the entire floras of the Hawaiian
Islands, Samoa, Tonga, and the Marshall Islands with examples of rare and
endangered species. Although HAW is the oldest herbarium in the Central Pacific
region, it has been underutilized for most of the last 20 years. HLA has been
inactive for the last 20 years with use only as a repository for vouchers of
living plants deposited in the University's Arboretum. HLA has been at-risk of
being lost because of its poor storage facility and thus has been temporarily
moved into HAW. HAW is housed in a good facility but has very limited space,
especially with the introduction of HLA into the same area. This project will
rescue the HLA herbarium, relieve overcrowding in the combined HAW and HLA
herbarium, rejuvenate the herbaria and enable them to become a center for
research and education on plants in Hawaii and the Pacific region. The goals of
the project are to combine the HLA and HAW herbaria into one functional unit on
the University of Hawaii campus and maximize and reorganize workspace through
installation of a compact storage system. The herbarium will become open to the
public with staffing provided by the Department of Botany in order to guide
visitors seeking to address questions about plant identities and
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reorganized herbarium will be better able
to support the teaching and research missions of the University of Hawaii,
particularly supporting courses and research in systematics, ecology,
ethnobotany, and conservation biology. Undergraduate and graduate students will
benefit from access to specimens of rare and endangered species as well as
complete floras of various Pacific Islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts resulting from the proposed activity include a greater appreciation for
rare and endangered plant species and natural environments by the over 700
students per year taught by faculty associated with the herbaria. Active
herbaria with accessible information to the general public will empower voters
and decision makers to learn about plants. Almost every Introductory Biology
text today includes examples of the interesting evolutionary processes seen in
the Hawaiian flora and fauna as well as the conservation threats posed to these
same organisms. The proposed project will enhance the abilities of the
University of Hawaii researchers to study the evolution of plants and to work on
creative ways to conserve the unique plants of the isolated islands of the 50th
state of the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;