* 0447083
* CAREER:      Personalized Access to Open Corpus Educational Resources through Adaptive Navigation Support and Adaptive Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Peter Brusilovsky, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/2011
* USD 440,000.00

The volume of educational resources available to students is rapidly increasing.
In a&lt;br/&gt;wide variety of subject domains, educational resources are now
available on the Web&lt;br/&gt;and in educational Digital Libraries. The
abundance of resources has created the need&lt;br/&gt;to provide personalized
access to educational resources, i.e., to help students
find,&lt;br/&gt;organize, and use resources that match their individual goals,
interests, and current&lt;br/&gt;knowledge. This project answers that need by
developing and exploring a broad range&lt;br/&gt;of innovative techniques for
personalized access to open corpus educational resources.&lt;br/&gt;Among these
techniques are adaptive navigation support and adaptive
visualization&lt;br/&gt;techniques, which offer a higher level of interactivity
and expressive power and take into&lt;br/&gt;account not only the users'
interests, but also their current knowledge and goals. To&lt;br/&gt;integrate
the results of this research into education, we are developing a system
that&lt;br/&gt;uses the most promising techniques to provide students in
undergraduate programming&lt;br/&gt;courses at the University of Pittsburgh with
personalized access to a large volume of&lt;br/&gt;diverse open corpus
resources. This system serves as a major evaluation platform for&lt;br/&gt;the
techniques being developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on personalized
access to educational resources, the project provides&lt;br/&gt;short-term and
long-term broader impacts. The system developed in the course of
this&lt;br/&gt;project maximizes educational opportunities for every student in
several large,&lt;br/&gt;programming-related undergraduate courses at the
University of Pittsburgh. Widely&lt;br/&gt;disseminated through publications and
the project's web site, our personalized&lt;br/&gt;information access techniques
help thousands of students to harness the educational&lt;br/&gt;power of the Web
and Digital
Libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.sis.pitt.edu/~taler/pacer.html