* 0447369
* Domestication of the Donkey:  Aridity, Mobility and the Development of African Pastoral Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Fiona Marshall, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 135,628.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Fiona Marshall and an
international team of colleagues will conduct three years of archaeological and
genetic research in northeast Africa, western Europe and the U.S.A. The team
brings together U.S., Portuguese/French, and Eritrean specialists in
archaeology, zoology, and modern and ancient genetics to examine the process and
timing of domestication of the donkey. Ancient use of domestic animals has
shaped global trajectories of social change, as well as the biodiversity of
contemporary livestock. Humans have domesticated few large mammals, however, and
most for food. Donkeys (Equus asinus) provided the only means of large-scale
transport for much of the ancient world. Although donkey's and mules are still
important pack animals in many areas of Africa, Asia, and South America today,
and mules played a key role in western societies up through the Second World
War, very little is known about the context of their domestication. The wild
ancestor of the donkey, the African wild ass (Equus africanus), is found in
northeastern Africa. Because donkeys appear in Predynastic Egyptian sites in
Africa (6-5 kyr bp), scholars have suggested that ancient Egyptians domesticated
the donkey for transport and trade. Domestication in Asia has also been
considered. This project considers the alternative hypothesis that donkeys were
domesticated in Africa by ancient northeast African cattle herders (7-6.5 kyr
bp), as the region became more arid and rainfall increasingly unpredictable.
Today, donkeys play a critical role in assisting African herding societies to
cope with unpredictable climatic fluctuations. They are used to collect water
and firewood, and to transport household structures, goods, young stock, and
children. Use of donkeys allows herders greater mobility with which to face
erratic rainfall, and improves the health and population dynamics of humans and
livestock. The nature of the research question requires collection of
zooarchaeological data in three different areas, collection of modern reference
material, morphometric study of modern skeletons, and analysis of archaeological
specimens. Collection of four modern African wild ass skeletons in Eritrea and
four donkey skeletons in Kenya will strengthen scant existing Museum collections
of African ass. Morphometric data, measurements, and x-rays collected from 18
modern donkeys and 12 modern African wild ass skeletons will contribute new,
methods to discriminate between donkeys and their wild ancestor.
Zooarchaeological studies will be conducted of African wild ass and donkeys from
six northeast African archaeological sites ranging in age from 12-2,000 kyr bp.
Ten ancient wild ass samples will be submitted for AMS dates, and 15 for DNA
analysis. The project will clarify the question of where and when the donkey was
domesticated and incorporated into early pastoral systems in Africa. The
intellectual merit of the research will be to contribute to longstanding debates
over southwest Asian vs. African origins of the donkey, to provide new
understanding of variation in domestication processes among large mammals, and
to reshape current understanding of the development of African pastoralism.

The broader impacts of this project are that it will contribute to conservation
of biodiversity, through assembling skeletal and genetic information on one of
the world's most endangered large wild mammals, the African wild ass. The
project also draws on synergies among current objectives in archaeology,
livestock development, and conservation biology, and will contribute to all
three. Infrastructure for future studies will be created, including new
reference skeletal material, and a published and on-line database of bone
measurements for African wild ass and donkey, modern and ancient. The latter
will facilitate identification of isolated specimens in countries and locations
without comparative material. This project also promotes interdisciplinary
international collaboration among geneticists, zoologists, and zooarchaeologists
in Europe, Africa, and the U.S.A.

