* 0447800
* CAREER:    End-user Programming for Web Automation and Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Robert Miller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2011
* USD 599,904.00

End-user programming seeks to help people with no formal training in programming
take advantage of the power of their computer systems. By one estimate, the
number of end-user programmers in the United States is expected to reach 55
million by 2005, compared to only 2.75 million professional programmers.
Unfortunately, closed, uncustomizable applications have long been a serious
obstacle for end-user programming on the desktop. The recent migration of
applications to the Web opens up a new vista of opportunity, in that
applications that would have been closed and uncustomizable on the desktop
sprout numerous hooks for customization when implemented for the Web. In this
project, the PI will seek to advance end-user automation and customization of
the Web, by developing new interface designs, representations, algorithms, and
tools. The research will include fundamental advances in learning wrappers
(patterns that identify components of web pages) from very few examples, so that
users can demonstrate web automation by pointing and clicking. Languages and
techniques will be developed that allow users to customize web sites without
examining their source code. A safe environment for offline testing and
debugging of web automation will be implemented, and techniques for integrating
multiple web sites together seamlessly, so that pages displayed by one site
automatically include context-sensitive information provided by another site,
will be devised. These fundamental contributions will form the basis for end-
user customizations of web sites to make them more readable, easier to use for
frequent tasks, and amenable to operations like sorting and filtering done in
the web browser. The capstone application of the proposed research will be a set
of tools that support gathering web information to drive personal decisions,
such as buying a car, finding a house, or choosing a job. To achieve these
goals, the PI will develop new algorithms for inferring patterns and scripts
that interact with and extract information from the Web, design and evaluate new
ways to customize users' web experiences, and seek to gain a deeper
understanding of how people acquire web information to make personal
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The outcomes of this project
will equip end-users with more control over the accessibility and performance of
their browsing experience, giving them more tools for making information-driven
decisions about important issues, both personal and public, such as education,
health care, public policy, safety, and the environment. The software to be
developed by the PI will be released free of charge as open-source tools for
public use, and as infrastructure for other researchers in end-user programming.
The project will also expose a generation of MIT computer science graduates to
HCI principles and techniques, so that as they move on to careers in software
industry and academia, they produce more usable software; related course
materials will be released for free, open, public use, as part of the MIT
OpenCourseWare Initiative.