* 0447067
* Safeguarding a Growing Herbarium and Establishing Digital Access to a Collection Resource for a Biodiversity Hotspot
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* James Ackerman, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 01/31/2009
* USD 391,846.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras under the
direction of Dr. James Ackerman for partial support of a project to expand and
upgrade the UPRRP herbarium, the largest and fastest growing vascular plant
collection in Puerto Rico. With overcrowded and deteriorated specimen cases, and
high specimen handling frequencies, funds for this proposal will be used for
expanding and upgrading the current facilities to accommodate collection growth,
and to employ a flexible herbarium management and collection database that will
make holdings electronically accessible. Facility improvement includes the
replacement of worn cabinets, the addition of others, expansion of the cabinet
compactor system, and increased capacity for specimen processing. Data storage
and herbarium management will involve the implementation of Brahms, a herbarium
data and management program developed by University of Oxford School of
Forestry. The data (including digital images) will be entered in the herbarium
and stored on a dedicated server maintained at the University of Puerto Rico's
High Performance Computing Facility and accessed through CATEC (Caribbean
Applied Ecology and Conservation) web site.&lt;br/&gt; Numerous floristic,
systematic, ecological and conservation projects are underway in Puerto Rico and
the Caribbean making the UPRRP herbarium collection an essential resource and
storehouse of basic data. Furthermore, with the collections located on campus,
general botany, ethnobotany, ecology and plant systematic courses serving both
undergraduate and graduate students depend on the facilities as a teaching
resource. Safeguarding these collections and making them optimally accessible is
key for enriching education opportunities for these students. Because most of
the UPRRP collection is recent, data associated with the specimens is generally
more complete than that of much older material. Thus, its strength lies in the
robustness of information reflecting the Caribbean's recent past.&lt;br/&gt; The
Caribbean region is one of the world's most complex archipelagos and is
considered among the top three most important biodiversity hotspots. This
floristically rich region is in a state of ecological flux through both natural
processes and man-made ones. Nature and society are at a critical juncture since
land use patterns are changing fast affecting vegetation and shifting species
composition and community structure in ways that are just beginning to be
understood. Documentation of present biological diversity is critical for
reconstructing the past and anticipating the future. UPRRP will offer rapid
access to specimen data by researchers, educators, and students worldwide. With
data from special projects separately searchable on the database, taxonomic,
ecological and conservation issues will be highlighted and should generate
public awareness of the urgent problems that Caribbean scientists are
addressing. The implementation of electronic collection management and data
dissemination may serve as a model for other botanical institutions in the
Caribbean. The project, by employing a number of people, will aid in the
development of human resources for careers in collection management, taxonomy
and conservation, most of whom will be from underrepresented groups since UPR is
overwhelmingly Hispanic.&lt;br/&gt;