* 0447675
* Alabama Research Infrastructure Improvement
* O/D,EPS
* 05/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Hassan Mahfuz, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Denise Barnes
* 12/31/2008
* USD 6,533,278.00

The proposal submitted the University of Alabama Tuscaloosa in response to
Program Solicitation NSF04-564, EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement (RII)
Grant Program, is a coordinated, collaborative statewide effort aimed at
improving the State's science and technology competitiveness through effective
partnerships among the seven doctoral-granting higher education institutions.
These institutions are: Alabama A&amp;M (AAMU), Auburn University (AU), the
University of Alabama Tuscaloosa (UA), the University of Alabama at Birmingham
(UAB), the University of Alabama at Huntsville (UAH), Tuskegee University (TU),
and the University of South Alabama (USA). This proposed RII program will
establish four centers of excellence, each representing a consortium of
universities and focusing on a critical research theme. The proposed centers of
excellence are: (1) Extended Alabama Structural Biology (EASBC), (2) Center for
Environmental Cellular Signal Transduction (CECST), (3) Center for Optical
Sensors and Spectroscopies (COSS), and (4) Alabama Center for Nanostructured
Materials (ACNM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal
is drawn from each of the four centers and is enhanced by the increased
collaborations and synergies that will exist among them. The EASBC will
determine the three-dimensional structure of biomolecules that are key for
understanding function and aid in structure-based drug design. Product
applications will include new compounds for treatment of diseases. The CECST
will employ tools of operomics, bioinformatics, and statistical genetics to
define the molecular of stress signaling and how these signaling cascade in
microbial, plant, and animal systems to affect resilience in the face of
environmental extremes. Discoveries will aid industry in the development of
strategies to harden economically important biosystems against environmental
disturbance. The COSS will explore new optical sensors for the detection of
environmental contaminants and toxic materials using recently developed laser
and spectroscopic technologies. Applications include counter-terrorism-related
detection of chemical/biological warfare agents and their precursors. The ACNM
will harness the benefits of nanoparticle infusion for the manufacture of bulk
nanostructures materials with superior mechanical, chemical, optical,
electrical, and thermal properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EPSCoR funding will
enable the centers to establish shared facilities and, consequently, achieve a
broad impact for the State by providing critical mass and infrastructure for
research, increasing diversity among participants, promoting K-12 interest in
science, and developing new economic opportunities. The proposal brings
biologists, optical scientists, environmental scientists, material scientists,
chemists, and biochemists in an environment of interdisciplinary research and
education for new discoveries in biotechnology, nanotechnology, and sensing.
Furthermore, the proposal infuses new and unique equipment, as well as highly
capable faculty and graduate fellows into the centers, promoting research,
education, and collaborations. Two of the state's HBCUs are leading one of the
centers (ACNM), which foster significant participation of underrepresented
groups. The proposed K-12 outreach will establish early interest in the
scientific areas critical to the State's overall
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;