* 0447766
* CAREER:  Performance, Adaptation and Robustness in Approximate Dynamic Programming
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2006
* Daniela Farias, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 07/31/2006
* USD 199,572.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award provides funding
for the development of streamlined algorithms for sequential decision-making
under uncertainty. The focus will be on large-scale systems, such as queueing
systems found in manufacturing plants, networks of mobile sensors, and economic
systems considered in problems of policy evaluation. The research will be
centered around approximate dynamic programming, a methodology that offers
unified treatment to problems of decision-making under uncertainty. Algorithms
and theory for approximate dynamic programming will be developed. In particular,
the focus will be on algorithms that generate decision rules with performance
guarantees, deal with model uncertainty, and take into account flexible
approximation architectures. Several applications will be considered, including
mobile sensor control, optimal optical design, queueing control and quantitative
economic policy analysis. In addition to the research activities, a
comprehensive teaching plan will be implemented. The teaching activities will
target education at MIT at all levels as well as the scientific community at
large and industry, through the development of new courses and reformulation of
existing ones, organization of industry and academic workshops and advising of
undergraduate and graduate students.

This research program will amplify the impact and applicability of approximate
dynamic programming techniques by addressing key unsolved issues and creating
more streamlined and robust methods. A primary objective is to advance the field
by addressing fundamental questions in approximate dynamic programming. Another
primary objective is to increase the impact of the methodology in industry by
making it more streamlined. If successful, this research plan will lead to
algorithms and software packages that are stable, exhibit performance
guarantees, and can be used with ease to solve industry problems. The
applications under consideration pose considerable challenges on their own and
their development within the approximate dynamic programming framework will
enrich both the methodology and application domains.