* 0447423
* CAREER: Kinetic Theory and Simulation of Magnetospheric Plasmas
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2005,10/31/2007
* William Daughton, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 10/31/2007
* USD 262,740.00

The large-scale evolution of the magnetosphere is strongly influenced by fairly
small transition regions such as the ion-scale current layers at the
magnetopause and within the magnetotail. One of the major obstacles to
developing models of the magnetosphere is that the plasma physics in these
regions is not well understood. There is clear evidence that both ion and
electron kinetic physics can play an important role within these current layers.
Research on this subject has been hampered by the computational difficulty of
performing realistic kinetic simulations and the theoretical challenge of
accurately computing the linear stability of the plasma within these regions.
This project will employ a variety of theoretical approaches and advanced
kinetic simulations to overcome these limitations and arrive at an improved
understanding of current sheets within the magnetosphere. The effort will use a
balanced approach comprised of linear kinetic theory, parallel kinetic
simulations using proven methods, and research into advanced simulation
techniques that may offer significant advantages in solving these difficult
problems. Particular applications of interest will include the onset and
development of magnetic reconnection at the magnetopause and within the
magnetotail, and the role of electron physics in the slow-mode shocks that are
expected to form as part of the reconnection layer. The theoretical results will
be compared with satellite observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
results will have broader impacts because the physics of current sheets and
associated processes such as magnetic reconnection are of importance in a wide
range of applications in space, astrophysical and laboratory plasmas. The
project will also have a strong educational component and dissemination of new
scientific knowledge and simulation codes to other researchers in space and
laboratory plasmas. The research program is integrated with both undergraduate
and graduate level education. This program will aid in the establishment of the
Plasma Simulation Facility at the University of Iowa, which will be used for
both teaching and research. The educational program is further enhanced by a
student internship agreement with Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL).
Students will have access to some of the most advanced computing facilities in
the world and the opportunity to interact with leading experts in the area of
plasma simulation.