* 0447262
* EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Plan
* O/D,EPS
* 05/01/2005,02/28/2009
* James Wicksted, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 02/28/2009
* USD 6,333,333.00

EPS 04-47262&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma State University&lt;br/&gt;Waxman,
Frank&lt;br/&gt;"EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement
Plan"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Oklahoma EPSCoR Research Infrastructure
Improvement award supports an emerging cross-disciplinary area that joins the
fields of plant virus biodiversity and ecology. The Plant Virus Biodiversity and
Ecology theme is a unique scientific integration, building on the genomics and
bioinformatics infrastructure in the state and linking the disciplines of plant
virology and ecology. This new interdisciplinary program will use the Oklahoma
Tallgrass Prairie, a natural habitat preserve for sample collection. Basic
questions in the ecology and diversity of viruses will be addressed. Researchers
will study virus-host interactions, their geographic distributions, changes over
time and the principles that govern the interactions and distributions. Support
will also be provided for technical staff in instrumental service facilities
that aid nanoscience research groups across the state. Oklahoma's infrastructure
improvement activities build on the research strengths of the state's major
graduate research/education institutions: the University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma
State University, the University of Tulsa, and the Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center. The Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation will also participate, offering a
valuable resource for training the next generation of scientists in Oklahoma.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Oklahoma project includes programs to support and
enhance the state's long-term commitment to human resource development. The
human infrastructure plan includes student and faculty development,
entrepreneurship, and promotion of public awareness of science. Initiatives
target rural and urban K-12 schools as well as community colleges and
baccalaureate universities, many of which serve high numbers of Native Americans
and students of other underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;