* 0447357
* Developing a Record of Quaternary Climatic Oscillation for the Eastern Sahara through Analysis of Fossil-spring Tufas and Lacustrine Deposits, Western Desert, Egypt
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2011
* Jennifer Smith, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 03/31/2011
* USD 216,451.00

This grant develops a climate chronology for the Quaternary of the Eastern
Sahara and to constrain the conditions of humid-phase environments in the Sahara
via survey, mapping, and analysis of fossil-spring and lacustrine deposits in
the currently hyperarid Western Desert of Egypt. The spring carbonates, or
tufas, are datable by Uranium-series and Electron Spin Resonance techniques, and
directly record times of increased precipitation in North Africa.

The environmental conditions of these humid phases are reconstructed via the
stable-isotope geochemistry of tufas, lacustrine carbonates, and gastropod-shell
aragonite, among other proxies. Data from survey and geochemical analyses of
lacustrine sediments are used to build hydrologic- and isotopic- balance models
of lacustrine hydrochemical evolution. These models generate quantitative
estimates of climatic variability during the lifespan of the pluvial -phase
lakes. Data thus obtained is used to test the hypothesis that Saharan pluvial
phases have occurred more frequently than interglacial maxima, as a response to
orbital precession- and obliquity-based fluctuations in the African Monsoon.

The establishment of a precise, detailed climate chronology for the Eastern
Sahara allows for detailed comparison with regional climate records
(Mediterranean and Atlantic cores, East African Rift Valley lake cores), which
aids in piecing together climate linkages. The projected precision of the
U-series dates also permits direct comparison with orbital parameters, in order
to test insolation-based mechanisms for generating rainfall in North Africa, or
to identify non-orbital climatic fluctuations in the region. The climatic
history obtained by the research could additionally be used to test hypotheses
regarding the role of the North African landmass in global carbon and methane
budgets over the course of the Quaternary. The 'greening' of such a substantial
area as the Sahara, as well as the formation of extensive lakes throughout the
Sahara would generate significant feedbacks to the climate system. Finally, a
better understanding of the frequency and intensity of North African pluvial
phases would allow for a re-evaluation of the extent to which the Sahara acted
as a barrier to the dispersal of modern humans out of Africa during the
Quaternary Period, an important concern in human origins research.

Broader impacts of the proposed work include the fostering of cooperation and
collaboration with Egyptian scientists through the hosting of a short course on
field techniques in Quaternary geology and geomorphology in Dakhleh Oasis. This
work forms the basis of a Ph. D. for one of the PI.s female graduate students.
The climate chronology is deposited with the web-based World Data Center for
Paleoclimatology database, allowing widespread use. Samples collected during
field work become part of a course on paleoenvironmental reconstruction.