* 0447294
* CAREER: Biomolecular Simulations Coming to Age: Folding of Globular and Membrane-bound Proteins Studied by Computer
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* Wayne C. Guida, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2011
* USD 615,416.00

This project, jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and Computational Program
in the Chemistry Division, will use novel computer simulation techniques to
study the mechanism of folding of proteins. The main computational algorithm to
be employed is the stochastic difference equation in length (SDEL), a boundary
value method that permits the calculation of trajectories connecting two known
(boundary) states of the system. This methodology allows viewing, with atomic
detail, long time dynamical processes that were impossible to study before by
computer simulations. The folding process of globular single-domain proteins
(apomyoglobin and bovine beta-lactoglobulin) and multi-domain proteins (gene-3
protein of phage fd and the phosphoglycerate kinase) will be considered in
aqueous environment by simulating explicitly the water molecules. Most of these
systems have not been studied before by computer simulations because of their
large size and their slow folding times. Also, an implicit water/membrane model
based on a continuum dielectric treatment (the Generalized Born theory) will be
used to study the insertion and folding of membrane-bound peptides and proteins
with unprecedented detail. The embedding and folding of simple peptides like
mellitin and the dimeric transmembrane domain from glycophorin A will be
considered first. Later on, folding simulations of more complex and biologically
relevant proteins like the K+ channel KscA, the monomeric beta-barrel OmpA porin
and Bacteriorhodopsin will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
promote the training of graduate and undergraduate students. The research and
methodologies will be used as thematic material in the Research Experience for
Teachers program at the University of South Florida in which school teachers
design lesson plans for their classrooms based on research performed during the
summer. The Research Experience for Teachers program has the potential to
instill in many middle and high school students the love for science through the
lessons designed by their teachers. Also, the success of Hispanic school
students in the Tampa area and their enrollment to college will be supported
through participation in a special social program at the University of South
Florida. &lt;br/&gt;