* 0447576
* CAREER: Flow-Induced Instability in Rotating Machines: A Nonlinear Systems &amp; Control Perspective
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Marcio de Queiroz, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 05/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Rotating machines based on fluid-film journal bearings are
susceptible to &lt;br/&gt;flow-induced instability, which are caused by the
mechanical-fluid flow &lt;br/&gt;dynamic interaction in the rotor-bearing
system. Although flow-induced &lt;br/&gt;instability was discovered 80 years
ago, it still remains an unsolved &lt;br/&gt;problem. This is indicative that
the two most fundamental questions remain &lt;br/&gt;without definite answers:
Can operating conditions that cause flow-induced &lt;br/&gt;instability be
accurately predicted? How can flow-induced instability be &lt;br/&gt;mitigated?
The essential difficulty of the problem is flow-induced &lt;br/&gt;instability
is a highly nonlinear, coupled phenomenon. The PI believes &lt;br/&gt;systems
&amp; control researchers can bring a fresh perspective to the problem
&lt;br/&gt;through a systems theory-based approach. To that end, the research
&lt;br/&gt;objectives of this project are: i) develop models that predict the
nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;mechanical-fluid flow dynamic interactions, ii) exploit
stability analysis &lt;br/&gt;tools for nonlinear systems to better characterize
flow-induced instability, &lt;br/&gt;iii) conceive an innovative sensor/actuator
paradigm for controlling the &lt;br/&gt;instability, and iv) synthesize
nonlinear feedback controllers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LSU, like many schools, has
systems &amp; control faculty and students &lt;br/&gt;throughout several
engineering departments. However, LSU is unique in that &lt;br/&gt;its Math
Department is one of the few in the nation whose main focus area is
&lt;br/&gt;mathematical control theory. To take advantage of this strength, LSU
is in &lt;br/&gt;the process of creating a Systems &amp; Control Group that will
comprise four &lt;br/&gt;Engineering departments and the Math Department. The
educational plan of &lt;br/&gt;this project will be a key component in this
effort. The plan will include &lt;br/&gt;four activities aimed at engaging a
diverse community of students, promoting &lt;br/&gt;cross-disciplinary
interactions, and increasing the ethnic/racial diversity &lt;br/&gt;of students
attracted to the field: i) development of a much-needed control
&lt;br/&gt;laboratory course, ii) development of a systems &amp; control "tune-
up" workshop &lt;br/&gt;for graduate students, iii) involvement and mentoring of
minority students &lt;br/&gt;through collaborations with a local HBCU, and iv)
development of a systems &amp; &lt;br/&gt;control summer camp for middle and
high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will attract the
interest of researchers in the areas of fluid &lt;br/&gt;mechanics, tribology,
and systems &amp; control alike. The proposed activities &lt;br/&gt;will advance
the state-of-knowledge within and across these fields by &lt;br/&gt;introducing
innovative bearing concepts and new control design tools for
&lt;br/&gt;uncertain nonlinear systems and infinite-dimensional systems. The
broader &lt;br/&gt;impacts include opportunities for minority students; outreach
towards &lt;br/&gt;secondary education; broadening the accessibility of systems
&amp; control to &lt;br/&gt;students across campus and across the state; and
dissemination and &lt;br/&gt;technology transfer via the activities and
industrial partnerships of the &lt;br/&gt;Center for Rotating Machinery under
establishment at LSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;