* 0447533
* CAREER:  Understanding Biomolecular Recognition Involving Large Conformational Changes
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Jin Wang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/2010
* USD 775,383.00

Molecular recognition is one of the key issues in modern molecular biology.
Although rigid and semi-rigid binding has been extensively explored, flexible
binding with large conformational changes which is often found in the process
and function of the cell is not well understood yet. The objective of this
project, jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program
in the Chemistry Division, is to establish a theoretical framework to understand
the fundamental mechanism (how flexibility might help recognition) and quantify
the kinetic paths of the flexible binding. The study of the flexible binding
will be carried out in three integrated steps: First, a theoretical framework
for flexible binding will be established to understand the role of flexibility
on the thermodynamic properties. Second, a path integral formalism will be
developed to quantify the kinetic binding paths, understand the roles of
flexibility and folding on the kinetics of flexible binding, and answer the
questions on the fundamental mechanism of binding such as which set of kinetic
paths the binding will be more likely to take. Third, the question of how the
flexibility helps the recognition at the atomic level will be explored. The
major intellectual merit of this research is to understand the fundamental
mechanisms of flexible bio-molecular recognition through the development of a
new theoretical framework and identification of kinetic paths. The principles
learned can be used to guide the atomic level kinetic path simulations of
specific recognition complexes, overcome the conventional computational
bottleneck and explore the dynamic functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational aspect of the project will have broad impact on students from all
over the world pursuing interdisciplinary studies at the interface of
biology/chemistry/physics, starting with the students in the U. S., China, and
Brazil. The research and education efforts will be integrated. This includes
designing interdisciplinary courses and curricula on bio-molecular recognition
and computational biology for undergraduate and graduate students; writing a
book on energy landscapes of bio-molecules; linking the methodologies developed
in this research to applications in industry; and developing an international
(China and Brazil) collaborative research and education program on bio-molecular
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;