* 0447799
* CAREER: Structure, Dynamics, and Energetics of DNA Mismatch Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Michael Feig, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 02/28/2011
* USD 843,223.00

This investigator is interested in helping to broaden structural biology studies
to address not only single molecules in aqueous environments but also large
molecular complexes in heterogeneous environments. He approaches this area
through modeling via computer simulations. For this project he has chosen as his
focus the atomic details of the interactions between mismatch repair complexes
and DNA. He will carry out his investigations with data from both the bacterial
and eukaryotic complexes. He will address three key questions: 1.) How does the
MutS protein differentiate defective DNA from regular DNA? 2.) How does binding
of defective DNA lead to repair initiation? 3.) What is the molecular origin of
specialization for different types of DNA defects in eukaryotic homologs of the
MutHLS system? For the modeling, recently developed implicit solvent methods
based on the generalized Born formalism will be used and developed further in
the context of protein-DNA interactions in order to balance computational
efficiency with a realistic description of the solvent environment. A second
major component of this project is the introduction of computer simulation
modeling as part of structural biology curricula directed at biology students.
Implicit descriptions of biological environments are particularly attractive for
education because such models greatly simplify and accelerate atomic-level
modeling. In addition, the PI will work on simplifying interfaces for advanced
molecular modeling and analysis tasks, thus allowing biology students to focus
on applications of the techniques to biological questions rather than on the
sometimes overwhelming technical details of the simulation methodologies.
&lt;br/&gt;Cells normally repair errors in genetic material efficiently. When
errors are not repaired, however, the resulting defects can cause profound
problems in cellular metabolism. Obviously, repair mechanisms are of utmost
importance to all organisms. The functioning of one specific repair mechanism
will serve as the subject of this attempt to improve structural biological
modeling via computer simulation and to make such modeling more accessible to
biology students through specialized courses and computer-user interfaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;