* 0447298
* Computerization of the Type Specimen Collection of the Paleontological Research Institution
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Warren Allmon, Paleontological Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 05/31/2009
* USD 273,318.00

A grant has been awarded to the Paleontological Research Institution (PRI) under
the direction of Dr. Warren Allmon for partial support of computerizing and
putting on-line records of the most important portion of the PRI collections,
the 13,600 "type" specimens (those which have been published in the scientific
literature as representative of particular named species and subspecies).
Although the PRI Type Collection is but a small fraction of the Institution's
total collection, which includes more than 2 million specimens, the types are
the scientifically extremely important because researchers use them to represent
named species and compare with other forms. The information that results is of
basic value for biostratigraphy (using fossils to date rocks) and systematics
(the study of the evolution and diversity of life). The award will be used by
PRI to enter information and images from these 13,600 specimens into a database,
and to make images and information available on a new website. The major
scientific results of this work will be to make an important part of the PRI
collection, which is among the 10 largest invertebrate paleontology collections
in the US, available to the global research community. This will be relevant to
a wide diversity of geological and biological research projects, and
particularly to at least two areas of active and controversial paleobiolgical
research to which PRI's collections are most applicable: 1) the connection
between environmental change in marine ecosystems of the Western Atlantic over
the past 65 million years; and 2) the patterns of evolutionary change among
marine invertebrates in New York during the Devonian period (ca. 400-360 million
years ago). The project will also provide for the "repatriation" of data to non-
US countries from which many PRI specimens were collected, including Cuba,
Trinidad, and Venezuela. By laying the groundwork for subsequent phases of
computerization of other portions of the PRI collections, this project will
begin the long-term process of making the entire collection much more widely
available to K-12 students, students at nearby Cornell University and other
colleges and universities, and the general public than has been possible before.