* 0447721
* CAREER:     Hierarchical Abstractions for Planning and Control of Robotic Swarms
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2005,02/28/2006
* Calin Belta, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 02/28/2006
* USD 80,000.00

Hierarchical Abstractions for Planning and Control of Robotic Swarms Calin Belta

As a result of recent advances in computation, communication, sensor, and
actuator technology, it is now possible to build teams of hundreds of small and
inexpensive ground, air, and underwater robots. They are light, easy to
transport and deploy, and can fit into small places. Such swarms of autonomous
agents provide increased robustness to individual failures, the possibility to
cover wide regions, and improve computational power through parallelism.
However, planning and controlling such large teams of agents with limited
communication and computation capabilities is a difficult problem that received
a lot of attention in the past decade. To accommodate large numbers of robots
with nontrivial kinematics or dynamics moving in complicated environments, this
project proposes hierarchical abstractions. At a lower level, continuous
abstractions reduce the dimension of the problem by extracting a set of
essential features of the swarm, while correctly capturing the robot
constraints. At a higher level, discrete abstractions focus on the complexity of
the environment and map the planning and control problem from the infinite
dimensional world of continuous systems to the decidable world of finite state
automata. The proposed algorithms lead to the development of HILLS, a High Level
Specification Language for Swarms, and LARAD, a LAnguage for Robot Automated
Deployment. In these frameworks, robotic motion plans are formulated in a high
level language in terms of strings or temporal logic formulas in the language of
a discrete system capturing the complexity of the environment. HILLS and LARAD
are implemented as simulation packages and also used in experimental platforms
for swarming robotics. While aimed to providing a solution to the swarming
problem, this project addresses fundamental issues in shape theory and the well-
known "n-body problem," which are traditionally studied in theoretical physics
and find applications in areas such as atomic physics and celestial mechanics.
On the other hand, using a unique approach to discrete abstractions, this work
attempts to enlarge the class of known decidable continuous and hybrid systems.
Finally, the hierarchical abstraction architectures of this project open a new
direction in planning and control of mobile robots by creating a framework in
which powerful discrete algorithms dealing with the complexity of the
environment can be seamlessly combined with continuous control laws for
nontrivial robot dynamics. This research is highly interdisciplinary, covering
topics ranging from traditionally "continuous" areas, such as geometric
nonlinear control, to "discrete" areas such as formal analysis, as well as
application areas at the boundary between robotics and biology. The educational
plan is focused on building bridges among the above areas by introducing
graduate and undergraduate courses on Hybrid Systems, Systems Biology, Geometric
Planning and Control, and Bioinformatics. It also involves a rich spectrum of
outreach activities, including mentoring of high school teachers, judging and
advising high school students participating in robotics competitions, and
mentoring under-represented minority undergraduate students.