* 0447883
* CAREER: 3D Sketchpad
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Lee Markosian, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 01/31/2008
* USD 210,659.00

This research targets a suite of tools (called "3D Sketchpad")&lt;br/&gt;for
creating interactive 3D illustrations. Example applications&lt;br/&gt;include a
teacher explaining physics, an archaeologist recreating&lt;br/&gt;a model of an
ancient village, a high school student producing an&lt;br/&gt;eye-catching
animation, and a physician explaining a diagnosis to&lt;br/&gt;a patient. The
key innovation is to support 3D modeling by&lt;br/&gt;drawing. The resulting
content looks like the user's drawing, but&lt;br/&gt;is 3D in the sense that the
viewpoint can be moved interactively.&lt;br/&gt;The long-range impact of this
research is fourfold. First, tools&lt;br/&gt;that let ordinary people create 3D
content will dramatically&lt;br/&gt;expand the applications of 3D graphics.
Second, expert users will&lt;br/&gt;design content that they would not have
undertaken with current&lt;br/&gt;tools because it would be too difficult or
time-consuming. Third,&lt;br/&gt;these tools support 3D content that is
aesthetically closer to&lt;br/&gt;traditional illustration than is currently
possible. Finally,&lt;br/&gt;this technology will propagate synergistically with
the growth of&lt;br/&gt;pen-based computing. Tools for creating 3D drawings
will&lt;br/&gt;ultimately be commonplace on tablet PCs, palm devices, and
even&lt;br/&gt;cell phones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge is to develop
new shape representations and&lt;br/&gt;associated operations that support a
drawing-based interface. The&lt;br/&gt;researchers are developing a new
representation, called a&lt;br/&gt;"layered mesh", consisting of a
multiresolution mesh that is&lt;br/&gt;built up incrementally in layers. Each
new layer responds&lt;br/&gt;dynamically to changes in the previous layers.
Layered meshes&lt;br/&gt;support the addition of new structures (e.g. limbs of a
human&lt;br/&gt;figure) and surface details (bumps or bulges) at
any&lt;br/&gt;resolution. They produce piecewise-smooth manifold surfaces
of&lt;br/&gt;arbitrary topology. Additional challenges include
the&lt;br/&gt;development of new non-photorealistic rendering algorithms,
new&lt;br/&gt;interaction techniques based on gestural input, new methods
for&lt;br/&gt;generating animation via sketched input, and pattern
synthesis&lt;br/&gt;tools whereby new shape features, stroke patterns, and
motions&lt;br/&gt;can all be generated from provided examples.&lt;br/&gt;