* 0447900
* CAREER:    Variational Methods for Design Complexity in Nanometer VLSI Circuit
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Janet Roveda, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2011
* USD 412,000.00

0447900&lt;br/&gt;Janet Wang&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Variational Methods for Design Complexity
in Nanometer VLSI Circuit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growing design complexity of
nanometer scale (component length ~ 10-9 m) VLSI/ULSI (Very- and Ultra-Large-
System-Integration) circuits cause escalating research/design costs that are
likely to hinder the creation of cheaper and faster computer processors. To
illustrate, the current Complementary-Metal-Oxide-Semiconductors (CMOS)
processes requires complicated physical modeling in order to accurately predict
the performance of the fabricated product. Process variation,
coupling&lt;br/&gt;capacitance, mutual inductance, and MOSFET leakage currents
are jargon-specific concepts for such intricate physical details peculiar to
components (e.g. gates) of very small (~ 10-9 m) physical
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;These time-variant, unsteady effects induce severe
uncertainties &lt; /B&gt;in the operating speed of the cicuit, in the integrity
of the pre- and post-circuit signal, in the power consumption, and in the
distribution&lt;br/&gt;of undesirable hot-spots within the circuit architecture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI strives to alleviate design cost through the
creation of Electronics Design Automation (EDA) tools that benefit from
specialized variational analysis techniques. As the acronym implies, EDA
tools&lt;br/&gt;automate many steps of the circuit design and reduce the
complexity workload for the design engineer. Thi s CAREER proposal outlines a
hybrid research/education program for The University of Arizona
at&lt;br/&gt;Tucson. The research program is expected to generate indispensable
and applicable knowledge in modeling , design, and verification of increasingly
complex ULSI circuits whereas the educational component&lt;br/&gt;endeavors to
train students in the creation, upgrade, and maintenancy of future EDA tools.
The following technological broader impacts are likely to manifest themselves
through the proposed research. An&lt;br/&gt;improved ratio of functional to
defective units in a microprocessor batch (yield production) would translate
into immense revenue savings for high volume manufactures. Chip circuit
designers may have the&lt;br/&gt;option to adjust important design parameters
(e.g. chip clock frequency) to maximize the performance of the processor. The
ability to predict full chip/package temperature profile would allow the elim
ination of&lt;br/&gt;hot-spots that negatively affect the performance of the
circuit. Advanced EDA tools would automate complex design rules and streamline
the design decision process for upcoming new bio- and nano-
materials.&lt;br/&gt;The increased availability of under- and post-graduate
cutting-edge electronics eduction for women and minority constitutes an
important social broader impact that provides these sectors with skills to
compete&lt;br/&gt;in the high-end Integrated Circuit (IC) design industry within
the next 20 years. &lt;br/&gt;