* 0447036
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Perception and Production Profiles of Bilingual Speakers
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2005,07/31/2006
* Carol Stoel-Gammon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,553.00

How do bilingual speakers produce speech sounds in both their languages? How do
these same speakers perceive these sounds? Under the direction of Dr. Carol
Stoel-Gammon, Ms. Andrea Macleod will study the phonological systems of two
groups of adult Canadian French-English bilinguals: bilinguals who acquire both
languages prior to the age of 5 and bilinguals who acquired their second
language between the ages of 6 and 12 years. This dissertation project will
advance our understanding of multilingual language competence. The phonological
abilities of bilingual adults is thought to differ from those of monolinguals
due to the pressures to sound like a native speaker in two different language
communities, and the pressure to reduce the processing load of having to master
these different phonological systems. Research has shown that the differences in
how these opposing pressures impact bilinguals are due to a number of factors
such as the age of acquisition, the language learning environments, and the
environments for ongoing language use. However, only a few models exist that
predict the course of bilingual phonological acquisition: Kuhl's native language
magnet model (1993); Best's perceptual assimilation model (1994); and Flege's
speech learning model (1995). These models present testable hypotheses that will
be evaluated in the proposed research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
bilinguals make up the majority of the world's population, the study of
bilingual language abilities are only targeted in a small body of research.
Despite demographic changes within North America and around the world, the study
of speech production and perception has focused on monolingual speakers, English
ones in particular, within the field of linguistics, speech-language sciences,
and psychology. Research in bilingual speech production and perception will shed
light on how individuals learning a second language balance two opposing
pressures: the pressure to maximize phonetic contrasts which stems from the need
to sound like a native speaker of two different language communities; and the
pressure to minimize phonetic contrasts stemming from the need to reduce the
processing load of mastering two phonetic and phonological systems. This project
will contribute to our current understanding of teaching second language
pronunciation by gaining a better understanding of how age of language learning
and language use impact the phonological system (speech-sound system)&lt;br/&gt;