* 0447142
* Computerization of the University of Michigan Museum of Zoology Mollusk Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* John Burch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 02/28/2010
* USD 484,849.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Michigan, under the direction of
Dr. Diarmaid O'Foighil, for partial support of the computerization of the Museum
of Zoology Mollusk Collection (UMMZ-MC). This collection is a major national and
international resource, serving as an influential research reference to diverse
fields including freshwater biology and conservation, invertebrate zoology,
medical and veterinary zoology, and paleontology. The present day scientific
utilization of the UMMZ-MC is hindered by the absence of an online searchable
database. In practical terms, this means that biologists/conservationists
interested in UMMZ-MC holdings often have to physically visit the collection for
extended periods to access the information they require. The grant will enable
UMMZ-MC personnel to enter all of the catalogued lots (approximately 251,000)
into an online searchable database. During this process, each lot will be re-
housed in an acid-free environment, enumerated, taxonomically-updated and
georeferenced. This work will have a transformative effect on the research
utility of the UMMZ-MC and will greatly facilitate remote access to the
collection's historical biodiversity data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan undergraduate students and graduate student curatorial assistants will
be centrally involved in this project. These students will receive a thorough
grounding in modern museum skills and work practices. They will receive expert
training in identifying specimens based on conchological features, in taxonomic
practice and nomenclature, and in the management and care of museum collections.
They will also be trained in a variety of computer science skills, including
data management, database design, SQL server and online database applications,
and geographic information systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computerization of the
UMMZ-MC will return it to the forefront of active research mollusk collections,
releasing its enormous store of latent historical biodiversity and
biogeographical data to an eager audience of systematists, ecologists and
conservation biologists, and spurring significant increases in overall
collection activity rates. The online database will also be available to the
general public, a growing fraction of whom are increasingly interested in
conservation issues and who are gradually becoming aware that the greatest loss
in North American animal diversity has involved freshwater mollusks. It will
allow the UMMZ-MC to eventually link with sister collections in peer museums,
facilitating the transition to online multiple-collection searches as they
develop. Finally, this project will also enable the UMMZ-MC to strengthen its
prominent role in training graduate and undergraduate students in systematic
biology and museum science by incorporating significant levels of practical
database and general curatorial skill development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;