* 0447967
* CAREER:  A Novel Approach to Understanding Microbial Metabolism and Soil Carbon Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Serita Frey, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2011
* USD 525,750.00

Soil carbon storage is determined to a large degree by the balance between plant
productivity and organic matter decay. Soil microorganisms are the primary
decomposers of organic matter and their metabolism controls how much carbon is
lost from the soil and returned to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. One of the
key factors determining the fate of soil carbon is the efficiency with which
soil microorganisms convert organic matter to microbial biomass. Despite its
importance in determining soil carbon dynamics, little is known about how
microbial efficiency responds to environmental change. In this project, a new
technique, calorespirometry will be used to make in situ measurements of
microbial efficiency in soils exposed to chronic warming and nitrogen
fertilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global change is altering the functioning of
terrestrial ecosystems. This project will focus on two aspects of global change
that have particular significance for the northeastern U.S., warming and
nitrogen deposition. This project will provide evidence for how warming and
nitrogen fertilization interact to influence microbial metabolism and carbon
loss from soils, and will provide valuable data for input into global carbon and
soil organic matter models. Additionally, a five-year outreach program will be
developed for the State of New Hampshire to provide accessible information to
the general public on the services that ecosystems provide (e.g., air and water
quality), and how global change is impacting the ability of ecosystems to
maintain these services. This objective will be accomplished via a website,
public service announcements on local National Public Radio stations, posters on
public transport systems, and an ecosystems services module for New Hampshire
Project Learning Tree, a statewide environmental education program.&lt;br/&gt;