* 0447649
* CAREER:  Sulfur Oxidation in Chlorobium tepidum, a Model Phototrophic Bacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* Thomas Hanson, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2011
* USD 849,460.00

This career development plan emphasizes genome-enabled studies of microbial
physiology in a non-traditional microbial model system. The research component
will provide a deeper understanding of how green sulfur bacteria
(Chlorobiaceae), a widespread group of anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria, oxidize
reduced sulfur compounds under anaerobic conditions. Anaerobic sulfur oxidation
consumes reduced sulfur compounds, which are toxic to humans and other
organisms. Anaerobic sulfur oxidation is a critical part of energy generation
pathways in green sulfur bacteria, but it is one of the most poorly understood
functions carried out by the Chlorobiaceae. The specific genetic components
required for sulfur oxidation will be identified by a molecular genetic approach
in Chlorobium tepidum, a recognized model system for the Chlorobiaceae.
Characterization of mutants lacking sulfur oxidation enzymes coupled with
biochemical studies will detail the contributions of these enzymes to the
physiology of C. tepidum. This project will develop and disseminate genetic
tools that will assist in analysis of the nine other Chlorobiaceae genomes
currently being sequenced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: An outreach
component will produce a science curriculum module that satisfies national
educational standards. The module will use Winogradsky columns to illustrate the
dynamic interaction between microbes and their environment. One unique aspect of
the project is a strong integration with the research program. This will be
accomplished by using student-constructed Winogradsky columns as sources of
sulfur dependent phototrophs, which will be brought into axenic culture in the
PI's laboratory. These cultures will be analyzed to assess the diversity and
distribution of key sulfur oxidation genes identified by the research component.
Culture properties, histories, images and data will be placed on a Web site for
access by participating classrooms and the general public to complete an
interactive loop between university research and K-12 education.