* 0447783
* CAREER: Architectural Support for Parallel Execution as a Continuum of Transactions (ASPECT)
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2010
* Milos Prvulovic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ahmed Louri
* 05/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: Architectural Support for Parallel Execution as a Continuum of
Transactions
(ASPECT)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective use of
future chip-multiprocessing and multi-threaded machines will increasingly rely
on the availability of parallel software. However, creating such software is
sill notoriously difficult and error prone. This project explores ways of
designing future parallel machines that will be easier to program in order to
decrease software developmental costs, increase software reliability, and
facilitate wider adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current CMP and MT architectures
provide programers with only rudimentary mechanisms to control the non-
deterministic ordering of events in parallel execution. This project is an
integrated exploration of computer architecture and system software that will
develop architectural support to explicitly track and manipulate event ordering
in parallel execution. The mechanisms will allow programmers to directly express
ordering constraints which are then enforced by the system, help find and debug
event-ordering problems, and leverage architecture-level knowledge of intended
ordering for prformance and power optimizations. Insights and results from this
project wilol also stimulate further related research in computer architecture,
software engineering, and programming languages.