* 0447046
* Facilities and Database Improvements for the Museum of WIldlife and Fish Biology, U. C. Davis
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Douglas Kelt, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 01/31/2009
* USD 277,933.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of California - Davis under the
direction of Dr. Douglas Kelt and Andrew Engilis, Jr. for partial support of
upgrading facilities and completing curation of the avian and mammalian
collections of the Museum of Wildlife and Fish Biology, University of
California, Davis (MWFB). The University will apply these funds to the
replacement of old and inadequate museum cases that currently house the mammal
collection and some birds. The new cases will also allow for expansion of the
collection. A drawer storage system using trays will allow more efficient
compartmentalization of collections while minimizing damage and improving access
and organization; curation, improved storage, and consolidation of all
osteological materials will be completed; labeling systems for skins, skeletal,
and liquid-preserved specimens will be revised; all collections will be
inventoried and entered into a developing computer database, which will be made
available through an online (World Wide Web) search engine accessible from the
MWFB web page. Importantly, these funds will allow MWFB to complete the
integration of its own collections with those obtained from orphaned or donated
collections.

The MWFB serves as a critical resource for 30 undergraduate and graduate courses
on the UCD campus, and routinely loans materials for educational needs by
regional universities and grade schools. Specimens also are used by several
agencies for training, providing a unique resource in California as most
research collections do not allow specimens to be used for instructional needs.
We will improve access to outside requests by researchers that involved studies
of systematics, species distribution, avian diseases, morphology, genetics, and
related disciplines. Specimens housed in MWFB uniquely document the biological
diversity of California and Southwestern United States. We expect collections
growth in Neotemperate and Neotropical countries and the Hawaiian Islands.

The MWFB has become an important and increasingly valued resource in California,
and use of these collections has been expanding and now routinely includes
requests from around North America. The museum was originally established to
support the teaching needs of the Department of Wildlife, Fish, and Conservation
Biology and has now grown to be the third largest university-managed collection
in California. In addition to internal growth, the museum has absorbed three
orphaned collections (the U.C. Davis Zoology collection, the U. C. Irvine
vertebrate collection, and the Mills College collection) and other collections
(e.g., substantial materials from the Point Reyes Bird Observatory and from
American River Community College (Sacramento, CA)). Improving internet access to
materials in the MWFB will facilitate loans and coordination of agency training
events. We will improve on site use of the facilities through reorganization of
the collection room, and provide coordinated access by K-12 groups that
cooperatively tour the Bohart Museum of Entomology and the MWFB.