* 0447681
* Wyoming NSF EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement
* O/D,EPS
* 05/01/2005,12/31/2012
* Randolph Lewis, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 8,854,167.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: EPS-0447681&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Wyoming
NSF EPSCoR Research Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt; Improvement
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Wyoming&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wyoming EPSCoR Research Infrastructure
Improvement award will build capacity and capability for national
competitiveness in Natural Resource Sciences, especially emphasizing ecological
topology of different spatial and time scales as it relates to ecosystem and
global change: Currently, the university has 20 faculty members in diverse
departments for this very broad, interdisciplinary area. The award will provide
partial start-up support for five new hires to fill specific needed niches in a
newly initiated interdisciplinary PhD program. Equipment and committed technical
staff will be supported to enhance the Stable Isotope, Nucleic Acid Exploration,
and GIS facilities, thereby strengthening research competitiveness and fostering
additional collaborations in this research focus area and contributing to the
development of a critical mass of research and educational expertise necessary
for large, multi-investigator, competitive research programs. This focus
relating to ecosystem responses to global change has significant current merit
and importance both for Wyoming and, more broadly, for national and
international concerns. There is growing recognition of the need for modeling
and understanding ecological processes at different spatial scales. This project
will provide a research and education focus related to that need for the
university. More importantly, Wyoming's strength in geological studies will give
added value in being able to address questions in different time scales as well
as spatial scales. This perspective will be of particular value in informing
policy decisions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Integration of research and education
will be emphasized in all aspects of the project. In the faculty recruitments
researchers who are also excellent teachers will be sought to strengthen the new
interdisciplinary PhD program. The award will supplement the university's level
of graduate student stipends and this greater level of support will require that
participating students take a course in Teaching for Scientists and Engineers. A
different kind of graduate student support is to be provided for graduate
student mentors for the Science Education program. Students receiving this
mentorship support will assist secondary science education students in a summer
research experience. Undergraduate fellowships for university and community
college students will engage these students in research experiences. Outreach
efforts will expand the number of high students participating in a previously
successful summer research program. In addition, technical assistance will be
engaged for efforts to increase public awareness of the role of research in
higher education and its contribution to the state's economic growth and
especially to make high school students and their parents more aware of
undergraduate research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;