* 0447689
* Idaho Research Infrastructure Improvement
* O/D,EPS
* 06/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Jean'ne Shreeve, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 02/28/2009
* USD 9,250,000.00

Proposal: EPS-0447689&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Idaho Research
Infrastructure Improvement &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Idaho &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Idaho EPSCoR Research Infrastructure
Improvement award will, strengthen shared facilities, build capacity, and
enhance research competitiveness in the general area of water quality and uses
relating to environmental change - specifically for five integrated research
themes: 1) hydrologic processes relating to the global debate on "Old Water" and
it's variable chemistry, 2) carbon/water flux at the local soil-vegetation-
atmosphere scale, 3) carbon/water export from watersheds and nutrient
limitation, 4) fish physiology and genomics, and 5) aqueous environmental
nanosensors. A diversity of researchers from the University of Idaho, Idaho
State University, and Boise State University will be brought together in the
kind of collaborative environment essential for useful and meaningful
infrastructure improvement to increase competitiveness for federal research
support. A highly instrumented Idaho Experimental Watershed Network will be
established; data management and analysis capabilities will be strengthened for
the Hydroinformatics Facility of the new Idaho Water Center; and a state-of-the-
art regional water quality laboratory will be developed to strengthen
collaborations with Idaho and regional Native American tribes as well as
national and international researchers. This project will contribute to
scientific understanding of environmental geochemical cycles and water quality
and potentially to national and global policy
formulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral associates will be involved in research related to the five
specified themes and graduate programs will be restructured to further the
integration of research and education within the universities. Existing
educational and public outreach programs will be strengthened to attract more
students to scientific and engineering studies/careers and to increase public
awareness of the role of research in higher education and its contribution to
the state's economic growth. In particular, current, working relationships with
Idaho's Native American Tribes in both research and education will be expanded
to other states, engaging the broader Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish
Commission. Outreach efforts to the private sector also include a Phase 0 SBIR
program, offering assistance with development and writing of more successful
SBIR proposals to different agencies. The project offers strong potential for
strengthening and expanding agriculture, aquaculture and related industries in
Idaho.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;