* 0447087
* U.S. - Egypt Workshop on "Tissue Engineering", Alexandria, Egypt, January 2006
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Robert Nerem, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2006
* USD 25,000.00

0447087 &lt;br/&gt;Nerem&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a US-Egypt Workshop on Tissue Engineering to be held in Alexandria,
Egypt in January 2006. The organizers are Dr. Robert Nerem, Institute of
Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia
and Dr. Hany El-Nazer, President, National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt and Dr.
Mona Marei, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt. Tissue engineering is a
fusion of a number of scientific and engineering disciplines including, but not
limited to, materials science, tissue mechanics, genetic engineering, stem cell
biology, modeling of complex biological systems, drug delivery, and clinical
strategies applying to all major organs and tissues in the body. Due to the
highly interdisciplinary nature of tissue engineering, a wide array of
scientific knowledge and&lt;br/&gt;engineering principles must be integrated to
develop a substitute organ or tissue. Scientific partnering and exchange of
information from all these disciplines are critical to the support and emergence
of tissue engineering as a viable option for the treatment of a number of
debilitating human conditions. The project aims at establishing ties to combine
the strengths of internationally recognized tissue engineering centers by
supporting the travel of nine United States scientists to participate in the
workshop and to meet with others from tissue engineering centers in Egypt and
the Middle East to discuss the latest developments in tissue engineering and to
establish collaborative ties. Additionally, the proceedings of the workshop will
be published for later reference and stimulation of collaborative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impact: The US delegation
will involve pioneers in the field of tissue engineering. They will develop
outlines for collaborative research with scientists from Egypt and from other
Middle East countries. The research would enhance the potential for developing
components and devices for medical applications in the United States and in
Egypt. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program,
which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
these joint scientific activities. &lt;br/&gt;