* 0447156
* Cys-Loop Receptors: Structure and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Timothy Hales, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 02/28/2009
* USD 449,999.00

The Cys-loop receptor family includes the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(nAChR) and the serotonin type 3 receptor (5-HT3R). Cys-loop receptors are
neurotransmitter-activated ion channels participating in neurotransmission in
the nervous system. Neurotransmitter binding opens the ion channel by initiating
the movement of the second transmembrane domain (TM2) of each of the channel's
five subunits. In the conventional view of the channel an outer vestibule
narrows to the rate-limiting region within the membrane where the gate is
located; the pore then opens into the cytoplasm. Thus, in this scheme,
determinants of ion conduction reside exclusively in TM2. &lt;br/&gt;However,
recent evidence renders this textbook view of Cys-loop receptors obsolete.
First, cryoelectron microscopy revealed that the nAChR has narrow "portals" at
the cytoplasmic interfaces of each subunit. Second, mutagenesis of these regions
in the 5-HT3R influences ion conduction. These findings necessitate revision of
the model for the ion permeation pathway. Thus this project addresses a
fundamental question in neuroscience: does conduction through ion channels
involve cytoplasmic elements? Data from this laboratory demonstrate that
intracellular regions of 5-HT3Rs affect all aspects of ion conduction:
conductance, voltage-dependence and ionic selectivity. This study will identify
the mechanisms involved, creating a new model for Cys-loop receptor function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key objective of the study is to create a Cys-loop
receptor database accessible to physicians, researchers and educators. Thus this
project will enhance the infrastructure for research and education at The George
Washington University and beyond. Undergraduate students spearhead the
developing partnership between the graduate Neuroscience Program and the
undergraduate Biomedical Engineering Program. The development of Cys-loop
receptor structure and function website has created a virtual link between the
two programs and will attract undergraduate students into this important
research field.&lt;br/&gt;