* 0447411
* Role of Rainfall on the Geochemical Evolution of Soils: The Atacama Desert of Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Ronald Amundson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2009
* USD 468,343.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil formation, a process that profoundly impacts
global atmospheric and aqueous chemistry, is defined by the balance of mass
inputs to, and losses from, the soil system. Observations in humid regions
indicate that as soils undergo biogeochemical alteration over geological time
scales, weathering losses exceed atmospheric inputs, and soils experience
pervasive chemical depletions of biologically essential elements and large
volumetric collapse (Vitousek et al., 1997).&lt;br/&gt;Yet this pattern hinges
on the availability of water for weathering and solute transport, and recent
climate comparisons in Hawaii reveal that decreasing precipitation, as might be
expected, results in decreased overall mass losses over geological time spans
(Chadwick and Goldstein, 2004).&lt;br/&gt;However, there is a decided lack of
quantitative mass balance research on the soils of arid and&lt;br/&gt;hyperarid
regions, and at this stage it is difficult to compare the long-term geochemical
behavior of these environments with the Earth.s more humid
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. This work, when combined with
other research, will provide an integrated perspective of the changing roles of
atmospheric solutes and both chemical and physical weathering as precipitation
decreases. This proposal outlines a chronological study of soils at critical
points along a precipitation gradient in the arid to hyper-arid Atacama Desert
of Chile that, when combined with previously published data, will reveal how
soil formation undergoes fundamental physical and chemical changes with
decreasing precipitation. Presently, detailed chemical and isotopic (stable,
cosmogenic radionuclides) studies have been initiated at three locations which
reveal that, with decreasing precipitation, soils increasingly retain
atmospheric solutes and undergo volumetric expansion. However, this work is
restricted in both space (climate range) and time (to multi-million year old
soils). Funds are requested here to expand this work and develop a rigorous
perspective of a pedologically-unexplored region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
objectives of this project are to: (1) develop four chronological sequences
along a latitudinal (precipitation) gradient in northern Chile, (2) quantify
chemical and physical properties of the soils and atmospheric deposition along
the gradient, and (3) obtain numerical ages for the landforms on which the soils
have developed and, to the extent possible, for the soils
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;These data will allow us to (1) establish rates of
chemical and physical changes in the soils with rainfall and (2) add constraints
to the geomorphic evolution of fluvial features in this unique
desert.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This work will impact science by
demonstrating the pervasive importance of atmospheric deposition to the soils of
the Earth, and will provide climatic trends on soil chemistry that can be
integrated with other studies in humid areas. The project will impact
institutions and international scientific exchange because it will be an
integrated collaboration between US and&lt;br/&gt;Chilean scientists, will
provide for student exchange and training (Chilean student to US, and US
students working with Chilean faculty and graduate students), and will provide
research results that will be disseminated within Chile by both U.S. and Chilean
colleagues. Finally, the key funded personnel in the project are graduate
students, and these students will work closely with the diverse set of
collaborators, and the new research techniques that the students (US and
Chilean) will be exposed to will put them at the forefront of earth surface
research techniques and concepts.&lt;br/&gt;