* 0447281
* Timing of Tropical Vegetation Response Following Abrupt Deglacial Climate Changes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* Konrad Hughen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/29/2008
* USD 325,000.00

Global climate is changing at an accelerating pace, and policy makers in society
must have accurate predictions of the natural ecosystem response in order to
anticipate and mitigate the most severe environmental impacts. With this
research, we will measure the response times and rates of change in vegetation
assemblages following abrupt climate shifts of the last deglaciation, 15,000 to
10,000 years ago. Annually laminated sediments are ideal for this purpose
because they are undisturbed by burrowing organisms and typically have high
accumulation rates. We will construct high-resolution records of both
terrestrial vegetation and climate change from laminated sediments at two
locations in the tropical Atlantic. Vegetation will be characterized using
organic compounds (biomarkers) that can be traced back to terrestrial vascular
plant sources, whereas records of past climate change will be constructed
through continuous analysis of elemental abundances related to river runoff.
Vegetation and climate shifts will be comparable across rapid climate
transitions between wet and dry conditions from the same sediment cores. This
project will provide the most precise measures currently obtainable of the
response of vegetation assemblages to rapid climate change, and will address
several outstanding questions: How quickly did deglacial vegetation shifts take
place? Did vegetation change at the same rate following different rates of
climatic change? What was the timing of vegetation change relative to the
proximate climate forcing? By helping quantify the sensitivity of vegetation
assemblages and entire ecosystems to rapid climate shifts, this work may allow
improved prediction of similar changes in the future.