* 0447285
* Digital Access to the Field Museum's Neotropical Plant Types Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* William Alverson, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 04/30/2008
* USD 308,882.00

A grant has been awarded to The Field Museum under the direction of Dr. Michael
Dillon for partial support of an initiative to database and image 23,800 type
collections of vascular plants from the Neotropics and 13,200 Berlin Negatives.
Herbarium specimen sheets identified as types will be scanned; core data from
original labels will be captured, cleaned, georeferenced, and automatically
processed for archival storage and web distribution. The project will add value
to these data through verification of the type status of each specimen based on
original literature and revisionary works. Data and images will reside in the
Museum's recently acquired KE Software EMu ('Electronic Museum') database system
and be immediately available online; they will also be made available for access
through the portals of Museum collaborators. The addition of KE Software's
portal to the EMu database will allow the Museum's Botany Department to increase
distribution of specimen data, enhancing an effort to deliver large quantities
of Mesoamerican specimen data via the web, in collaboration with the Missouri
Botanical Garden. Data and images will be repatriated via DVDs to all major
herbaria in Latin America.

The Field's Botany collections rank among the world's largest assemblage of
flowering plants and cryptogams, totaling about 2.7 million specimens, some
40,000 of which are types. Of this number, 28,000 represent Neotropical
flowering plants. Type collections are the critical element in the description
and delimitation of organisms at the species and infraspecific levels. Ready
access to type collections and corresponding information, such as original
literature, is indispensable to correct assessment of global, regional, and
local biodiversity. This project addresses the impracticality of frequent loans
of valuable type specimens for purely taxonomic purposes by providing online
availability of high-quality images and corresponding label information to meet
the needs and demands of the scientific community. Data pertinent to the
verification of type specimens increase the overall value of a type collection.
The project offers an important service to the international scientific
community, especially in Latin America, where floras for identification often do
not exist and those that do typically are devoid of photos or illustrations.

Repatriation of specimen data to the countries where the specimens were
originally collected will permit in-country researchers to use these data to
improve their biotic inventories and taxonomic studies of the vascular plants.
It will also enhance collaborations and active projects with local institutions
in Bolivia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, and other countries.
At the Field Museum, these projects will include training of personnel in
methods for databasing, plant taxonomy, and verification of type specimens. The
project will give Chicago-region Latin American students a chance to collaborate
with Field Museum researchers to improve the quality of the Museum's web
presence by leveraging the collaborative program of HiTech Latin American
interns.