* 0447555
* CAREER: Synthesis, Characterization and Discovery of Frontier Carbon Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2012
* Yoke Khin Yap, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 03/31/2012
* USD 506,227.00

This project focuses on novel solid compounds composed of elements of boron (B),
carbon (C), and nitrogen (N), a class of compounds commonly referred to as
frontier carbon materials. Inaddition to investigating how to control the
arrangement of B, C, and N atoms during the synthesis materials such as boron
nitride, carbon nitride and boron-carbon nitride, the functions of kinetic
energy of the growth species, potential energy of the growth species, and the
role of catalysts in controlling bonding between B, C, and N atoms will be
explored. The goal is to create new thin films and nanostructures of boron
nitride, carbon nitride and boron-carbon-nitride with desired physical
properties. The project will stimulate cross-disciplinary research
collaborations within the campus and in other universities and national
laboratories. The related education components will stimulate the interest of
teenagers in the physical sciences through undergraduate education, laboratory
tours, summer youth exploration, summer research programs, and will include a
new graduate course and a minor in nanoscale science and technology.

This project will provide training opportunities to new researchers who will
then be able to advance the science of novel carbon materials as thin films and
nanostructures with desired physical properties. The project will stimulate
cross-disciplinary research collaborations within the campus and in other
universities and national laboratories. The related education components will
stimulate the interest of teenagers in the physical sciences through
undergraduate education, laboratory tours, summer youth exploration, summer
research programs, a new graduate course and a minor in nanoscale science and
technology. Frontier carbon materials are of high interest to US industry.
Students trained in these and related areas are typically highly competitive in
the job market.