* 0447990
* CAREER:  Financial Engineering, Incomplete Markets and Investment Under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Vicky Henderson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 01/31/2010
* USD 112,366.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award provides funding
for research and education in financial engineering. The focus is on the
development of option pricing and valuation methodologies suitable for
incomplete financial markets. Incompleteness arises in financial markets as soon
as the unrealistic assumptions of a perfect market are relaxed. The classic
Black and Scholes valuation is no longer applicable in such situations. The
approach of utility indifference pricing, with roots in economics, has emerged
recently to deal with incomplete markets, and the research aims to extend this
methodology to American options with an infinite maturity. The techniques used
include stochastics, partial differential equations and martingales. When
incompleteness arises from non-tradability of the underlying asset, such options
are useful in modeling the investment (and abandonment) decisions faced by
firms. Utility indifference pricing involves choice of a suitable utility
function to describe risk preferences. The second main goal of the research is
to develop the concepts of time consistent utility functions. Consideration of
infinite horizon American options leads to issues of valuing intermediate
cashflows and complications due to the horizon. Naive limit taking results in
degenerate control problems, so care must be taken to develop new approaches.
This research will lead to new methods for portfolio management and links to
dynamic risk measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
have impact in diverse areas such as corporate finance and real options.
Improved corporate investment decisions arising from this research could benefit
the shareholders of firms, and therefore society. Additionally, the techniques
of stochastic optimal control and martingales will be of interest to researchers
in mathematical finance. The finance industry will benefit from developments in
utility indifference pricing techniques, as they need to cope daily with the
practicalities of the incompleteness of markets when pricing derivatives.