* 0447242
* Higher Level Phylogeny of the Lycaenoidea (Lepidoptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Naomi Pierce, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 02/28/2009
* USD 449,999.00

DEB-0447242: A higher phylogeny of the Lycaenoidea (Lepidoptera)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits of the
proposed activity. The Lycaenoidea (Lepidoptera: Lycaenidae + Riodinidae) are a
large group of insects whose some 7000 species have extraordinarily variable
life histories. The Lycaenoidea are distributed world-wide, with their center of
diversity in Southeast Asia, but two important and understudied groups, the
Riodinidae and Eumaeini, occur primarily in the Neotropics, and together
represent 35-40% of lycaenoid diversity. The goal of this research is to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of the Lycaenoidea by analyzing both
morphological and molecular characters. Representatives of 360 genera, or just
over half of the estimated 715 genera in the Lycaenoidea will be sampled; each
specimen will be scored for more than 125 characters, and its DNA sequenced for
4 genes (c. 3000 base pairs). Emphasis will be on the rich but poorly known
Neotropical fauna. The resulting evolutionary tree of relationships will be used
to derive a stable classification for the group. It will also provide a
framework to study life history evolution and test biogeographic hypotheses
regarding the origin and diversification of Lycaenoidea. The work will focus on
the radiation of two groups in the Neotropics: the hyperdiverse Eumaeini
hairstreaks, and the enigmatic Polyommatus blues. An understanding of the
evolutionary history of these insects will illuminate historical and ecological
factors that have affected Neotropical biodiversity. A strength of the proposal
is the complementarity of the participants: the project is a collaboration
between specialists in molecular and morphological approaches to reconstructing
evolutionary history, and will contribute to our understanding of how best to
use disparate and independently powerful datasets.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
resulting from the proposed activity. The project will specifically train a
postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student in molecular and morphological
systematics, and will involve the additional participation of numerous graduate
students, undergraduates, consultants and collectors. The Principle
Investigators (Pierce at Harvard and Robbins at the Smithsonian) have strong
records for mentoring students, including women and minorities, and
collaborating with scientists in Latin America. Both are members of
international entomological consortia. This project will develop a web site with
a searchable database that will make the thousands of specimens in the DNA and
Tissues collection at Harvard sampled as part of this research available to the
professional community, and will sponsor a public exhibit on Lepidoptera (moths
and butterflies) at the Harvard Museum of Natural History emphasizing research
on Lycaenoidea. The sequences will contribute to a larger database being
developed by museums world-wide to use DNA "barcodes" for insect identification.
Finally, because of their complex life histories, lycaenoid butterflies are
particularly vulnerable to habitat destruction and are disproportionately
represented among endangered species (e.g., the Xerces Blue, Karner Blue and
Mission Blue in the US, all symbols of conservation; the Large Blue in the UK;
Brenton's Blue in South Africa; and Illidge's Blue in Australia). An
understanding of factors that affect both extinction and diversification of
these insects will have a clear application to ongoing conservation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;