* 0447509
* CAREER: Formal Verfication of Aspect-Oriented Software
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2011
* Shriram Krishnamurthi, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2011
* USD 450,671.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0447509&lt;br/&gt;Shriram Krishnamurthi&lt;br/&gt;Brown
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Formal Verification of Aspect-Oriented
Software&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Module systems have grown significantly in scope
and sophistication. The most recent innovations have been in the space of so-
called aspects, which provide modularity mechanisms that blur the line between
static and dynamic composition. The creation of innovative module mechanisms
gives programmers new powers, but in turn also makes it possible for them to
introduce ever more subtle errors into software. This potential for new kinds of
errors places a greater burden on verification techniques. These techniques
have, however,&lt;br/&gt;failed to keep pace with advances in software
modularity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will advance the state of
research in computer-aided verification for the forms of modularity introduced
by aspects. It will generate new theories of modular verification that address
the different styles of aspect modularities. This work is, therefore, an
instance of a larger research program that seeks synergies in the confluence of
software engineering, programming languages and computer-aided
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will also have significant
broader impact. It will lead to tools that will benefit the software development
community. It will generate a new design for programming languages courses.
Finally, it will produce a course designed to teach computing to students of the
social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;