* 0447165
* Upgrading of Binghamton University Geoscience Microscopy/Fluid Inclusion Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2008
* Tim Lowenstein, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2008
* USD 97,242.00

EAR-0447165&lt;br/&gt;Lowenstein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upgrading the Binghamton
University Geoscience microscopy/fluid inclusion laboratory involves obtaining
new equipment that will facilitate ongoing NSF-funded research projects on the
chemistry of ancient seawater and geobiology. Current research involves
searching for microorganisms and ancient DNA trapped in brine inclusions for
periods of 104-106 years in Quaternary salt cores from three basins (Death
Valley, Salar de Atacama, Chile, and Salar de Uyuni, Bolivia). The goal is to
obtain data on the distribution, survival, and diversity of microorganisms in
fluid inclusions in saline minerals that have been in the subsurface for periods
of several hundred thousand years. These projects require identification of
micron-size organisms in fluid inclusions in crystals. The optical microscope
system purchased with this grant will facilitate observation of microbes. Fluid
inclusion drilling and extraction will be facilitated with the purchase of a
precision drill and mount for motion control; a laminar flow hood would protect
brine inclusions from contamination. An upgrade of the miscroscopy/fluid
inclusion laboratory will benefit the students and faculty in the Department of
Geological Sciences at Binghamton University. Undergraduate and graduate
students will receive instruction and training in the use of equipment, and
several courses will use the laboratory for instruction. Summer workshops will
be organized to provide training and curriculum development for local middle
school and high school teachers in geobiology; the microscopy/fluid inclusion
laboratory will be used for these workshops.&lt;br/&gt;