* 0447034
* SGER: Subantarctic Mode Water and Antarctic Intermediate Water: How Well Are They Represented in Climate Models?
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Igor Kamenkovich, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2005
* USD 24,091.00

Processes in the Southern Ocean can influence global ocean circulation and
density structure on the time scales relevant for global climate change.
Evaluation of simulation of the Southern Ocean water masses in U.S. climate
models will therefore assist in quantification and reduction of the uncertainty
in predicting the response of the global thermohaline circulation to increasing
concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. The goal of this study is
to evaluate simulation of the Subantarctic Mode Water (SAMW) and Antarctic
Intermediate Water (AAIW) in three U.S. climate Models: the Community Climate
System Model (CCSM), the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) model, and
the Goddard Institute of Space Sciences (GISS) model, using observational data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has two main objectives: &lt;br/&gt;(i) To
evaluate simulation of the properties of SAMW and AAIW by ocean general
circulation models (OGCMs) through comparison with the observational data from
the World Ocean Atlas 2001. The analysis will focus on the volume, temperature
and salinity of SAMW and AAIW and on the stratification along meridional
sections at the southern boundary of the Pacific and Atlantic oceans.
&lt;br/&gt;(ii) To evaluate simulation of circulation and modification of the
intermediate water using estimates of mass, heat and salt fluxes by a data-based
inverse box model. The analysis will focus on the isopycnal fluxes into the
Pacific and Atlantic basins, as well as on the diapycnal fluxes that modify
properties of the intermediate water in the Southern Ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of these analyses will help to identify
sources of disagreement between the OGCM-simulated and observed properties of
SAMW and AAIW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the work are that it
will aid in assessing the uncertainty of the future climate change projections
and will guide future model development. This is important for environmental
management and decision-making activities.