* 0447570
* CAREER:  Nitrate Isotopes and Biogeochemistry:  A Plan for Coupling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2011
* Daniel Sigman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2011
* USD 731,268.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0447570&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biogeochemistry, which investigates the
environmental fluxes of biologically important elements, is an emerging
interdisciplinary field, and the use of the stable isotope distributions of
nitrogen-bearing compounds is a developing area within biogeochemistry. In this
project, a faculty member at Princeton University expects to promote the future
of biogeochemistry as a field by integrating undergraduate education into his
research into the use of stable isotopes to understand the marine nitrogen
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Princeton University community has remarkable
expertise in biogeochemistry and its interaction with the physics of the ocean
and atmosphere. Complementarily, the university works to engage undergraduates
in research activities through the universal requirement of a senior thesis. To
link these two strengths, this project will feature a summer undergraduate
research program to fund senior thesis-related projects that benefit from and
support the research of graduate students in biogeochemistry. Working with a
graduate student mentor, the principal investigator himself, and another faculty
member or NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory scientist in some cases,
each undergraduate will pursue a project that is appropriate for a senior thesis
and potentially publishable. Because the project will also be designed to
further the research goals of the graduate student mentor, the mentor will have
appropriate expertise and additional motivation. The continuity of the summer
research program with the completion of the thesis during the next academic year
increases the potential for significant accomplishment and true synergy between
the educational and research goals of the program. This program builds upon the
principal investigator's effort to engage students in the environmental Earth
sciences at multiple stages in their undergraduate
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrate is a ubiquitous form of biologically
available nitrogen in the environment. Based on previous method development in
the principal investigator's laboratory, the graduate students and
undergraduates will investigate the nitrogen (N) and oxygen (O) isotopes of
nitrate as 'tracers' of the N cycle, focusing on the marine environment.
Research will center on two projects that draw upon the expertise from across
the university: (1) lab culture, in vitro assay, and field incubation studies of
the coupled N and O isotope dynamics of nitrate assimilation and
denitrification, two of the critical reactions in the N cycle; and (2)
incorporation of the N and O isotopes of nitrate into numerical models of ocean
circulation and biogeochemistry. These projects, in the context of the oceanic
data sets generated in the principal investigator's laboratory, will allow for
the quantification of biogeochemical processes the signals of which are
otherwise complicated by their simultaneous occurrence and by ocean circulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include the
anticipated recruitment of highly capable students into the environmental Earth
sciences and the exposure of future individuals of influence to scientific
studies of the environment. This program directly involves only a modest number
of students, but it completes a multi-stage strategy for engaging students in
the environmental Earth sciences. Moreover, its impact will be amplified by the
campus presence of such advanced undergraduate activities in environmental Earth
science and the role of the program as a testing ground for senior thesis-
supported activities in this area. &lt;br/&gt;