* 0447869
* CAREER:     Modeling and Managing Uncertainty in Wireless Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Martin Haenggi, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Min Song
* 01/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

The inherent non-determinism and dynamism and the communicational limitations of
wireless ad hoc and sensor networks force a reexamination of the assumptions and
models used for classical networks. There is a need for sound mathematical
models to explore the complexities induced by the probabilistic and dynamic
interaction of the physical and information processes. Hence, this project
focuses on modeling and managing uncertainty in such systems, with the goals of
achieving an improved understanding, deriving performance bounds, and developing
innovative strategies and guidelines for protocol design, as well as providing
cutting-edge research opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate
students. The two-pronged research approach includes a theoretical and an
experimental component. The multidisciplinary theoretical part combines
methodologies from information and communication theory, and random graph theory
and stochastic geometry, whereas the experiments are based on a sensor network
testbed with mobile elements.

This project will contribute significantly to the ability to analyze and design
robust and resource-efficient static and mobile ad hoc and sensor networks, and
it is expected that the broader networking community will benefit from the
models and design guidelines. Some models will hopefully be incorporated into
standard simulation tools. The research findings are disseminated not only
through the traditional channels but also via an educational outreach component,
and their broader impact will be felt through the application to other important
classes of networks, including multi-hop cellular networks that may soon become
significant for a major part of our society.