* 0447427
* CAREER:    From Fish Habitat to Restoration - Understanding Fish Responses to Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2012
* Aline Cotel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 01/31/2012
* USD 489,917.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0447427&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: ALINE
COTEL&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER:
FROM FISH HABITAT TO RESTORATION- UNDERSTANDING FISH RESPONSES TO
TURBULENCE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High quality habitats are essential to ensure
healthy ecosystems and therefore successful growth, survival and reproduction of
biological organisms. A deeper understanding of the relationship between habitat
characteristics and biological organisms leads to more efficient restoration
methods for a variety of environments. Among many ecologically important aspects
of locomotion, turbulence is believed to create large stability challenges for
fishes. Understanding the abilities of fishes to stabilize postures and
trajectories in turbulent flows appears to be an important and especially
effective candidate towards examining how mechanical principles affect field
behavior and distributions. This work builds upon a fruitful collaboration
between a biologist and an engineer and has expanded to include co-training of
graduate students willing to pursue dual degrees in Natural Resources and
Engineering. In addition, through programs such as Undergraduate Research
Opportunities Program (UROP), undergraduate students are involved in this
productive, interdisciplinary work during both the academic year and the summer.
The interaction between the two groups allows both disciplines to look at real-
world environmental issues in a broader and deeper sense. An option being
explored is to develop a new focus area related to fish habitat and restoration
within the Civil and Environmental Engineering undergraduate degree. This
project will have even broader impacts for society. There is considerable
interest in dam removal, stream and river restoration, and shoreline protection
and rehabilitation, and results from the proposed research will provide data to
help inform debate on these subjects. Scientific knowledge is essential in order
to achieve national goals for the Great Lakes. Human development carries the
threat of changes in shoreline flow signatures that are unsuitable for fishes.
Insights gained from the research will be shared with the community in town
meetings and other local media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;