* 0447739
* CAREER: Recognition of Dynamic Activities in Unstructured Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Rene Vidal, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2011
* USD 440,000.00

Abstract: This project is concerned with the study and development of seeing
machines capable of recognizing actions in dynamically changing environments
with a minimal level of supervision. The emphasis will be on the recognition of
face, hand and arm gestures, human gaits, changes in individual behaviors in a
crowd (e.g., a person in the middle of a walking crowd starts running), and
changes in crowd behavior (e.g., a group of individuals in a walking crowd
suddenly start running) occurring in a dynamically changing environment due to
camera motion, dynamic backgrounds (e.g., water, fog, fire, smoke, steam) and
multiple moving objects and people. The intellectual merit of the proposed
research will be a unifying theoretical framework for the recognition of human
and crowd activities that combines geometry, dynamics and clustering. The
recognition task will be viewed as the inference of a mixture of dynamical
models (e.g., rigid motions, non-rigid motions, linear dynamical models)
exhibiting abrupt changes both in space (due to multiple activities occurring in
a single frame) and in time (due to multiple activities occurring over a period
of time). The development of this framework will require significant advances on
dynamic scene reconstruction, spatio-temporal video analysis, clustering on
geometric spaces, and kernels on dynamical systems. The broad impact of the
proposed research includes applications in computer vision, machine learning,
control theory, robotics, and biomedical engineering. Techniques for recognition
of human and crowd activities are directly applicable to surveillance and
security. Techniques for dynamic scene reconstruction and spatio-temporal
modeling are useful in traffic monitoring, sports coverage/broadcast, human-
computer interaction, image retrieval and search, video motion capture, and
image-based rendering. Techniques for clustering on geometric spaces can be
applied to identification of hybrid systems in control theory, reconnaissance
and mapping problems in multiple robot systems, and modeling of gene expression
data and biological networks in biomedical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;