* 0447110
* Overcoming Barriers to Efficient Negotiation and the Resolution of Disputes
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Lee Ross, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 03/31/2009
* USD 400,349.00

Twelve studies will test the capacity of various interventions to help parties
involved in ongoing conflicts find "common ground" and reach mutually beneficial
agreements. Some of these interventions are suggested by the theoretical
perspective that the investigators have developed through research on various
cognitive and motivation barriers to successful negotiation. Others are
suggested by the investigators' real-world experiences in intergroup conflict
resolution in Northern Ireland and the Middle East. These studies will focus not
only on the participants' success in reaching agreements, but also on the
cognitive, motivational, and interpersonal processes that often pose barriers to
success in real-world negotiations. One such barrier is the "dissonance" that
antagonists can feel about abandoning a struggle for which they have made past
sacrifices without achieving their objectives. Another barrier is "reactive
devaluation"-a phenomenon first studied by the present investigators, whereby
the act of putting a given concession or compromise proposal on the table
decreases its attractiveness and perceived significance in the eyes of the party
to whom it has been offered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conflict resolution has long
been a central problem in social psychology, but most experimental work on this
topic has involved highly artificial conflicts and negotiation tasks. In
contrast, the proposed studies feature a range of negotiation tasks and measures
specifically developed and pre-tested by the investigators, in which the
participants' roles and motives reflect genuine, strongly felt interests,
social-political opinions, and personal identities. For example, one task will
require Palestinians and Israelis to try to reach agreement about specific
issues or proposals that would benefit both sides, regardless of what specific
future political settlement might be reached by their respective governments.
Closer to home, students who disagree about they way resources should be
allocated to male and female athletic programs will attempt to reach agreement
about the best way to distribute extra funds and/or bear the burden of cutbacks.
Thus, for these studies to bear fruit, the intervention techniques they employ
will have to "matter" even when motivated negotiators deal with issues they care
about deeply. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three types of interventions will be tested.
The first type is designed to "defuse" the mechanisms postulated to underlie
reactive devaluation-in particular, the tendency for the recipient of a proposal
to make negative inferences about the content of the proposal and the reasons
why it was offered. The second type will use various techniques (some operating
consciously and some non-consciously) to promote positive expectations about
negotiation outcomes and/or the trustworthiness of the other side. The third
type explores the value of various techniques for providing negotiation
participants with research-based "insight" about reactive devaluation and the
processes underlying it-in the expectation that such knowledge will make those
participants less susceptible to those processes. Many of these interventions
have already been tested in pilot studies in the investigators' laboratories.
The main goal of the proposed research is to show that they can make a
difference in the context of heartfelt, real-world disagreements. In so doing,
the investigators also hope to show the more general value of applying research
in social psychology and judgment and decision-making to illuminate shortcomings
and biases in the way people respond to new information, to prospective risks
and opportunities, and to the challenges of life in conflictual social settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;