* 0447898
* CAREER: Formal Cooperative Planning of Decentralized Robot Actions - Career Development Plan
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Herbert Tanner, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 08/31/2009
* USD 331,888.00

This project links for the first time high level planning and reconfiguration to
low level execution in heterogeneous multi-agent systems. Planing decisions are
automated and combine the diverse capabilities of the underlying systems towards
a common objective. The derived plans have guaranteed refinement into timed
switching sequences of novel, decentralized continuous controllers. The
interconnected system can complete a variety of complex cooperative tasks
without hardware reconfiguration. This is the first scalable methodology for
complete planning and controlled execution in heterogeneous interconnected
systems.

The method builds on a hierarchical hybrid architecture in which decision making
takes place in the higher purely discrete layers, while the execution of plans
is supervised by continuous controllers at the lower layers. The link between
the low continuous dynamics and the higher discrete models is established using
abstraction. Different homogeneous robotic groups obtain asymptotic abstract
discrete representations via a palette of cooperative controllers. Controller
switching within a group, as well as concurrent and synchronized execution among
several groups is captured in a product-timed automaton. The timed automaton is
further abstracted into a purely discrete push down automaton that uses its
stack to store timing information. From the push down automaton we extract an
equivalent context free grammar, and express the cooperative tasks as words in
this grammar. Automatic parsing yields derivations that correspond to
cooperative plans, in the form of sequences of controller activations in the
underlying groups.

Being one of the three Hispanic Serving Institutions in Carnegie
Doctoral/Research Universities-Extensive, UNM is uniquely positioned to recruit
Hispanic and Native American students