* 0447561
* CAREER:    Transient Signal Processing for Realistic Imagery
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Fredo Durand, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 12/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

This research characterizes light transport from a signal-processing perspective
with applications to image synthesis and material-appearance acquisition. A
crucial aspect of visual signals is their frequency content, that is, whether
light intensity varies smoothly or presents high-frequency content and
discontinuities. While such characteristics are implicitly exploited by a number
of techniques, there has been little work on the formal frequency analysis of
global lighting. This research develops a theoretical framework that describes
the effect of all light interaction in a scene in terms of frequency
characteristics. This theory is also applied to develop more efficient image
synthesis algorithms, and to solve inverse problems in material-property
acquisition. The research provides strong signal-processing fundamentals to
realistic graphics and enables faster and easier creation of high-quality
computer graphics imagery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research establishes a
novel signal-processing framework for the mechanisms of light transport. The
local frequency content of the radiance function is studied with an emphasis on
how it is affected by phenomena such as shading, occlusion, and travel in free
space. This work is comprehensive in that it treats both the angular and spatial
dimensions of the radiance domain, which extends previous work that usually
treated only one of these components. This theoretical work serves as conceptual
inspiration and provides analytical formulas for applications. In particular,
practical algorithms are developed for lighting simulation and real-time
rendering. These algorithms exploit knowledge of the frequency characteristics
of the radiance signal. The acceleration strategies rely on lower sampling rates
when appropriate and perceptual masking due to high-frequency patterns. New
techniques are also developed to acquire real-world material properties,
including the acquisition and characterization of ground-truth data. This
permits the validation of assumptions made in other projects, and also the
exploitation of these characteristics for faster acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;