* 0447231
* CAREER:Geochemical Energy for Thermophilic Archaea and Bacteria
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2005,04/30/2012
* Jan Amend, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2012
* USD 538,975.00

ABSTRACT Evidence is mounting that the extraordinary metabolic and phylogenetic
diversity of microorganisms is the result of several billion years of co-
evolution with geologic processes. Investigating the intimate couplings of
geochemistry and microbiology will become an even greater focus of geologic
research in the foreseeable future. Among the best and most exciting sites to
investigate the bio-geo interface are shallow marine hydrothermal ecosystems;
they are ubiquitous, geochemically and microbiologically highly diverse, readily
accessible for even complex investigations, and understudied compared to their
deep-sea and continental counterparts. My primary career interests are
understanding the geochemical constraints on metabolic diversity and
investigating the role that microorganisms play in controlling their chemical
environment. A crucial link between these two processes ? and between
microbiology and geochemistry in general? is the availability of chemical energy
sources. Quantifying the geochemical energy for thermophilic archaea and
bacteria is at the core of my future studies. I have developed an integrated
plan for research and education activities that will build a foundation for a
long-term academic career. The plan includes expanding geobiology and
geochemistry at Washington University through innovative course offerings and
hands-on mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students. New courses, which
seek to address several identified weaknesses in the curriculum, include a
field/lab class in geobiology, a writing intensive course in the natural
sciences, and multidisciplinary seminars that cover topics of exceptional and
timely interests. The educational component proposed here also seeks to provide
several extra learning opportunities (through Science Clubs) in low-income,
urban area elementary schools; the ultimate challenge is to eliminate the
"achievement gap" that exists between groups of students. This activity will be
coordinated with established public outreach programs, teachers and volunteers
at various K-5 schools, and numerous local science and nature centers. My new
research directions in microbial geochemistry include 1) designing geochemically
realistic growth media to culture heretofore "unculturable" thermophiles in
hydrothermal ecosystems; 2) determining in situ energy-yields for an array of
redox processes in vent environments, including the oxidation and fermentation
of organic compounds and the conversion of Arsenic-bearing compounds; and 3)
going "inside the cell" to quantify the free energies of common and central
biochemical pathways as a function of temperature and pressure, both catabolic
(energy-producing) and anabolic (biosynthesis) reaction networks. The approaches
combine fieldwork (in situ measurements, sampling), analytical chemistry
(aqueous solutions, gases, minerals), experimental microbiology (thermophile
culturing, gene surveys), and quantitative modeling (reaction energetics,
estimation of thermodynamic properties). The overall objectives are to generate
quantitative, predictive, and comprehensive models of the biogeo interface in
hydrothermal systems and to develop the scientific tools needed to test, guide,
and improve our understanding of global biogeochemical processes.

