* 0447674
* Metallosupramolecular Complexes Through Coordination Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 01/31/2008
* USD 405,000.00

Dr. Chad Mirkin, Chemistry Department, Northwestern University, is supported by
the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division for the rational design of macrocyclic and higher ordered
supramolecular structures. The primary objective is to develop a novel synthetic
methodology, termed the "Weak-Link Approach" (WLA), for constructing
supramolecular structures from symmetrical hemilabile ligands and transition
metals. The WLA allows one to rationally design and prepare two- and three-
dimensional molecular architectures with dimensions that are extraordinarily
large. Moreover, it allows functionality to be introduced into such structures.
In this project, two classes of structures are targeted: 1) macrocyclic
multimetallic compounds with synthetically programmable structural, chemical,
and photophysical properties with unusual host-guest chemistry, and 2) a new
type of biomimetic allosteric catalyst for reactions of both synthetic and
industrial relevance. Class 1 complexes will consist of ligands and metal
centers that provide control over complex size, shape, water solubility,
fluorescence, and chirality. Class 2 complexes will use this control to create
supramolecular compounds with arrays of metal centers arranged in such a way
that reactivity at a distal site will control catalytic chemistry at a catalytic
site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this proposal are to develop a
novel synthetic approach to form very large structures, whose chemical and
physical properties can be tailored. A major aim of these studies is to develop
new types of complexes with potentially useful photochemical and catalytic
properties. These may have applications in organic synthesis and as molecular
sensors. Additionally, these compounds may be useful for separations,
particularly of chiral molecules important to the pharmaceutical industry. The
students involved in this project will receive training in both inorganic and
analytical methodology, and undergraduate participation will be achieved by
leveraging existing REU programs at Northwestern.&lt;br/&gt;