* 0447079
* WORKSHOP: Advances in Computers and Computational Sciences.
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Richard Ewing, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2007
* USD 24,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to sponsor U.S.
faculty and researchers to attend the first SINO-US&lt;br/&gt;Workshop on
Computer and Computational Sciences (WCCS) to be held in Beijing 2005.
The&lt;br/&gt;purpose of the workshop is to strengthen research exchange in
computer sciences, and to&lt;br/&gt;promote successful collaborations between
experts in the field. WCCS provides a forum for&lt;br/&gt;presenting the latest
advances in computer and computational sciences, engineering,
and&lt;br/&gt;technologies. It also provides a platform for discussing the
practical challenges&lt;br/&gt;encountered and the solutions adopted thus far.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A particular aim of
WCCS is to bridge the gap between the research community and
the&lt;br/&gt;application domains, and to foster discussion and technology
exchange between these two&lt;br/&gt;communities within the two geographic
regions (US and Asia). As such, we have invited&lt;br/&gt;top-notch researchers
in the computer science community to serve on the Technical&lt;br/&gt;Program
Committee. &lt;br/&gt;We believe that by offering funding for selected U.S.
scientists (who would not otherwise&lt;br/&gt;be able to attend due to monetary
obstacle), these individuals and the overall workshop &lt;br/&gt;goals will
benefit. Travel support for attendance will be advertised nationwide;
women,&lt;br/&gt;minorities and disabled faculty and researchers will be
especially encouraged to apply
for&lt;br/&gt;sponsorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foremost goal is to
establish contacts for future collaborations and to allow for
ideas&lt;br/&gt;and solutions to be exchanged.