* 0447386
* Interactions of Mercury and Other Metals with NOM: Binding by Dissolved OM, Inhibition of Metal Sulfide Precipitation, and Enhancement of Metal Sulfide Dissolution
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2005,12/31/2009
* George Aiken, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2009
* USD 320,399.00

The ecological fate of mercury in aquatic systems depends, in large part, on
dissolved organic matter (DOM) concentration, the concentrations of inorganic
ligands, especially sulfide, and the presence of sulfate-reducing bacteria that
convert Hg2+ into methylmercury, a highly toxic form of mercury that is readily
bioaccumulated. Recent research shows that Hg(II) binds to DOM more strongly
(KDOM 1023 L kg-1) than previously thought under environmentally relevant
conditions. Strong binding of mercury by DOM, which is controlled by a small
fraction of the DOM containing reactive thiol functional groups, is second only
to sulfide when compared to other ligands of geochemical significance. In
addition to strong binding of Hg(II) by thiol-like moieties associated with DOM,
strong DOM-Hg interactions are apparent from studies of the effects of DOM on
the dissolution and precipitation of relatively-insoluble cinnabar (HgS).
Organic matter enhances HgS dissolution through surface reactions favored by DOM
rich in aromatic moieties. Precipitation of metacinnabar (HgS) is inhibited by
low concentrations (=3 mg C L-1) of DOM by prevention of the aggregation of
nanocolloidal mercuric sulfide. Interactions of HgS with DOM can influence the
geochemistry and bioavailability of Hg in aquatic environments by maintaining
higher dissolved total Hg concentrations than predicted by current speciation
models.&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, Joe Ryan (University of Colorado at
Boulder), Kathryn Nagy (University of Illinois at Chicago), and George Aiken
(U.S. Geological Survey, Boulder, Colorado) outline a plan to investigate more
challenging aspects of Hg-organic matter interactions. Similar interactions with
selected metals (from soft to hard) will be studied. Better definition of these
interactions is required for the improvement of metal speciation models and
increased understanding of the factors controlling metal cycling in aquatic
systems. Specific objectives of this research are to (1) quantify the effects of
organic matter, metal nature, and sulfide concentration on metal binding by
dissolved and solid organic matter at environmentally relevant concentrations,
(2) elucidate the contributions to metal binding by sulfur, nitrogen, and oxygen
functional groups in organic matter, (3) examine the effect of organic matter
nature on the inhibition of metal sulfide precipitation, with an emphasis on
mercuric sulfide, and (4) probe the mechanism of DOM enhancement of metal-
sulfide dissolution. Major products of this research will be the determination
of organic matter binding constants for selected toxic metals at environmentally
relevant concentrations and the assessment of colloidal stabilization as a
process contributing to the occurrence of dissolved metals in aquatic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed research include
dissemination of the research results at national conferences and in peer-
reviewed journals in addition to the following special activities. The co-PIs
and their research assistants will collaborate with Dr. Edward Tipping,
developer of a widely used geochemical equilibrium model (WHAM), to incorporate
new DOM-metal binding constants into metal speciation calculations and with Dr.
Alain Manceau to characterize competitive binding of metals with organic matter
used in bioremediation schemes. The co-PIs will develop a graduate class on the
interactions of organic matter with contaminants. The information resulting from
this study will be directly applicable to the effective management of aquatic
ecosystems, and has important implications for ecosystem restoration programs.
Dr. Aiken will continue to participate in U.S. Geological Survey efforts to make
science accessible for environmental regulators managing the Florida Everglades
and the San Joaquin-Sacramento River delta in California. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;