* 0447542
* CAREER: Fostering "Mathematical Practices" In Urban Classrooms: Focus On Representation And Justification
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2012
* Despina Stylianou, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* James S. Dietz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 823,772.00

The learning of mathematical practices, that is, the specific processes that
successful mathematics learners engage in when doing mathematics, such as the
use of justifications and various representations, is as important in achieving
high performance in mathematics as it is to know the theory of mathematics. Yet,
the role of these practices in school mathematics has been peripheral at best.
Many students' experience with mathematics is limited to the memorization and
practice of facts and procedures and little emphasis is placed on the
development of these practices. This is particularly true in diverse, urban
environments where students have been traditionally under-performing in
mathematics. However, recent reform efforts are calling for a shift of
mathematics instruction to foster the development of such practices in all
students. If these practices are to become a meaningful part of school
mathematics programs, we must advance our understanding of students' development
of these practices and the conditions that promote that development. While
research has provided us with valuable insights on several of these practices,
there has been little understanding of how these practices develop as a whole
and over time especially in challenging instructional settings. I am proposing a
study that will address this topic. This study will trace the development of
middle school students' competencies in the mathematical practices of
representation and justification and will identify conditions that influence
that development. I will begin first with a broad analysis of a large number of
urban students' conceptions of mathematical practices. This will be followed by
a focused and detailed analysis of the development of 6th to 8th grade students,
using a variety of instruments and classroom observations. The goal is to go
beyond documentation of the current conditions, and to trace and understand
changes in students' competencies over time. Furthermore, the study will analyze
classroom-teaching practices that influence these changes. To achieve this, the
students' teachers will participate in concurrent professional development
activities designed to enhance their understandings of middle school students'
development of mathematical reasoning and classroom practices that promote that
development, and will also be studied in parallel with their students.

Intellectual Merit.

The proposed work addresses calls for new research programs in emerging areas,
including those that attend to the development of mathematical practices. The
study will lead to conceptual frameworks that coordinate social and cognitive
perspectives on mathematics learning with much-needed work in the urban schools'
context and in the area of middle school students' development of mathematical
practices (and not only skills and facts) and how to engage in professional
development for teachers that supports this. The result will be deeper insight
into the forms of pedagogy and content that support student learning in urban
mathematics programs.

Broader Impacts.

I expect the proposed work to open new avenues in the learning and teaching of
middle school mathematics, in particular, in the teaching and learning of
mathematical practices, in ways, which resonate with overall progressive trends
in the mathematics education community. A better understanding of the processes
associated with students' developing conceptions of these practices can lead to
recommendations for curriculum development and instruction. This study will
suggest how instruction on representation and justification might be more
effectively incorporated in middle school mathematics and will provide some
insights on the nature of the cognitive and social obstacles that inhibit the
development of efficient mathematical reasoning in more advanced levels. The
proposed research setting is situated in a major urban area with a diverse
student population for whom traditional mathematics instruction has not proven
fruitful. Thus, understanding how to build mathematically successful students
and how to support teachers within this context can support learning across
multiple and diverse student populations. Findings will be broadly disseminated
to enhance the field's understanding and to assist teachers in their everyday
activities. Overall, the activities of the project will directly impact the
diverse urban community of New York and will mentor pre-service teachers and
graduate students who are members of underrepresented groups.



Finbarr C. Sloane Ph.D. Program Director REC: ROLE & IERI