* 0447598
* Conference:    International Conference on Intelligent Systems Applications to Power Systems (ISAP2005); November 6-10, 2004; Arlington, VA.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Dagmar Niebur, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2006
* USD 25,000.00

The next International Conference on Intelligent Systems Applications to Power
Systems, ISAP2005, will take place November 6 - 10, 2005 in Arlington, VA, which
is located in the Washington metropolitan area. It is the objective of this
proposal to request support for the travel expenses for students and for some of
the direct conference costs including CD production of the proceedings,
communication and supplies. Matching funds will be sought from power system
utilities and manufacturers. Special efforts will be made to recruit students
and speakers from minorities and underrepresented groups. Intellectual Merit
ISAP is the only international conference entirely dedicated to intelligent
system applications for power systems and thus provides an ideal forum for the
presentation of innovative research fostering close interaction between
researchers. This conference is expected to have a substantial impact on the
quality of the research and teaching in the major areas of discourse which is
due to its interdisciplinary nature as well as to the high quality of the
invited speakers and participants. Since the venue of the bi-annual conference
traditionally rotates between Europe, North-America, South-America and Asia,
ISAP2005 provides a unique and most likely the only opportunity for currently
enrolled US students to interact exclusively with international experts in the
area of intelligent systems for power systems. While intelligent systems slowly
enter the traditional power engineering curriculum, this conference will provide
major educational opportunities for US students to learn about the newest
techniques. Broader Impact NSF's potential contribution to the administrative
costs including printing, communications and supplies will allow the conference
organizers to keep the conference registration fee at a moderate level, thus
offsetting the relatively high travel and lodging expenses for our international
participants; i.e. high when compared to national living expenses in many Asian,
African or Eastern European countries. Traditionally the ISAP conference has
attracted a sizable participation of researcher from Eastern-European countries
as well as South-America and Asia where researchers with excellent technical
expertise face a lack of economic resources. The interaction of US as well as
international students with researchers from different cultural backgrounds
provides an enriching experience that reaches far beyond technical knowledge
acquisition. It also offers opportunities to present and involve students from
underrepresented minorities in exciting and societal relevant research and
education activities.

This conference further provides a unique opportunity for NSF to interact with
students, academia and power industry to promote and discuss NSF's vision of
technical challenges in complex systems, sensing, communication and control as
well as its economic, educational and sociological impact.

