* 0447395
* CAREER: Microbial Geochemistry of Natural Marine Gas Seeps - A Research and Education Plan
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2011
* David Valentine, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2011
* USD 651,473.00

ABSTRACT

Valentine / OCE-0447395

In this CAREER project, a researcher at the University of California at Santa
Barbara will conduct an integrated research and education program focusing on
the fate of methane seeping naturally into the marine environment, an issue of
environmental and economic relevance. The primary research goal is to determine
the impact of microbial methane oxidation on the flux of methane from the
sediments to the ocean/atmosphere in areas of active gas seepage. The research
will involve a combination of field and laboratory studies of three gas seep
environments located offshore the UCSB campus, at depths ranging from 10m to
300m. The primary research goal will be achieved by quantifying both the net gas
flux emanating from the sediment as well as the net rate of microbial methane
oxidation within the sediment, and comparing the relative importance of each
process across the three study sites. This proposal further seeks to integrate
the proposed research with educational activities at the graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 levels.

The educational goals of the proposed project are: (1) to train graduate (Ph.D.
& M.S.) students in the integrated study of microbiology and geochemistry; (2)
to educate undergraduate students in the marine sciences through year-long
research projects, and through incorporation of results into general education
courses; (3) to incorporate undergraduate students into ocean going research by
including them as active participants in proposed cruises through a formal field
studies course; and (4) to introduce K-12 students and teachers to the topic of
marine hydrocarbons through participation in UCSB's Floating Lab outreach
program. These educational goals of this project will be achieved by
incorporating graduate and undergraduate students into every stage of the
research project, by incorporating results into general education courses, and
through outreach activities that will bring approximately one thousand K-12
students to local seep fields annually. The massive gas seeps offshore UCSB
provide an ideal natural laboratory for a CAREER project. Seeps are readily
accessible from the campus, they engender curiosity in students, they have a
tangible environmental impact, and the underlying microbial processes are
important yet poorly understood.

Broader Impacts: This project promises to contribute fundamental knowledge to
the global biogeochemical cycle of methane, to provide interdisciplinary
training for graduate students in chemical and biological aspects of ocean
science, to provide educational opportunities for undergraduate students in the
area of marine science, and to educate K-12 students and teachers through
outreach activities. Furthermore, this research has the potential to reveal a
variety of novel microbes and microbial activities, has potential applications
in the field of bioremediation, and may lead to the discovery of new gas seep
environments offshore California.