* 0447987
* CAREER:     Physics With High pT Muons:    Top Quark Properties at Hadron Colliders
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2004,12/31/2010
* Emanuela Barberis, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Joseph Reidy
* 12/31/2010
* USD 800,000.00

This proposal seeks funding for a long-term research program in High Energy
Physics (HEP) at Northeastern University. The program focuses on the Dzero
experiment at Fermilab and on the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment at the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, which represents the new energy frontier in
particle physics and a top priority within the US HEP program. The proposal
requests support for the career development of Dr. Emanuela Barberis of the
Department of Physics at Northeastern University. She is a member of the
experimental High Energy Physics group at NU and her area of research is the
study of the structure and interactions among elementary particles at particle
accelerator facilities. She has been a member of the ZEUS collaboration at DESY,
from 1992 to 1997, a member of the Dzero collaboration at Fermilab since 1996,
and she has recently joined the CMS collaboration at CERN. Prof. Barberis has
worked on top quark physics in Run 1 of the Tevatron collider, on the
determination of the top quark mass and its dependency on the measurement of the
jet energy scale, and on the modeling of radiative corrections in top quark
production and decay. Since 2001, the Dzero detector has been recording data
from Run 2, which is expected to extend to the end of the decade, with a set of
detector upgrades entering in 2005 to improve the detector performance during
higher luminosity running. With increasing luminosity and the increased center
of mass of Run 2 (nearly 2 TeV), the goal is to perform detailed studies of the
properties of the top quark with a data sample twenty times larger than Run 1.
At the Tevatron, Prof. Barberis proposes methods to perform the most precise
measurements of two fundamental properties of the top quark, its mass and
charge. The ultimate aim of Prof. Barberis' research program is to study the
connection between the top quark and the origin of particle masses, using the
top quark as the laboratory where new physics is likely to appear first. Prof.
Barberis proposes to continue to study the interactions of the top quark and a
mass-generating Higgs field at the large center of mass energy of the LHC, 14
TeV, with the CMS detector. The CMS detector is scheduled to be commissioned in
2007. There, the plan is to determine the strength of the coupling between the
Higgs field and the Standard Model top quark, and to test how the Standard Model
can extend to explain the pattern of masses observed in nature in a more
fundamental way, via models which predict the existence of an additional,
heavier quark, and its interactions with the Higgs field. The signature for the
production and decay of top quark(s) is the detection of high pT decay products.
Among the possible final state decays, the cleanest ones contain high pT muons.
Prof. Barberis is strongly committed to extend the scope of her research program
to educate a broad range of students, e.g., undergraduate students through the
NU co-operative programs, SPS, and summer school initiatives, and high school
students through the Quarknet program.