* 0447679
* Advancing Science Excellence in North Dakota
* O/D,EPS
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Philip Boudjouk, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 04/30/2009
* USD 6,783,333.00

&lt;br/&gt;The "Advancing Science Excellence in North Dakota" project seeks to
improve the state's research infrastructure, human resource development and
technology transfer effectiveness. North Dakota's plan for research
infrastructure improvement targets support for two strategic research
initiatives: Spintronics Printing Integrated Network (SPIN) and Sustainable
Energy Research Infrastructure and Supporting Education (SUNRISE). The SPIN
initiative will design and fabricate new materials and processes to enable
spintronic device manufacture via printing technologies. Researchers will
investigate spin dependent tunneling (SDT) devices with nanometer dimensions
using novel precursors via a printing process. The SUNRISE initiative addresses
three components associated with sustainable energy: 1) sustainable coal
utilization through improved environmental performance; 2) agricultural-based
transportation fuels development; and 3) investigations into a novel approach to
hydrogen distribution and storage. The research infrastructure improvement
efforts capitalize on the state's existing research strengths and take advantage
of opportunities to integrate research and education as well as technology
transfer into the growing economy of the state. The University of North Dakota
(UND) and North Dakota State University (NDSU) serve as the foundation for this
effort with participation of Turtle Mountain Community College (TMCC). Seed
grant funding, travel awards and new faculty startup funding support the
research areas with programs to support increased collaborative and competitive
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Dakota will improve its human
resource development with programs designed to promote disciplinary and
education partnerships. Undergraduate students will participate in hands-on
research experiences in the laboratory throughout the year. A Graduate Student
Research Assistantship program will aid in the recruitment and retention of
graduate students. The NATURE program will enhance science and mathematics
education at Turtle Mountain Community College in an effort to increase the
graduation rate of Native American students in STEM disciplines. Technology
transfer will be facilitated by programs that increase the interaction of
university faculty, students and private sector partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;