* 0447192
* RUI: Genetic Differences in Excitotoxic Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2005,12/31/2008
* Jonathan Day, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Cedric L. Williams
* 12/31/2008
* USD 105,977.00

Excitotoxicity is a phenomenon of the central nervous system in which prolonged
electrical activity results in the death of nerve cells in specific parts of the
brain. While often associated with diseases like epilepsy, this process can be
induced in normal brains by applying naturally occurring neurotransmitters such
as glutamic acid (glutamate). Several related glutamate-like molecules are known
to be excitotoxic and they each interact with a different subset of glutamate
receptors on the surface of nerve cells. Animal studies have revealed that
excitotoxic susceptibility is an inherited trait in certain inbred laboratory
mice. Injection of kainic acid, a potent excitotoxic glutamate-like molecule,
induced seizures C57BL/6 (B6) and FVB/N (FVB) mice. However no nerve cells were
lost in the brains of the B6 mice while the FVB mice show extensive nerve cell
death. In preliminary experiments a hypothesis was tested: Is the mouse strain-
specific difference in excitotoxin cell death the result of an intrinsic
resistance in the B6 mouse nerve cells? Using glutamate to induce excitotoxicity
the resistance of cultured B6 nerve cells was compared with cultured FVB nerve
cells. The FVB neurons exhibited cell death and B6 neurons showed resistance to
excitotoxicity. These results demonstrated that strain specific excitotoxic
resistance in the B6 mice was a property of the nerve cells alone and not
dependent on the environment of the living adult mouse brain. These data also
showed that the strain difference in excitotoxic resistance seen in the live
animal is present very early in neonatal development. This proposal will examine
the differences between the B6 and FVB nerve cells in culture in order to
determine what could account this difference in resistance. Finding the
properties of the B6 nerve cells which confer resistance will enhance our
understanding of excitotoxicity, whose role in brain function and dysfunction
remains poorly understood.

Broader impact: CSU Chico is a comprehensive university with limited but growing
research infrastructure. The department of Biological Sciences has made a
commitment to undergraduate research by reducing teaching loads for active
faculty, upgrading the research environment, and hiring faculty with established
research backgrounds. This laboratory has been successful in producing Ph.D.
graduate students, peer reviewed publications, and funded grants. This project
will ensure continued and future student participation at meetings of
professional societies, such as the Society for Neuroscience. These kinds of
interactions are extremely valuable to students interested in pursuing research
careers. This is an explicit goal of this institution and there is an impressive
track record to support this effort. The one way to maintain this productivity
is through active collaboration with colleagues at major Ph.D. granting
universities; this project is a part of that effort. Other benefits include
opportunities for colleagues at larger institutions to recruit able graduate
students from this institution. These students will be some of society's future
scientists. Finally, CSU Chico serves a large rural area of northern California,
and funnels students from several regional community colleges to Bachelors and
Masters level degrees.