* 0447354
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education in Solar Physics, Space Weather, and Energetic Charged Particles
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Joe Giacalone, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 01/31/2011
* USD 1,009,302.00

The Sun occasionally becomes extremely active and produces the largest flux of
high-energy charged particles in our solar system. The physical characteristics
of these solar-energetic particles (SEP) vary considerably. The solar physics
community currently has a useful paradigm to help categorize these events;
however, we lack a detailed understanding of the important physical processes
involved in their acceleration and propagation to Earth. It is now clear that,
in order to arrive at a fundamental physics-based picture, we need to take a
cross-disciplinary approach that combines solar physics, particle transport
theory (acceleration and propagation), space-plasma physics, and space weather.
A deeper understanding of the physics of solar-energetic particles will enable a
better predictive capability for space weather and all that that entails. The PI
proposes to integrate basic research and education to help understand various
aspects of the connected Sun-Earth system as a whole. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI intends to develop a graduate-level solar physics course in the Department of
Planetary Sciences at the University of Arizona. The course will present an
introduction to the physics of the Sun, including a detailed description of
solar magnetic fields and extreme solar activity, some of which is responsible
for the acceleration of high-energy particles, and the relation between solar
activity and Earth's climate. Second, the PI will partner with the National
Solar Observatory to develop a series of summer schools for graduate students
and researchers that teach a cross-disciplinary approach to studying the Sun-
Earth connection. Third, a public outreach component to the project is targeted
to spark public interest in solar physics and space weather, and to provide new
subject material for science teachers and students at public schools. LPL's
Public Outreach Program and the University of Arizona's SAMEC (Science &amp;
Math Education Center) program will direct public outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan focuses on studying the
origin of energetic charged particles (up to a few tens of GeV) near Earth and
beyond, using analytic theory and numerical modeling (including data analysis
when needed). The long-term goals are to determine the mechanism(s) responsible
for SEP acceleration, to identify probable sources, understand how they
propagate in the fluctuating electric and magnetic fields of the space near
Earth (and Mars), to determine the causes of the observed variability in
particle fluxes, energy spectra, and composition, and to determine the structure
of solar, coronal, and heliospheric magnetic fields.