* 0447611
* CAREER: Knowledge for Teaching Mathematics: The Impact of Mathematics Courses on Prospective Elementary Teachers' Mathematical Knowledge
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2005,12/31/2012
* Raven McCrory, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 12/31/2012
* USD 679,830.00

The proposed program of research focuses on the mathematics prospective
elementary teachers have opportunities to learn during their undergraduate
education and what they actually learn as a result of their mathematics courses.
Although research has identified the problem of teacher knowledge as a
significant contributing factor in the generally inadequate quality of K-6
mathematics education, more is known about what teachers do not know than about
what they know or have had opportunities to learn. This study will look across
institutions and states to examine what prospective teachers are being taught
and what they are actually learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
investigate both opportunities to learn and learning from undergraduate
mathematics courses through a set of multi-method, multilevel case studies. The
work will include an analysis of textbooks written for undergraduate mathematics
courses for prospective elementary teachers; an examination of textbook topical
coverage and how that correlates with states' mathematics student learning
standards; surveys of mathematics departments and instructors of those courses
in selected states; case studies of selected courses at institutions within the
states; and pre- and post-assessments of student (preservice teacher) learning
in those courses. The focal mathematical domains will be multiplication,
fractions, and reasoning and proof. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
contribute to understanding whether prospective elementary teachers are exposed
to content that they need for successful teaching, and whether they are learning
that content. The findings will include whether, and to what extent, instructors
are teaching content that contributes to mathematical knowledge for teaching.
This is new research in areas about which little is known, with important
implications for teacher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposer's education plan includes teaching undergraduate mathematics courses
for elementary teachers at Michigan State University using two approaches
currently supported by the Mathematics Department and using that teaching as a
site for studying opportunity to learn and teacher knowledge. She will revise a
course to introduce PhD students to theoretical and practical issues in
assessing teacher knowledge and opportunities to learn. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;