* 0447694
* CAREER:  A Faunistic and Phylogeographic Survey of Beetle Diversity in the California Floristic Province Hotspot
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Michael Caterino, Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 02/28/2011
* USD 511,047.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Michael Caterino&lt;br/&gt;DEB
0447694&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREERS project, based at the Santa
Barbara Museum of Natural History,&lt;br/&gt;will build a foundation for
synthetic study of the rich beetle fauna of the&lt;br/&gt;California Floristic
Province. It will establish the PI as one of a very&lt;br/&gt;small number of
arthropod biodiversity specialists of this increasingly&lt;br/&gt;imperiled
region. Focusing on the southern Californian Transverse Ranges,&lt;br/&gt;this
project integrates field-based inventory work, DNA-based studies
of&lt;br/&gt;geographic variation, and a cutting edge bioinformatics platform to
develop&lt;br/&gt;a uniquely deep understanding of the area's biodiversity. The
California&lt;br/&gt;Floristic Province is an internationally recognized
biodiversity hotspot,&lt;br/&gt;yet its most diverse inhabitants, beetles and
other arthropods, remain very&lt;br/&gt;poorly known. This project will discover
hundreds of undescribed beetle&lt;br/&gt;species, will reveal the extent of
genetic diversity across the region, and&lt;br/&gt;will document the
distributions of thousands of species in unprecedented&lt;br/&gt;detail. The
data developed through this study will have far-reaching&lt;br/&gt;application.
The region has long been recognized as an important natural&lt;br/&gt;laboratory
for studying evolution, providing important insights into the&lt;br/&gt;process
of speciation. But these studies have been taxonomically
limited.&lt;br/&gt;Expanding on this body of work through studies of regional
beetles will&lt;br/&gt;allow real generalizations to be made about these
processes. Additionally,&lt;br/&gt;despite their ecological significance,
invertebrates have received little&lt;br/&gt;consideration in land use
management in the region, due principally to a&lt;br/&gt;lack of applicable and
accessible data. This project will produce this data&lt;br/&gt;and an online
system for accessing it.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Promoting knowledge and
appreciation of insect biodiversity in the region is&lt;br/&gt;one of the
project's primary goals. Students at high school, undergraduate,&lt;br/&gt;and
postdoctoral levels will be directly involved in the research. They
will&lt;br/&gt;gain experience in field biology, modern molecular systematics
techniques,&lt;br/&gt;and bioinformatics methodology. All project personnel will
share findings&lt;br/&gt;through public presentations at the Museum, through
professional&lt;br/&gt;presentations at international conferences, and through
an attractive,&lt;br/&gt;user-friendly project web site. The web site will
provide the primary portal&lt;br/&gt;for direct access to project data. The
underlying database will house&lt;br/&gt;thousands of georeferenced specimen
records, enabling GIS-based mapping and&lt;br/&gt;distributional analyses. These
data will also be accessible to automated&lt;br/&gt;queries from remote servers
assembling a global biodiversity data&lt;br/&gt;architecture. For general users
the web site will provide access to natural&lt;br/&gt;history information and
photographs of many species they may find in the&lt;br/&gt;area. Special effort
will be also made to make this information readily&lt;br/&gt;useful by primary
school students and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;