* 0447452
* CAREER:  A Fundamental Study on Hard Turning - Prediction and Synthesis of Surface Integrity and Component Life
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Yuebin Guo, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2011
* USD 430,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award supports
fundamental research on hard turning. The research objective of this CAREER
award is to predict and synthesize surface integrity and component life by hard
turning. The specific research approaches are: (a) create and verify meso/micro-
scale finite element analysis models of hard turning to predict surface
integrity through accurate modeling of dynamic mechanical behavior with loading
history effects, materials damage, and microstructure effects of work materials
and (b) identify the individual and compound effects of residual stress profile
and white layer on fatigue life in rolling contact using novel experimental and
simulation approaches. The education objective is to integrate the research
results into education activities across academic disciplines and career paths
in manufacturing engineering. The specific approach includes curriculum
development and collaborative learning; a hard turning academy; outreach to
local historically black colleges and universities, high schoolers, and
professional societies; collaborations with industrial practitioners, leading
academic groups, and national labs; and various assessment tools and broad
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this CAREER plan will enable
machining industry to make high quality bearings, gears, cams, shafts, pinions,
dies, molds, tools, and other parts at high efficiency, flexibility and low
cost, while lessening the environmental impact. This will result in cheaper and
superior fatigue performance of machined components used in rolling contact,
thereby benefiting the economy and society. The established hard turning
paradigm can be an example for other manufacturing processes. The research
accomplishments will significantly advance research and manufacturing
capabilities of the hard turning consortium at The University of Alabama to
stimulate economic growth in Alabama through high-impact research and creating
well-trained manufacturing workforce. The educational initiatives will also
facilitate students' learning processes and continuing education; broaden
participation of underrepresented students in research; and transfer new
research findings to a broad audience.