* 0447899
* CAREER: Kinetic, Dynamic, and Structure-Function Relationship Studies of a Y-family Polymerase
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2012
* Zucai Suo, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 03/31/2012
* USD 797,900.00

Numerous DNA-damaging agents continually attack cellular DNA and generate a
variety of lesions. Lesions that are not repaired block replicative DNA
polymerases, but can be bypassed by members of the novel Y-family DNA
polymerases. The Y-family polymerases lack intrinsic proof-reading activity and
often catalyze DNA synthesis with a high error rate. Such error-prone
replication of lesions by Y-family polymerases contributes to the generation of
spontaneous mutations; in human this mutational process is known to affect
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. For this project, an archaeal enzyme Dpo4,
from Sulfolobus sulfataricus is chosen as a model Y-family polymerase. The goal
is to understand how Dpo4 copies undamaged and damaged DNA. The results are
broadly applicable since all organisms from bacteria to humans contain Y-family
polymerases. Extremely fast laser based dynamic techniques (as fast as
femtoseconds) will be used to study the interactions between Dpo4, DNA, and an
incoming nucleotide (DNA "building block"). The crystal structure of a complex
of Dpo4, cisplatin-damaged DNA, and a nucleotide will be determined. Cisplatin
is a frequently used anti-cancer drug and the structure of the DNA adduct that
forms is well established. The crystal structure will reveal how Dpo4 interacts
with and replicates damaged DNA. The research project will not only provide a
comprehensive understanding of DNA lesion bypass by a Y-family polymerase, but
will also offer undergraduate and graduate students at the Ohio State University
opportunities to receive important scientific training in the field of advanced
enzyme kinetics and dynamics.