* 0447676
* CAREER: Inquiry Teaching and Learning: Connecting Research and Practice
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2012
* Bobby Jeanpierre, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 04/30/2012
* USD 711,855.00

Bobby Jeanpierre, an assistant professor in the College of Education, Department
of Teaching and Learning Principles teaches undergraduate science methods, and
graduate level courses integrating mathematics and science education. The PI.s
teaching and researching interests are intricately link to the overall goal of
this CAREER AWARD, which is to significantly impact science teaching in diverse
(50% or more students on free and reduce lunch) school settings. The PI embeds
inquiry practices in all of the courses she teaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI's current research projects are embedded in inquiry teaching and learning.
The research foci are: 1) Lockheed Martin Mathematics and Science Program (LMA)
2) .Transition to Mathematics and Science Teaching (T-MAST), 3) stream video
production, and 4) virtual field trip evaluation project. The PI conducts
research on the classroom experiences and practices of in service (LMA) teachers
and novice alternatively certified (T-MAST) teachers. The stream video project
is the development and research into .best practices. in science teaching for
students with learning disabilities. The PI works along side an Exceptional
Education Specialist to develop the content for the streaming videos. The PI
provides formative and summative evaluations for the development of a virtual
field trip project. Taken collectively, these varied research projects are all
interwoven with one common theme, the use of science reform and inquiry
practices in teaching and learning in diverse school
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this CAREER proposal, the PI seeks to
extend the teaching and researching components to include a Historically Black
College University. Hence, the PI intends to combine past international
collaboration and national research experiences and current research interests
to advance the understanding of inquiry in diverse settings. The PI brings these
research interests and experiences together to define a focus for her central
career goal, which is to significantly contribute to the effectiveness of
science teaching and learning in diverse school
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: .Inquiry Teaching and
Learning: Connecting Research and Practice. Seeks to contribute to our knowledge
and understanding of inquiry and science reform practices implemented in K-8
diverse schools. To accomplish this goal several questions will be
answered:&lt;br/&gt;1) What are teachers. beliefs about inquiry-based
instruction in diverse school settings? 2) How do teachers implement inquiry-
based instruction? And 3) Do teachers use a variety of reform science-based
classroom instructional practices in diverse settings? Embedded in these
research questions is a closer look at teachers. goals, purposes, practices and
why they choose to implement inquiry in diverse school
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project examines inquiry and
reform science practices as implemented in diverse settings. Hence, an important
focus is the examination of inquiry in diverse schools and collaboration across
and between schools and universities. Therefore, a strong collaboration with a
.Historically Black College University will be established. The expected
products of this proposal include: 1) the development of video of teachers.
inquiry classroom instructional practices in diverse schools, which will have a
Web-based streaming component, 2) a cadre of doctoral students of diverse
cultures and interests who gain the knowledge and skills to conduct research in
diverse contexts, and 3) publications in international, national, and state
journals. The learning that results from this project has the potential to
increase our understanding of effective inquiry practices as implemented in a
variety of diverse school settings.&lt;br/&gt;