* 0447920
* SGER: Evaluation of Midlatitude Storm Characteristics and Variability in Intergovermental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Coupled Models
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2006
* George Tselioudis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/2006
* USD 24,859.00

The frequency and intensity of baroclinic storm systems determines to a large
extent the energy and water cycles in the Northern and Southern midlatitudes. In
light of potential systematic changes in midlatitude storm characteristics with
climate change, it is crucial to test the ability of climate models to simulate
correctly the characteristics and variability of midlatitude storm tracks. In
this project, storm tracking techniques that have been applied to the National
Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) reanalysis data will be applied to
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) - Fourth Assessment Report
(AR4) coupled model output to determine the spatial and temporal characteristics
of midlatitude storm tracks in the 1960-2000 time period.

This study will evaluate the skill of coupled climate model historical runs to
simulate the spatial characteristics of midlatitude storm tracks, the intensity
distributions of midlatitude storms, and the temporal variability of storm
tracks at time scales that range from the seasonal to the decadal. Preliminary
analyses of the observed storm variability indicate potential trends in both
storm frequency and intensity that are particularly evident in the Southern
Hemisphere. The ability of climate model simulations to reproduce such trends
will be evaluated along with the ability to reproduce Arctic Oscillation and El
Nino related changes in storm track frequency and intensity. The results of the
model evaluation will provide a first look at the effects of model resolution on
storm track simulation, will test the ability of the models to simulate
potential changes in extreme storm events with climate warming, and will help to
attribute errors in model radiation and precipitation fields to model dynamical
or microphysical schemes. The study will also provide leads to modelers that
will help evaluate the use of damping mechanisms in model physics
parameterizations. Broader Impacts: To the extent that this study pinpoints and
helps to improve deficiencies in the modeled representation of mid-latitude
storm tracts in a changing climate environment, it will have a positive impact
on the quality of future climate and water resources information provided to
environmental managers and policy-makers.

This is a grant under the U.S. Climate Change Science Program's, Climate
Variability and Predictability Program (CLIVAR).