* 0447751
* CAREER:     From New Reactivity to Complex and Diverse Molecular Architecture
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2010
* Sergey Kozmin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This research project focuses on the development of new synthetic methodology
exploiting the reactivity of siloxyalkynes in a range of new catalytic
reactions. Specific reactions to be studied include (i) cycloisomerizations;
(ii) diyne carbocyclizations; (iii) condensations with carbonyl, nitroso and aza
compounds; (iv) tandem, sigmatropic and electrocyclic processes; and (v) direct
intermolecular catalytic functionalization of arenes and alkenes. In activities
designed to inspire undergraduates to pursue careers in chemistry, and to raise
awareness among the general public of the critical role of basic research, a
Chemistry/Biochemistry Discussion Group will be organized, an Honors Organic
Chemistry sequence will be refined, and a new exhibit at the Museum of Science
and Industry will be developed, highlighting the value of basic research in the
fight against cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of this CAREER award
from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Sergey A.
Kozmin, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Chicago, is
developing new methods for the synthesis of complex organic molecules. These
studies offer significant impacts in diverse areas, including catalysis,
medicinal chemistry, and chemical biology. Professor Kozmin's activities are
also expected to have broad impacts in the scientific education of the general
public. His new exhibit planned for Chicago's Museum of Science and Industry,
"Chemistry, Biology and Medicine in the Fight Against Cancer," is expected to
attract a highly diverse group of millions of viewers in the years to come. The
exhibit will provide an ideal platform for demonstrating the impact of basic
research on improving our quality of life and raising the awareness and
popularity of chemical research within the general public.