* 0447190
* Landsliding and the Evolution of Mountainous Landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2008
* Joshua Roering, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2008
* USD 154,010.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Landsliding is the dominant erosional mechanism in most
mountainous landscapes. We have a poor understanding of how factors such as
climatic and tectonic forcing, channel network characteristics and bedrock
properties govern the spatial and temporal pattern of hillslope adjustment;
upland regions are predominantly erosional in nature and thus do not retain a
direct 'record' of process dynamics. Furthermore, no quantitative models exist
to predict the dynamics of large landslides over geomorphic timescales. As a
result, fundamental questions regarding the role of landslides in landscape
evolution remain: &lt;br/&gt;o How long do large landslides persist in the
landscape? What controls their long-term activity? &lt;br/&gt;o How do large
landslides affect topographic development and sediment production? &lt;br/&gt;o
How does landslide-driven sediment production affect channel morphology and
valley incision? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to
quantify the effects of landsliding on sediment production and hillslope
morphology by quantifying spatial and temporal patterns of slope instability in
a landslide-dominated catchment. The upper Redwood Creek drainage basin (~200
km2), California, is an ideal laboratory for this endeavor because: over 80% of
the catchment is comprised of landslide-prone terrain, the region experiences
high rates of rock uplift, and extensive studies have documented geomorphic
process rates and deformation associated with slow, intermittent earthflows and
slumps using photogrammetric and field-based methods. Although several slope
failures in Redwood Creek exhibit significant historical activity, ubiquitous
dormant landslides (i.e., hummocky hillslopes) with varying degrees of
degradation are the legacy of prior phases of widespread slope instability.
&lt;br/&gt;Using high-resolution topographic data generated via airborne laser
swath mapping (ALSM), we propose to document how tectonic and climatic forcing
affect the long-term pattern of slope instability in Redwood Creek by
quantifying the detailed morphology of landslide-prone hillslopes. The style and
relative age of landsliding can be constrained via statistical analyses of
terrain roughness; meter-scale scarps, debris levees, and folds are fresh and
well defined in recent failures and become increasingly subdued and smooth on
older landslides. We will calibrate quantitative measures of terrain roughness
with estimates for the timing of slide activity (established via radiometric
dating of undrained depressions) to document the chronology and style of slope
deformation across the study area. When coupled with studies of valley dynamics,
paleoclimate, and paleoseismicity, our analysis will permit us to test
hypotheses relating the history and pattern of slope instability with various
external perturbations. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research has significant implications for earth scientists seeking to understand
mountain-scale denudation, land-use impacts, and the effect of climate change on
surficial processes. Because landslide-derived sediment production profoundly
affects grain size and channel properties, our catchment-wide analysis of slope
instability will be useful for establishing linkages between hillslope processes
and aquatic habitat. In Redwood Creek, zones of focused historical erosion
related to land-use practices (such as gullys, earthflows, and shallow
landslides) are systematically superimposed on hillslopes shaped by a complex
mosaic of large landslides. Our analyses will enable land managers to better
predict and remediate impacts of timber harvesting and climate change. The ALSM
dataset will also serve as a baseline for characterizing future hillslope and
channel system dynamics. On a broader scale, the results will serve to excite
simulations of sediment routing, dispersal, and deposition across continental
margins, establishing direct linkages between sediment production and marine
deposits. The research will be strengthened through direct collaboration with
federal and state land management agencies.