* 0447586
* CAREER: Targeted Environmental Genomics: Stable Isotope Probing of Non-cultivated Diazotrophs in Soil
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2012
* Daniel Buckley, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2012
* USD 686,488.00

Nitrogen (N) fixation is an ancient microbial process which evolved early in the
history of our planet and is of central importance to the biosphere. All living
things require fixed N for biosynthesis and N-fixing microbes in soils provide
the dominant natural source of N in many terrestrial ecosystems. Despite their
ancient and enduring ecological importance remarkably littleis known about the
ecology and evolution of these microorganisms and of soil microbes in general.
This research effort will implement a novel approach that combines stable
isotope probing in concert with environmental genomics to target the genomes of
non-cultivated diazotrophs. This approach will allow access to genomic DNA from
these non-cultivated microbes, providing a remarkable opportunity to advance our
understanding of the environmental and genomic mechanisms that regulate the
diversity and activity of a microbial process of central importance to the
global N-cycle. The genome sequences obtained will help shed light on the
evolution of N-fixation and on genome evolution in general by revealing the
complex structure of nitrogenase supraoperons in previously uncharacterized
microorganisms. In addition, by using this microbial community as a model, this
research will reveal basic principles pertaining to the functional significance
of microbial diversity and the mechanisms that regulate microbial process in
soils. Thus, this project will have both specific and far reaching effects that
will improve understanding of microbial processes in the soil, and the ability
to effectively manage terrestrial ecosystems. As part of this project an
educational program will be developed that is composed of three components
designed to increase science literacy, to improve awareness of microbiology, and
to train the next generation of environmental genomics researchers. The first
component is a summer workshop "The Microbial Earth" that will provide high
school science teachers with modules allowing them to implement open ended
laboratory exercises in their curricula and will provide equipment and
assistance to help them achieve their teaching goals. The second component is a
web module called "Bioprospecting on the Frontiers of Microbiology" for the
Cornell CyberTower site. This multimedia module will highlight the role of
environmental genomics in discovering novel modes of life and valuable new
enzymes. The last component is an advanced undergraduate course in environmental
genomics to test the idea of using undergraduates in genomics cooperatives to
achieve the dual goals of providing students with primary research experience
while contributing to the analysis and annotation of raw genome data.