* 0447211
* The Rectification and Digitization of the Alcala and Brown Philippine Collection of Amphibians and Reptiles, California Academy of Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Alan Leviton, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 03/31/2009
* USD 214,386.00

A grant has been awarded to the California Academy of Sciences (CAS) under the
direction of Dr. Alan E. Leviton for partial support of a project to correct and
digitize locality records for the largest collection of amphibian and reptile
specimens ever assembled from the Philippines, this largely through the efforts
of Drs. Angel C. Alcala and the late Walter C. Brown. Extensive transcription
errors were introduced when the data were transcribed from original field notes
to the handwritten catalog ledgers. The data, containing errors from these
ledgers, were later entered into the Academy's Department of Herpetology's
computerized database. Consequently, these erroneous data have been referenced
by scientists, students, and land managers. The purpose of this current NSF-
supported project is to review and correct the current database entries to
reflect accurately the data contained in the original field notes. This will be
done by detailed review and re-entry of the data as they appear in the those
notes. The Alcala and Brown specimen-associated data will then be georeferenced
(adding latitude and longitude to the original locality) so that they can then
be used by computerized geographic information systems (GIS). In addition, the
original field notes will be scanned, digitized, and indexed to archive the
deteriorating notes, which were most often written on high-acid-content paper,
and allow broad Internet access to this rich resource. Other products will
include a checklist to the amphibians and reptiles of the Philippines, a
distributional checklist of known species from each island, and an annotated
catalog of the many new species that are based on the Alcala and Brown
collections. The results of the project will allow these important historic
records of amphibian and reptile species to be used in studies of biogeography,
ecology, biodiversity, conservation planning and habitat assessments, and aid in
studies to determine the origin and dispersal of species within the Philippine
Archipelago. Researchers, government agencies, and land managers can use the
accurate locality and microhabitat data with digital maps to pin-point where
each specimen in the Alcala and Brown collection was collected. The digital
field notes will also allow access to the original data, which contain more
ecological information than incorporated in the computerized catalog. Internet
access to the corrected database will allow other institutions, which obtained
specimens from Alcala and Brown, to correct and update their records. The
Philippine Islands are considered a "biodiversity hotspot" and numerous species
are threatened because of habitat alteration. By posting the corrected and
georeferenced data and digitized field notes on the Internet these data can be
utilized by government and non-government agencies working on conservation
efforts. Data from the Alcala and Brown collection will also be used in new
public exhibits at CAS to highlight the biodiversity of the Philippines and
other areas of southeastern Asia.

