* 0447479
* Building Kentucky's New Economy with EPSCoR
* O/D,EPS
* 06/01/2005,12/31/2008
* John W.D. Connolly, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sian Mooney
* 12/31/2008
* USD 9,250,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal submitted by the University of
Kentucky Research Foundation aims at increasing the Commonwealth of Kentucky's
research and development (R&amp;D) competitiveness. This will be accomplished by
augmenting the research infrastructure and expertise statewide and concentrating
on those areas in which the State's New Economy strategic plan has focused. The
KY EPSCoR proposes to increase the State's R&amp;D competitiveness by
implementing two key mechanisms: (1) an investment in infrastructure
improvement; and (2) an investment in education, outreach, and diversity. The
first will be addressed by developing three of the five research areas at the
top of the State's New Economy priority list: (a) nanotechnology (with an
emphasis on sensors), (b) biotechnology (specializing in metabolomics), and (c)
information technology (specifically in the virtual environments area). This
effort will be concentrated at three universities: the University of Kentucky
(UK), the University of Louisville (UL), and Kentucky State University (KSU).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the nanotechnology initiative is to
create a nationally competitive research and education center through strategic
improvements in the nanotechnology research facilities and resources throughout
the State. The purpose of the metabolomics initiative is to integrate this
emerging field with the existing infrastructure of functional genomics and
proteomics through the establishment of a state-of-the-art center at UL.
Finally, the virtual environments initiative will reinforce a significant but
embryonic effort by UK and the Kentucky Office of the New Economy to enable
internationally recognized, leading-edge research, education, and industrial
outreach in visualization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second investment
constitutes a contribution to the broader impacts of the proposed infrastructure
improvement initiatives, including a comprehensive plan to increase the level of
competence and public awareness in environmental issues. A new institute at
Eastern Kentucky University will coordinate efforts in the eastern part of the
State. A continuation of the Kentucky Environmental Research and Educational
Consortium will coordinate the western part through the Tracy Farmer Center for
the Environment, recently established with private funds on the UK campus.
Furthermore, Kentucky will pursue an aggressive plan to increase diversity in
the scientific expertise across the State through the Research Enhancement Grant
Program, and the Summer Research Program, both of which focus on bringing
undergraduate women and minorities into the scientific enterprise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;