* 0447147
* Acquisition of Additional Radio-Analytical Capabilities, TAMUG's  Laboratory for Oceanographic &amp; Environmental Research, Coastal Zone Laboratory &amp; Coastal Geology Laborator
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2006
* Peter Santschi, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2006
* USD 20,388.00

With funding from this small grant, researchers at the Texas A &amp; M
University at Galveston will modernize the data acquisition and analysis
capability of their environmental radioisotope laboratory. Areas of ongoing
research that will greatly benefit from the acquisition of radiochemical
equipment for funded radiochemistry include the following: (1) studies of
actinide metal mobility in subsurface and surface water environments; (2)
investigations of sediment transport (erosion, resuspension, deposition) and
sediment geochronology in terrestrial and coastal marine environments; and (3)
research on nano-particle and biomolecule-biota interactions in terrestrial and
coastal marine environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts,
this grant should significantly augment the grantee's radio-analytical
capabilities. It will allow facilitate the continuation and improvement of their
research efforts with state and federal funding agencies, their role as an
environmental analytical laboratory of regional significance, their
collaborative research relationships with regional, national and international
scientists and institutions, their interface with local communities and
stakeholder entities, and their ability to continue to function as a resource
for the education and training of undergraduate and graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers, and visiting scientists. &lt;br/&gt;