* 0447214
* CAREER: Discriminative Syntactic Language Modeling: Automatic Feature Selection and Efficient Annotation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2011
* Brian Roark, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 03/31/2011
* USD 527,550.00

The focus of this proposal is on the effective use of parser-derived and tagger-
derived features within discriminative approaches to language modeling for
automatic speech recognition. Discriminative&lt;br/&gt;language modeling
approaches provide a tremendous amount of flexibility in defining features, but
the size of the potential parser-derived feature space requires efficient
feature annotation and selection algorithms. The project has four specific aims.
The first aim is to develop a set of efficient, general, and scalable syntactic
feature selection algorithms for use with various kinds of annotation and
several parameter estimation techniques. The second aim is to develop general
tree and grammar transformation algorithms designed to preserve selected feature
annotations yet lead to faster parsing or even tagging approximations to
parsing. The third aim is to evaluate a broad range of feature selection and
grammar transformation approaches on a large vocabulary continuous speech
recognition (LVCSR) task, namely Switchboard. The final aim is to design and
package the algorithms to straightforwardly support future research into other
applications, such as machine translation (MT); and into other languages, such
as Chinese and Arabic. The algorithms developed as a part of this project are
expected to contribute to improvements in LVCSR accuracy and applications that
rely upon this technology. The algorithms are being packaged into a publicly
available software library, enabling researchers working in many application
areas including LVCSR and MT and various languages to investigate best practices
in syntactic language modeling for their specific task, without having to hand-
select and evaluate feature sets.