* 0447703
* CAREER:    People, Paper and Computers
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2012
* Francois Guimbretiere, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2012
* USD 414,000.00

Despite advances in the design of smaller and more powerful tablet-like
computers, the often-touted "paperless office" remains elusive. On the contrary,
consumption of paper is on the rise and, with only few exceptions, office work
still relies heavily on this medium. At the root of this apparent paradox is the
wide gap between paper affordances, (e.g., ease of navigation and annotation,
and high information density display), and digital document affordances, (e.g.,
ease of distribution, archiving, and search). In this research the PI will
investigate how to bridge this gap, by focusing on combining the affordances of
paper on the one hand and digital document on the other, with respect to
navigation, annotation, displaying large quantities of information, and
information processing. To do so, the PI will adopt a 3-pronged
approach:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paper track. Paper is an inexpensive static
medium well adapted for navigating and annotating large quantities of
information, but it lacks information processing capability. The PI's Paper
Augmented Digital Document system will study how new technology such as the
Anoto digital pen system can bring digital affordances to paper. This track will
focus on cohabitation between the digital and the paper world, using paper as
transient support for digital documents when paper affordances are
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tablet computer track. The PI's Next Generation
Tablet PC project will provide paper-like document navigation techniques on
tablet computers using tangible and haptic interfaces. It will also address the
inherent lack of screen real estate on tablet computers, by exploring how small
clusters of tablet computers that can be created on the fly may serve as portals
to different documents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactive surfaces track.
Interactive surfaces provide large display areas and can tap into large
computational resources such as computational clusters. Unfortunately, they
typically lack efficient document navigation tools. Using the Maryland
Interactive Table as a testbed for his experiments, the PI will explore how new
tracking technology can deliver better document navigation on horizontal
interactive surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For each track, the PI's goal is to
build a prototype advanced enough to serve one common task: supporting a small
group of people in creating and improving a document, such as the proposal on
which this award is based! Integrating data from the different tracks will
provide a unique opportunity to analyze the differences and similarities among
the approaches. The PI believes that such side-by-side comparisons are the key
to a sound, scientific exploration of the design parameters relevant for
providing efficient navigation, access to large quantities of information, and
access to computational resources. In particular, he expects this research to
provide answers to questions such as the following: What are the relative
advantages and disadvantages of paper-based vs. digital interactions? What are
the patterns of paper use in real-life settings, and how do they compare with
findings from ethnographic studies? What are the best ways to reproduce paper
navigation affordances on portable devices and interactive surfaces? How does
the introduction of digital equivalents of paper influence information foraging
pattern as well as social patterns (e.g., in small
groups)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will impact how
people perform numerous common tasks such as proofreading documents, making
notes on large format documents such as blueprints, navigating through digital
documents, and conducting meetings using interactive surfaces. The techniques
developed in this project will also impact the field of human computer
interaction in general, by providing valuable insights into how to design
efficient tangible interfaces and better two-handed interfaces for interactive
surfaces. Graduate students will be involved in all aspects of this work, and
will be encouraged to explore interdisciplinary projects combining hardware and
software design, interaction design, and methodical comparison between different
design