* 0447237
* Technician Support: Laser Ablation ICP-MS Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Robert Bodnar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

EAR-0447237&lt;br/&gt;Bodnar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a
full-time technician to maintain and operate equipment in the soon to be
established laser ablation ICP-MS laboratory in the Department of Geosciences at
Virginia Tech. Funding to establish the LA-ICP-MS laboratory was recently
awarded to the PI by the NSF Major Research Instrumentation Program. The
instrumentation and operational protocol for the laboratory are designed
specifically for analysis of fluid and melt inclusions. A laser ablation ICP-MS
laboratory for analysis of fluid and melt inclusions was identified as a
highpriority research need during an NSF-sponsored workshop entitled Research
Opportunities in the Geology and Geochemistry of Mineral Deposit Systems that
was held in Denver, Colorado, in October, 2002. Establishment of a laser
ablation ICP-MS laboratory for fluid and melt inclusion analysis has broad
support across the geosciences in the U.S., as documented by letters of support
from 34 leading researchers from academic and government labs. The system to be
installed at Virginia Tech will include a 193 nm ArF excimer laser combined with
an ICP-MS. The laser system that best meets the requirements for fluid inclusion
analysis is the GeoLas + manufactured by Lambda Physik. This will be coupled to
an Agilent Technologies 7500cs ICP-MS. This instrument will be used to determine
the major, minor and trace elements in both synthetic and natural fluid and melt
inclusions, and will be available to all researchers requiring such data from
fluid and melt inclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Geosciences at
Virginia Tech maintains a strong commitment to outreach, education and
participation of under-represented groups. While not specifically related to
this proposal, the laser ablation ICP-MS laboratory will in the future be used
in summer programs designed for high school science teachers. This program has
operated successfully on the Virginia Tech campus for several years, and will be
expanded in future years to include access to a wider range of facilities within
the Department of Geosciences. Having a full-time technician dedicated to the
laser ablation ICP-MS laboratory will also facilitate access to the lab by
graduate students, post doctoral researchers and faculty from other institutions
and will contribute in a general way to training of the future
professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;