* 0447113
* Development of an ultrasonic acoustic interferometer for silicate liquids in an internally heated pressure vessel
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2011
* Rebecca Lange, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 281,284.00

EAR-0447113&lt;br/&gt;Lange&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
the development of a high-pressure acoustic interferometer that can be used to
measure the sound speed and density (and thus compressibility) of silicate
liquids in an internally heated pressure vessel (IHPV). We plan to develop two
different techniques at elevated pressure: (1) the frequency sweep method to
measure liquid sound speed, and (2) the reflection coefficient method to measure
liquid density. We will use an existing IHPV that is operable to 0.3 GPa and
1200 degrees celsius. Funds from this grant will be used for various equipment
and machine shop costs and to partially support a full-time technician.
Measurement of the density and compressibility of silicate liquids at high
pressure is a major experimental imperative in the earth sciences, especially
when applied to volatile-bearing melts. These data are needed for accurate
thermodynamic calculations of crystal-melt and fluid-melt equilibrium at depth,
which in turn are required for quantitative models of partial melting, melt
transport, crystallization and degassing, and the mechanics of magma eruption.
The graduate students involved in this project will obtain a strong background
in thermodynamics, acoustics and signal processing, as well as petrology and
geochemistry. It is anticipated that the techniques that we develop will become
widely used throughout the ultrasonics and earth sciences community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;