* 0447583
* CAREER: Molecular Characterization of the Vernalization-Responsive Block to Flowering in Winter-Annual Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Scott Michaels, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 02/28/2010
* USD 812,851.00

To maximize reproductive success, plants have evolved mechanisms to regulate
flowering time in response to both endogenous and environmental cues. In
temperate climates, the prolonged cold temperature of winter provides a seasonal
landmark for biennial and winter-annual plants. These species (which include
many crop plants) contain a block to flowering such that flowering is prevented
prior to winter and promoted in the spring. The promotion of flowering by
prolonged cold treatment (as winter) is known as vernalization. Significant
headway has been made in understanding the process of vernalization in the model
plant Arabidopsis thaliana. In Arabidopsis, vernalization is caused by the
interaction of two genes, FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC), which acts to block
flowering, and FRIGIDA (FRI), which is required for high levels of FLC
expression. Cold causes an epigenetic repression of FLC gene expression, likely
at the level of chromatin modification via histone acetylation. To dissect the
regulatory interactions between FLC and FRI, an exhaustive mutant screen has
been conducted. This screen led to the isolation of genes that are required for
the upregulation of FLC by FRI (termed FS genes). The purpose of this proposal
is to characterize the role of the FS genes in flowering-time regulation, using
genetic, molecular genetic, and biochemical approaches. These studies will
primarily involve: 1) double mutant analyses to characterize the genetic
relationships among the various FS genes; 2) yeast two-hydrid screens to
identify interactors among the various FS proteins; and 3) microarray analyses
to isolate downstream targets of the FS gene products. The role of FS in other
early-flowing accessions of Arabidopsis will also be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Because changes in gene
expression through chromatin modification have been documented in a broad range
of eukaryotes, including yeast, Drosophila, C. elegans, and humans, there is a
high likelihood that this research will provide new knowledge that will be of
broad scientific interest. This work also has potential agricultural
applications, inasmuch as most crop species are biennials and the ability to
manipulate their flowering time might provide avenues for crop improvement. In
terms of human resources, the research will provide a fertile training ground
for undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Plant-
development education modules will be also developed for both undergraduate
genetics students and the public at large. &lt;br/&gt;