* 0447381
* Mutiple proxy approach to Terrestrial Paleoclimate - The Late Triassic Ischigualasto Basin, NW Argentina
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2008
* Neil Tabor, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 04/30/2008
* USD 84,996.00

Terrestrial paleoclimate proxies based on paleosols have proliferated over the
past two decades. The results of this study provide a much-needed test of the
numerous paleoclimate proxies by crosschecking of the results provided by
minerals within a single basin and, in some instances, a single paleosol
profile. In addition, the results of this study should provide information that
help to determine which geochemical proxies are least likely to survive into the
geological record. To that end, this research documents the pedogenic and post-
pedogenic history of the minerals contained within paleosols, determines which
geochemical proxies of paleoclimate are most likely to be retained in spite of
burial, and which of these provide a robust and quantitative record of Late
Triassic paleoclimate in the Ischigualasto basin of southern
Pangea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is directed by two main objectives:
(1)Documentation of the mineralogical composition, stable isotopic composition,
and 40Ar-39Ar ages of minerals contained within paleosols in order to delineate
the temporal framework of mineral crystallization and the utility of a
particular mineral as a proxy of paleoenvironment. The minerals of interest
include phyllosilicates, oxyhydroxides and carbonates, as these are common
pedogenic minerals and are abundant within the geological record. (2) To
reconstruct the evolution of Late Triassic atmospheric PCO2 from multiple
mineralogical proxies and elucidate any robust trends between changing
atmospheric green house gas concentrations and other paleoclimate parameters
such as paleotemperature and
paleoprecipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleoclimate studies of 'deep-time'
geologic records provide compelling evidence for repeated, abrupt intervals of
global warming or cooling, and transitions between extreme climate states. Many
of these climate events triggered significant biotic turnover and led to
wholesale changes in biogeochemical cycling. Moreover, recent developments have
fueled a debate over the validity of the pCO2-climate paradigm over the past
half billion years. These issues parallel the climate change debate of concern
at present, thus highlighting the need to fully understand Earth's climate
system and its variability. The development of marine and terrestrial
paleoclimate archives at equal spatial and temporal resolution is critical to
documenting the global nature of such large-scale environmental perturbations,
and to characterizing the full range of Earth climate-system dynamics. In total,
the importance of this research transcends any one place or time (i.e., Late
Triassic of Argentina), because this study provides a better understanding of
just how useful paleosols may be for paleoclimate reconstructions in general.