* 0447332
* Acquisition of a Versatile Scanning Electron Microscope
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2005,11/30/2007
* Huifang Xu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 11/30/2007
* USD 260,000.00

EAR-0447332&lt;br/&gt;Goodwin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Geology and
Geophysics at the University of Wisconsin - Madison will purchase an
exceptionally versatile scanning electron microscope (SEM), equipped with a
range of detectors to be used in a variety of research and educational
activities within the department and affiliated Geology Museum. The instrument
will have the ability to produce high contrast cathodoluminescence and high
resolution back-scattered electron images of variations in chemistry of
materials such as zircons, inclusions in diamonds, and Mars meteorites, which
are very rare; three-dimensional secondary electron images of features such as
fossils, which will be aided by low vacuum; electron back-scattered detector
(EBSD) analysis of the 3D orientation of solid phases; and qualitative chemical
analyses using energy dispersive spectroscopy. The SEM lab will provide teaching
and training for graduate and advanced undergraduate students, who require long-
term experience to develop the abilities needed for professional use. This
training will include both formal class work and research activities. This
equipment will be utilized in an existing, NSF-funded education and outreach
program by our Geology Museum, targeted toward high-school students and
teachers. In our experience, students of all ages respond very positively to the
intriguing images that can be obtained with this state-of-the-art equipment;
this type of response is often critical to maintaining the interest of younger
students, including women and underrepresented minorities, in science. Ongoing
research that will benefit from this facility addresses many areas of interest
to the public, including water quality and resources, the geologic record of
earthquakes, approaches to removing carbon from the atmosphere (carbon
sequestration), the geologic record of climate change, volcanic hazards, and
materials applications of mineralogy. The acquisition of this equipment will
allow the development of innovative applications of relatively new technology,
such as EBSD. Many applications of EBSD have direct applicability and utility to
different elements of the EarthScope initiative, NSF's multifaceted study of the
geologic evolution and active tectonics of the United States. In addition, these
state-of-the-art imaging capabilities will be critical for sample selection and
for guiding in situ stable isotope analysis by WISC-SIMS, the Wisconsin
Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer Facility, which installed a new CAMECA ims-1280
Ion Microprobe in March 2005. This lab will explore new applications of stable
isotope chemistry - a record of fluid-material interactions - in Earth,
Materials, and Biological Sciences. We expect it to revolutionize our
understanding of these processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;