* 0447226
* Preparation and Curation of a Collection of Seabirds Salvaged from the New Zealand Long-line Fishery
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2007
* Sievert Rohwer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 05/31/2007
* USD 40,225.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Washington under the direction of
Dr. Sievert Rohwer for the partial support of an undertaking by the Burke Museum
to prepare, catalog, and house a collection of 333 seabirds, salvaged as by-
catch over the past decade from the long-line fishing industry in New Zealand.
By-catch mortality has had a serious impact on populations of many tube-nosed
birds, such as albatrosses and shearwaters. Due to their population declines,
salvage is the only way research series of such birds are likely to be obtained.
This grant will cover costs associated with preparing the new specimens,
including labor for a skilled preparator, student assistants, and a collection
manager. In addition to skin and skeleton preparations, all of the specimens
will have an associated extended wing and frozen tissue specimen. Materials
needed for archival storage of these new specimens include two new cases,
skeleton boxes, and tubes for tissue samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
several principle reasons why adding these specimens to the world's collections
will make an important contribution to research and education. First, few
museums have developed large collections of extended wings, so those associated
with these specimens will constitute a major addition to world holdings, and
likely will be the first wings preserved for many of these species. The Burke is
unique in the world for its large research series of wings, which are absolutely
essential to deducing the rules of flight feather replacement for large birds
and are also heavily used by illustrators. Second, no museum in New Zealand
maintains a tissue collection. Thus, this project will produce the first large
set of tissues from Southern Hemisphere seabirds that will have been permanently
archived by an institution with a commitment to making them available to
researchers throughout the world. Finally, the 213 skeletons from this
collection will increase world holdings by = 25-50% for six species and will add
10 new species to the Burke's collections. Additionally, for many species in
this collection, the majority of the world's skeletons are outside the US,
making skeletons stored at the Burke particularly valuable to US scientists
because of their greater accessibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of collections grants are multifold because the community of users of
collections is very broad. Increasingly, our collections serve a national and
international community of scholars, as well as a vibrant program of
undergraduate and advanced training at the University of Washington. Because
specimens are our sole source of new data about past populations and extinct
lineages, projects that improve their long-term care have huge potential
benefits to society. Beyond original research, our collections serve a diverse
community of users, including state and federal agencies, all manner of regional
conservation and educational groups, a large community of wildlife artists and
sculptors, and a growing program of K-12 educational outreach offered through
the University and the Burke Museum.&lt;br/&gt;