* 0447743
* CAREER: Cooperative Communication Systems: Resource Allocation, Self-Organization, and Synchronization
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2010
* Donald Brown, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* William H Tranter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 417,980.00

The key to reliable communications over wireless channels is diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;Of the various methods used to achieve diversity, spatial diversity
&lt;br/&gt;through the use of multiple transmit and/or receive antennas is
&lt;br/&gt;particularly attractive in that it does not require additional
&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth or loss of transmission rate. Spatial diversity does,
&lt;br/&gt;however, require the use of multiple antennas which must be separated
&lt;br/&gt;by at least a few wavelengths in order to be effective. This physical
&lt;br/&gt;constraint precludes the use of spatial diversity in many scenarios,
&lt;br/&gt;but recently, researchers considered this problem in the context of
&lt;br/&gt;multiuser communication systems in which there may be multiple
sources &lt;br/&gt;and/or destinations each with only a single antenna. In these
types of &lt;br/&gt;systems, communicating nodes can form "partnerships" to
achieve a new &lt;br/&gt;kind of spatial diversity: "user cooperation
diversity". Nodes in a &lt;br/&gt;partnership pool their antenna resources to
form a virtual antenna &lt;br/&gt;array and many of the benefits of spatial
diversity are achieved &lt;br/&gt;without the need for a "real" antenna
array.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While user cooperation diversity can provide many of
the advantages of &lt;br/&gt;antenna arrays to devices that would otherwise only
have access to a &lt;br/&gt;single antenna, the implementation issues are
significantly different &lt;br/&gt;than those of antenna arrays. Unlike a
traditional antenna array, the &lt;br/&gt;nodes in a cooperative partnership are
at least semi-autonomous in the &lt;br/&gt;sense that they each typically have
their own local resources, &lt;br/&gt;quality-of-service requirements, and
timing references. This project is &lt;br/&gt;centered around the questions
created by the inherent autonomy of nodes &lt;br/&gt;in cooperative multiuser
communication systems: how to initiate and &lt;br/&gt;maintain cooperative
partnerships, how to optimally allocate resources &lt;br/&gt;in cooperative
partnerships, and how to synchronize cooperating nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;