* 0447887
* CAREER:The Role of the Protein Kinase C Pathway and Chromatin Remodeling Factors in Orchestrating the Environmental Stress Response in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2011
* Audrey Gasch, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 04/30/2011
* USD 900,000.00

All organisms must be able to sense their environment and mount the appropriate
defenses against environmental stress. This project will examine the complex
regulatory network that orchestrates the environmental stress response (ESR) in
yeast. The ESR consists of ~900 gene expression changes that are activated by
diverse stresses. Experiments are planned to test the role of the Protein Kinase
C (PKC) signaling network and chromatin remodeling proteins in regulating the
ESR in response to specific stresses. Using DNA microarrays, it is possible to
measure the expression level of every single gene in the yeast genome in one
experiment. Yeast microarrays will be used to follow whole-genome expression in
wild-type cells and in cells defective in PKC signaling, as cells respond to
stress. Computational analysis of the data will identify genes whose expression
is dependent on different regulatory proteins in the network, thus allowing the
investigators to map the path of signal transduction in response to stress.
These results will provide insights into how cells orchestrate complex cellular
responses, including the ESR, and will shed light on the PKC signaling network.
A significant component of this work is the development of a new computational
genomics course at UW-Madison, specifically aimed at training biologists in
statistical and computational analysis of large datasets.