* 0447972
* CAREER: Orchestra - Managing the Collaborative Sharing of Evolving Data
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2011
* Zachary Ives, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 03/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER project develops, implements, and validates Orchestra, a general
middleware layer for supporting collaborative data sharing: the effective
exchange of data and updates between loose confederations of scientific
collaborators who may disagree about their preferred schema, or even about which
data items or updates are correct. The proposed methodology is "peer-to-peer"
and "bottom-up" in style: it provides mechanisms by which one can rapidly join a
data sharing confederation, by mapping a new data source to existing schemas
within the confederation and then specifying what updates are to be trusted and
accepted. The primary means of data exchange is through reconciling
modifications made locally with those (trusted) updates made elsewhere;
operations from elsewhere can always be overridden locally. Additionally, the
research develops mechanisms for globally querying across all data sources and
schemas. The work naturally extends techniques from data integration and peer
data management.

Broader Impact: This work enables greater data sharing in the scientific
community, especially bioinformatics: it focuses on the use, derivation, and
sharing of information in bioinformatics databases and warehouses, and it will
be evaluated in such applications. The developed system will be disseminated on
the Web and promoted through seminars delivered at the Penn Center for
Bioinformatics and the regional Greater Philadelphia Bioinformatics Alliance, as
well as other scientific forums. The research project will be integrated into an
educational program (graduate and undergraduate) to teach data management in the
broader context, focusing on data integration and exchange as well as
traditional databases.

http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~zives/orchestra/