* 0447161
* Workshop for the Design of a Mentoring Program for Junior Women in Physical Oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2007
* Susan Lozier, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 11/30/2007
* USD 79,201.00

In recent years, women have been going to graduate school in physical
oceanography in increasing numbers, with women currently making up approximately
half of all graduate students. However, the number of women in principal
investigator positions does not reflect the increase in the number of women
attaining their Ph.D. in the field. Thus, there does not appear to be a problem
with recruiting women to the field, rather, the problem lies with the retention
of those that are trained in physical oceanography. This problem is not unique
to physical oceanography nor to ocean sciences, rather it occurs throughout the
sciences and engineering. The barriers to success for women in physical
oceanography, as in other fields, are varied. These include the demands of
combining a family with a career that requires a large amount of effort during
prime childbearing years, the competition between the career goals of a spouse
or partner, and the lack of adequate mentoring. Recent studies and surveys have
consistently shown that one of the indicators of success in science seems to be
whether or not an individual has a mentor. The physical oceanographic community
cannot change the structure of family life nor make major organizational changes
to the structure of scientific careers, however it can begin to make a
difference in the mentoring of women junior scientists. Thus, it is proposed
here to initiate a community-run mentoring program for the purpose of retaining
more women in the field of physical oceanography. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
order to design an effective mentoring program, the input of a broad segment of
the physical oceanographic community is needed, as well as the input of those
outside of the community whose expertise is focused on mentoring. Thus, as a
first step toward the creation of this mentoring program, a workshop will be
convened for the express purpose of designing such a program. The intent of this
proposal is to design this mentoring program for the physical oceanography
community essentially as a pilot project that, if successful, could be expanded
to include women and minorities in all areas of ocean sciences at a later date.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This proposed workshop, through its
focus on the retention of women in the field of physical oceanography, will
allow further capitalization on the investment the funding agencies and the
universities have made on the education of women students. Essentially, this
proposed work seeks to stem the loss of intellectual capital from the physical
oceanographic field. It will also aid efforts to create a scientific workforce
whose diversity matches that of the student population and, in a broader sense,
that of the U.S. population as a whole, by aiding the retention of women in the
field of physical oceanography. &lt;br/&gt;