* 0447278
* Consolidation of Frozen Tissue Collections and Improvements to the Ichthyology, Herpetology, Malacology, and Decapod Collections at The University of Alabama
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Wallace Holznagel, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 12/31/2010
* USD 498,780.00

A grant has been awarded to The University of Alabama under the direction of Dr.
Phillip Harris for partial support of improvements to the frozen-tissue and
formalin-fixed, alcohol collections maintained by the Ichthyology, Herpetology,
Malacology and Decapod Collections. Ichthyology and Malacology currently have a
combined collection of ca. 35,000 frozen specimens or tissues; both collections
have a substantial number of threatened and endangered species. While both
collections are in electronic databases, information coverage for individual
lots is unequal. The lack of a centralized database and repository for all
frozen collections has resulted in the uncoordinated accessioning of frozen
specimens and tissues. This deficiency puts these collections in jeopardy of
being permanently lost, damaged, or disassociated from their data. Consolidation
of these independent frozen-tissue collections and proper curation will ensure
the long-term preservation and accessibility of these valuable and irreplaceable
materials. In addition, current electronic databases require improvements,
including updating the taxonomy and initiation or completion of georeferencing
for all specimens. Upon completion of these tasks, the electronic databases will
be transferred into SPECIFY 4.05 and a common internet-access platform will be
created to search these collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collections
maintained by The University of Alabama contain valuable specimens documenting
the aquatic fauna of the eastern and southeastern United States. These
collections date from the late 1940's and contain an important record of changes
in species diversity and numbers over time due to anthropogenic influences on
aquatic ecosystems. All of these collections are active research collections and
are valuable resources to ichthyologists, herpetologists, malacologists,
decapodologists, and state and federal natural resource agencies. Proposed
improvements to these collections, especially the frozen-tissue collections,
will safeguard them from deterioration, loss of specimens, disassociation of
specimen with collection data, and enhance access of researchers to data and
collection records. All of the proposed curatorial activities described in the
proposal contain a training component for undergraduate and graduate students
interested in natural history collection curation and management. In addition, a
new seminar course, Museum and Field Techniques in Natural History Studies, is
being developed for students from across biological disciplines to gain an
appreciation for the role of collections and phylogenetic systematics in their
respective fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the university
environment, specimens from all four collections are used in numerous public
outreach activities, such as museum displays, loans to public and private school
teachers and the Ichthyology Collection's Traveling (or In-house) Fish Show.
These collections are an important record of the biodiversity of the
southeastern United States and some of these materials are irreplaceable. Funds
from this grant will assist in safeguarding these valuable resources for future
generations.&lt;br/&gt;