* 0447860
* CAREER: Creation of a Highly Automated, User-friendly Image Processing System for Electron Crystallography
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Henning Stahlberg, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2009
* USD 687,510.00

Electron crystallography studies the structure of membrane proteins in the
membrane-embedded state. Two-dimensional crystals of the membrane proteins are
imaged by cryoEM methods, and computer processing of the recorded data allows
determining the high-resolution structure of the proteins. The aim of this
project is to provide a software system that will facilitate the processing of
electron crystallography data, in order to transform the structure determination
of membrane proteins into an understandable and accessible technology for
biologists. That is, a user-friendly and highly automated software system (an
open-source MatLab toolbox) will be prepared which will allow structural
biologists to perform efficient computer processing of recorded cryoelectron
microscopy (cryoEM) images of 2D membrane protein crystals with the option of
calculating the 3D structure of membrane proteins automatically.

Broader impacts: A bi-annual workshop on electron crystallography at UC Davis
will accompany the creation of the image analysis software. This workshop will
offer lectures and hands-on experiments to learn the methods of 2D membrane
protein crystallization, data collection by cryoelectron microscocpy, computer
image processing, and 3D computer structure reconstruction using the created
software system. Transmission electron microscopy also allows imaging of non-
crystalline biological samples and imaging of cellular structures at lower
resolution. The versatility of this instrumentation will be employed in various
teaching, demonstration and outreach activities to introduce underrepresented
groups, high-school scholars and university undergraduate and graduate students
to the principles of life sciences.