* 0447271
* Expansion and Improvement of the Penn Cranial CT Database
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2005,11/30/2010
* Richard Leventhal, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2010
* USD 238,664.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Pennsylvania under the direction
of Dr. Thomas Schoenemann for partial support of the expansion and improvement
of the Penn Cranial CT Database, which consists of high-resolution,
3-dimensional (3D) computed tomography (CT) images. This grant will allow the
database to expand from its current set of scans of human and non-human primate
and fossil skulls taken from the skeletal collections at the University of
Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology (UPMAA). Free online access
to the scan database will be accomplished through the Museum's existing web-
based archives and collections interface (http://www.museum.upenn.edu/mis/).
When completed, the database will be fully searchable, and will include all the
information known for each specimen, digital photographs of the specimens from
the 6 major viewing angles, and the 3D CT images themselves.

The Penn Cranial CT Database will improve the access and usefulness of the
unique set of specimens housed at the UPMAA. The specimens are from all over the
world, thus representing a broad range of human variation. The 3D CT images to
be taken are essentially high-resolution 3D digital pictures, which will allow a
dramatic increase in accessibility of the existing crania. The availability of
3D CT images for researchers worldwide is important for three reasons: 1) Recent
computer software makes it possible to take almost any measurement directly from
the CT scans themselves, which minimizes damage from repeated handling. 2) These
images allow for the study of important structures inside the skulls that cannot
be easily studied externally (for example, the surface of the braincase). 3) New
software methods allow for powerful studies of complex geometry of the skull
(for example, the creation of atlases describing in detail the variation across
all specimens on a point-by-point basis). These CT images will therefore be
invaluable not only for the understanding human variation and interpreting
fossils, but also for research where detailed analysis of variation in shape of
the skull is essential.

The broader significance of this project includes the involvement of local
students in the creation of an online virtual museum of 3D images of important
fossils and skulls for teaching purposes, and a vastly more accessible and
useable collection of skeletal material to interested researchers of all kinds.
Student involvement will be in the form of special 'science scholarships'
offered to local high school students (a large majority of whose students are
from historically disadvantaged minority groups), who will not only assist in
every aspect of the project, but will also formulate mini-research projects
relating to the skeletal material and the associated CT images. These projects
will introduce students to the basics of scientific research, and to the kinds
of questions these. The online virtual museum will illustrate important features
of human evolution, and will dovetail with the Museum's planned human evolution
exhibit. Our goal is to allow the general public to compare important fossil
specimens to the range of variation in modern apes and humans, thus highlighting
the major trends in human evolution.