* 0447541
* CAREER: Macromolecular Recognition and Differential Ion Channel Functioning
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2005,01/31/2007
* Lisa Gentile, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2007
* USD 254,392.00

This project describes plans for the continued development of a high quality
research program in protein biophysical chemistry, and its integration into an
educational plan involving high school, undergraduate, and master's students, as
well as high school chemistry and biology teachers. The intellectual merit of
this research focuses on understanding the underlying molecular recognition of a
class of sulfated steroids that inversely modulate ion channels belonging to the
ionotropic glutamate receptor (iGluR) family. Not only will this knowledge
further the understanding of molecular recognition, but it will also aid in the
ability to decipher the complex functioning of the brain. What function do these
neurosteroids play in regulating our memory, cognition, and learning? The
educational component integrates high school chemistry and biology teachers
along with their students into the above research plan. The specific aims are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Map the binding site of pregnenolone sulfate (PREGS) and
pregnanolone sulfate (PREGAS) to the iGluRs and understand why PREGS is a
positive regulator of the NMDA receptor, but a negative regulator of the AMPA
receptor.&lt;br/&gt;2. Involve high school chemistry and biology teachers in an
inquiry based investigation, which will enable them to develop new techniques,
gather ideas to incorporate into new courses or labs, and satisfy their clock
hour requirements.&lt;br/&gt;3. Involve high school juniors and seniors in a
full time summer research program. This will allow these students to develop
critical thinking and problem solving skills, as well as to expose them to the
excitement of science and the possibility of future careers in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are primarily
in addressing scientific literacy. Not only will undergraduates and high school
students be trained by this program, but also the high school teachers will
participate in this program. Involvement of teachers in a research-based inquiry
will aid in their ability to teach the process of science to students in a
highly effective manner. &lt;br/&gt;