* 0447880
* CAREER: Phylogeny and Evolution of Armored Scale Insects (Hemiptera: Diaspididae) and Their Bacterial Endosymbionts
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2011
* Benjamin Normark, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 06/30/2011
* USD 651,937.00

The abstract. Normark DEB 0447880

Armored scale insects are unusual organisms in many ways. The males fly, and
look like ordinary insects, but the females are wingless, legless blobs. Armored
scale insects have strange genetics, in which males start life with chromosomes
from both parents, but lose their fathers' chromosomes and pass on only their
mothers'. They have strange anatomy and nutrition, with no gut connecting mouth
to anus. UMass grad student Matthew Gruwell recently discovered that armored
scale insects are also associated with unusual bacteria -- unlike the
Proteobacteria found in most sap-feeding insects, armored scale insects have
Flavobacteria. The role of bacteria in the nutrition and genetics of their hosts
are vibrant areas of current research, and this field may be illuminated by the
connections betwen armored scale insects' unusual nutrition, genetics, and
bacteria. But the simplified anatomy of armored scale insects, and consequent
difficulty of identifying them, classifying them, and understanding their
evolutionary relationships, has hindered progress. In this project, the
principal investigator and his students will sequence DNA from four different
genes of 250 species of armored scale insects, expanding upon an earlier study.
They will also sequence DNA from bacteria associated with the scale insects, and
investigate where in the scale insects tissues the bacteria occur. The DNA
sequences will be used to infer evolutionary trees which will shed light on the
evolution of the unusual characters of these insects and the nature of their co-
evolution with bacteria, as well as providing a sounder basis for their
classification.

Armored scale insects are major pests of trees and shrubs in the US and in all
but the coldest regions of the world, especially damaging fruit and nut crops
and ornamentals. This project will lead to a better classification of these
insects, which will help managers predict important biological features such as
natural enemies. Ultimately these data will permit armored scale insects to be
identified through "DNA barcoding." This will be especially useful in the case
of armored scale insects, since currently only one life stage (adult females) is
identifiable. The project directly supports education in that almost all of the
funds go to support graduate and undergraduate students and their research. To
foster direct undergraduate education and participation in the project, the
principal investigator is teaching a new undergraduate course entitled
"Molecular Biodiversity Lab," that will teach the basic principles of the field
of molecular systematics, and the associated lab and computer skills.