* 0447480
* Ancestral  plasticity and mating system evolution in the stickleback radiation
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2010
* Susan Foster, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 12/31/2010
* USD 628,369.00

Adaptive radiation occurs when an ancestral population invades many novel
habitats, and the daughter populations evolve in response to differences in the
patterns of natural selection across habitats. Initially, shifts in behavior may
buffer populations from the changing conditions, and differences in the
responses to different environments can determine which behavior patterns are
exposed to selection in the ensuing years. Thus, the patterns of ancestral
plasticity could predispose populations to evolve in particular directions, and
could lead to the repeated evolution of divergent patterns of expression across
habitats as is seen in a number of recent adaptive radiations.

In the post-glacial radiation of the threespine stickleback fish (Gasterosteus
aculeatus), ancient oceanic populations have repeatedly given rise to freshwater
populations that possess morphological and behavioral features that cause them
to be specialized for feeding on plankton (limnetic type) or bottom-dwelling
invertebrates (benthic type). Prior research has shown that female mating
preferences covary with male color and behavior expression during breeding, and
that benthic and limnetic populations differ predictably. However, data also
offer evidence of phenotypic plasticity in the expression of these traits in the
oceanic ancestor that parallels divergent patterns of plasticity of the two
types in the freshwater radiation. This research will involve rearing
sticklebacks from three ancestral, oceanic populations, and from three derived
freshwater benthic and limnetic populations. Male nuptial behavior and color
expression will be compared with female mating preferences before and after
exposure to cannibalistic foraging groups, as these groups are the trigger for
plastic responses in these traits. Such groups are formed only by oceanic and
benthic fish. Plastic expression in the oceanic forms will be used to infer the
ancestral condition for comparison with that in the derived types. This research
should offer insight into the role of plasticity in adaptive radiation - an
exciting and fundamentally important issue in evolutionary biology. Another
question that will be evaluated is the intriguing possibility that ancestral
phenotypic plasticity could, under certain scenarios, lead to the decoupling of
female mating preferences and the norms of reactions of the traits original
favored by this selection, a suggestion at odds with the view that signal and
receiver characteristics should be tightly coupled.

Broader Impact: The research will involve training at least 15 undergraduate
students in scientific theory and practice. Clark University offers an
especially rich research experience that, for those entering the fifth year
masters program, can last as long as five years and result in one or more
publications. Data collected from the project will also be used in laboratory
exercises that focus on behavior, statistics and evolution. Secondary and
college teachers will be able to download exercises and data from a web site
free of charge. Finally, this research may help conservationists understand the
loss of a very unusual pair of stickleback species that inhabited a single lake
in British Columbia, Canada. This pair has been lost to hybridization, and one
of the possible explanations is that increased turbidity decreased the
effectiveness of visual signals critical to assortative mating. This research
will allow us to evaluate the plausibility of this hypothesis.