* 0448491
* CAREER:    Gas-Phase Catalytic Processes on Metal Nanoclusters
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Beatriz Roldan Cuenya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 03/31/2010
* USD 553,476.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project CAREER: GAS-PHASE CATALYTIC PROCESSES ON METAL
NANOCLUSTERS aims to improve the understanding of the processes taking place in
nanocluster-catalyzed reactions by systematically studying how the nanoparticle
size, shape and composition affect its chemical reactivity. The low temperature
carbon monoxide oxidation and the direct propylene epoxidation reactions on
metal-oxide-supported gold nanoparticles will be used as model systems. The
experiments will involve a unique combination of ex-situ size- and shape-
selected nanoparticle preparation methods and in-situ (UHV) reactivity
measurements at different stages of thermally and chemically-induced structural
transformations. Interconnections between directly measurable electronic
phenomena and surface chemistry will be established by X-ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy, Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and Temperature-Programmed
Desorption. The fundamental knowledge gained may lead to the discovery of new
catalytic processes while making efficient use of energy and raw materials with
minimal influence on the environment. The educational component of this program
includes the development of a new graduate course entitled "Basic concepts of
surface science applied to nanotechnology", the involvement of K-12 teachers,
undergraduate and K-12 students in the proposed research through summer
fellowships, and an outreach program directed to local high school female
students and their families that will facilitate field-trips to the University
of Central Florida (UCF) and the participation in round table discussions with
UCF faculty members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exciting new
opportunities are emerging in the field of catalysis based on the use of
nanotechnology. Nanostructured surfaces show modified chemical reactivity due to
changes in surface morphology and electronic structure. This project aims to
improve the understanding of the processes taking place in nanocluster-catalyzed
reactions by systematically studying how the nanoparticle size, shape and
composition affect its chemical reactivity. The fundamental knowledge gained may
lead to the discovery of new catalytic processes while making efficient use of
energy and raw materials with minimal influence on the environment. In addition,
this program will help to promote and consolidate the research in nanoscience at
UCF through the development of a new graduate course entitled "Basic concepts of
surface science applied to nanotechnology." The students trained in these and
related areas of nanoscience and engineering are very competitive in both the
academic and industrial job market.&lt;br/&gt;