* 0448189
* CAREER:  Spatial Optimization of Computing Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2010
* Igor Markov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Project ID: CCF-0448189 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Igor
Markov&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Spatial Optimization of Computing Systems
&lt;br/&gt;Instritution: University of Michigan Ann Arbor
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consumer electronics and high-end computing
applications of the future demand improved performance, better energy-efficiency
and lower cost. A number of design styles have emerged to meet related
tradeoffs, including such recent advances as structured ASICs. However, a
fundamental change is upon us with the impending slow-down of Moore's law in
10-15 years-the size and performance of individual transistors are not going to
improve as fast as today, and competitive semiconductor products will have to
use spatial resources on a chip more efficiently. Such improvements will require
synergies between computer and electrical engineering, as well as large-scale
mathematical and combinatorial optimization. The challenges to interconnect
scaling that arise in semiconductor technology nodes below 180nm give us a
glimpse of problems to come. First, interconnect delays do not improve as fast
as gate delays. Therefore, in chips that started shipping two years ago,
critical interconnect delay exceeds gate delay. Moreover, today interconnects
occupy a much larger volume on a chip than gates, and therefore gates must be
spaced further apart to facilitate routing. By mitigating capacitance between
adjacent wires, "unused space" improves power dissipation and signal delay,
while decreasing signal noise. These global effects have not been expected in
the late 1990s and devalue, to a large extent, the ongoing miniaturization of
CMOS transistors. In technology nodes below 65nm, wires become so slow relative
to gates that they must be heavily buffered during layout, making buffers most
heavily used gates. In other words, most of the gate-area is used for
communication rather than for computation. Since buffer locations and densities
are not known in advance, additional unused space must be left throughout the
chip, and interconnect becomes even longer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scaling
effects outlined above already require a rethinking of methodologies for
designing circuits and systems. Logic circuits must be synthesized so as to
minimize communication and interconnect rather than gate area. At the system
level, global communication and global wires must be minimized. Latency can be
hidden by deep pipelining, non-traditional signaling strategies and such
fundamental new concepts as networks on a chip. An additional thrust of this
proposal is to carry over spatial planning to much earlier stages of chip and
system design than is common today. The project will develop new software tools
for optimizing shapes and relative locations of large modules, and inter-module
communication at the system level. Spatial planning additionally requires
attention to large fixed-shape modules, e.g., embedded memories and design
Intellectual Property, that are difficult to pack and may require alignment. The
more futuristic part of the research will consider spatial planning and physical
optimization in the context of carbon-based nano-devices, quantum dots and
quantum circuits. These technologies employ radically different types of
interconnect and imply different design constraints and optimization.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;