* 0448983
* CAREER: Alternative cements for sustainable development and concrete performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Maria Juenger, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 12/31/2010
* USD 412,380.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed career development plan emphasizes
"sustainability" in both its research and educational components. The
investigation will explore methods of reducing the environmental impact of
concrete production while maintaining or improving current performance
standards. This will be achieved through the synthesis of low energy, low
CO2-emitting cements. The cements will be characterized and optimized with
regard to their environmental impact, performance, and durability. As Portland
cement concrete is the most widely used construction material in the world, even
small improvements to this sustainability of this system could have a
significant global influence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cement production is energy
intensive, accounting for almost 5% of global industrial energy consumption.
Furthermore, cement manufacturing contributes significantly to the emission of
greenhouse gases (5% of global anthropogenic CO2). In the proposed work,
industrial wastes will be used as raw ingredients for synthesizing ordinary
Portland and novel "green" cements. The use of industrial wastes in lieu of
natural materials will reduce CO2 emissions from cement manufacturing with the
additional benefit of landfill reduction. The novel "green" cements explored in
this project will have both lower energy needs and lower CO2 emissions compared
to Portland cement. All synthetic systems will be characterized extensively and
optimized for concrete performance. Results from this project will advance the
state of knowledge in the emerging research area of sustainable cements,
particularly with regard to the effects of various raw materials on cement
composition and properties. During the course of this work, new insights will be
provided into the formation mechanisms of new and existing cementitious phases,
hydration reaction mechanisms, and the inter-relationship between composition-
processing microstructure- properties in cementitious systems. Advances in
prediction models for cement phase formation and in analysis and
characterization techniques are also
anticipated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approaching development in the context of
sustainability has far-reaching societal and environmental benefits. A movement
toward sustainable development demands not only new ways of engineering, but new
mind-sets of those who engineer. This career development plan addresses both of
these aspects in its research and educational components by valuing the
environmental friendliness of a material on par with its performance, and
teaching students the value of this methodology through new courses and course-
enhancing modules. Modules will be distributed to other institutions upon their
completion through educational workshops to encourage their use. Educating
students in this paradigm is extended into the K-12 realm through outreach
programs directed at students historically under-represented in engineering,
including women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;