* 0448171
* Ultrastructural Analysis of RNA Synthesis and Processing
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Ann Beyer, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2009
* USD 429,590.00

A long-standing question in biology concerns the in vivo assembly of ribosomes,
which are the biological machines that translate the genetic code into proteins.
In this project, early steps in biogenesis of the small ribosomal subunit will
be studied by electron microscopic visualization of nascent ribosomal RNA
transcripts in the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Five reproducible assembly
intermediates for the small subunit are discernible on nascent transcripts,
beginning with formation of a small 5' particle and culminating in compaction of
the entire 18S rRNA sequence into a large terminal knob (the pre-small subunit),
which is released co-transcriptionally by RNA cleavage. Remarkably, an
intermediate assembly step involves formation of three kinked nodes of RNP
formation in the 18S RNA, which map approximately to the three known domains of
18S rRNA and which collapse onto each other during a process that dramatically
compacts the length of the RNA into the large terminal knob. These events are
reminiscent of findings from bacterial ribosome reconstitution studies, in which
it was shown that the three subdomains of the small subunit (body, platform,
head) are autonomous assembly domains. Thus, the hypothesis that will be tested
is that the three nodes of RNP formation represent assembly of ribosomal
proteins onto the three structural domains of 18S RNA, which will be the first
test of this assembly pathway in vivo. A combination of yeast genetics and
electron microscopy will be used to test the hypothesis by depletion of early-
assembling ribosomal proteins and by insertion of rRNA expansion sequences to
test for predicted effects on the size or spacing of nodes. Specific proteins
will be localized in the structures using antibody or cytochemical labeling for
EM. This project will help elucidate the process of eukaryotic ribosome
biogenesis in living cells, and represents a new experimental handle on this
extremely important and complex biological process. It will also present
training opportunities for students, including an annual summer research
internship for an undergraduate from an underrepresented minority group.