* 0448476
* CAREER: Combating Malicious Behavior in Commodity Software
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2011
* Somesh Jha, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 12/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Infrastructures in critical domains such as medical, power, telecommunications,
and finance depend on information systems. Therefore, attacks can have
devastating affects on these critical infrastructures. Moreover, an increasing
number of organizations are relying on commodity software. This trend can be
attributed to increasing reliance on out-sourcing and commercial off-the-shelf
(COTS) components. However, deploying commodity software poses significant risks
because they can contain exploitable vulnerabilities and hidden malicious
behavior. Combating malicious behavior in commodity software is especially
challenging because its user only has access to the executable for the software.
This proposal addresses the problem of combating malicious behavior in commodity
software. The proposed tasks are applicable in the context of model-based
intrusion detection systems (MIDS) which are a type of host-based intrusion
detection system (HIDS) that monitor program execution using a model. There are
three major areas in MIDS: model construction, enforcement, and model analysis.
This proposal addresses model construction and model analysis. In the context of
MIDS, the proposed research will improve precision of existing model-
construction algorithms, tackle privacy violations, and develop techniques for
analyzing and refining models.