* 0448115
* CAREER:  New Architectures for Distributed Compression and Communication of Delay-Sensitive Information in Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* Sandeep Sadanandarao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 04/30/2011
* USD 399,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;In sensor networks comprised of energy- and complexity-limited
inexpensive sensors, the underlying information field is distributed, endowed
with certain dynamics in terms of physical movement (for example: seismic,
acoustic waves traveling over a geographical region) and delay-sensitive that
warrant real-time reconstruction. Further, in such multi-terminal settings,
``bit'' is not the universal currency of information, as the separation of
multiuser compression and communication is sadly suboptimal. In
this&lt;br/&gt;project these two issues are addressed by considering a new
dynamic compression model and a new multi-partite graph-based architecture for
distributed transmission of delay-sensitive information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this new compression model the information available at certain nodes is
changing as a function of time. This model is referred to as source coding with
feedforward. This induces a completely new dynamism in&lt;br/&gt;the information
compression problem. Further, in the architecture for transmission of
distributed information considered in this project, multi-partite graphs are
used as a discrete interface between distributed compression and distributed
communication. This leads to a modular design of multi-terminal sensor-based
information processing systems. Using these mechanisms, the goal of this project
is to &lt;br/&gt;realize a self-organizing sensor network enabled with a new
architecture that is capable of performing more efficient representation,
communication and real-time reconstruction of distributed and delay-sensitive
complex information fields than possible by any system today. This research
effort is complemented by an educational effort to train young engineers to
become skilled in construction, management and development of such massively
complex information systems. The specific issues considered in this project are
development of project work in the courses, integrated undergraduate education
and research effort, and curriculum development with a course on distributed
signal processing and
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;