* 0448196
* Algorithmic Support for Temperature Aware Computing and Networking
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Kirk Pruhs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,951.00

Recently, it has been recognized that power management to control temperature
is vitally important. In fact, in May Intel abruptly announced that it had
scrapped the development of two new computer chips (code named Tejas and
Jayhawk) for desktops/servers in order to rush to the marketplace a more
efficient chip technology more than a year ahead of schedule. Analysts said the
move showed how eager the world's largest chip maker was to cut back on the heat
its chips generate. Intel's method of cranking up chip speed was beginning to
require expensive and noisy cooling systems for computers.&lt;br/&gt; There is
an extensive literature on power management in computing devices, and there is
an extensive literature on power management in ad-hoc and sensor networks. Yet
almost all of this literature focuses on power management to conserve energy,
and not on power management to reduce temperature. Temperature and energy are
different physical entities with quite different properties. Bluntly, if the
processor in your mobile device exceeds its energy bound, your battery is
exhausted, but if your mobile device exceeds it thermal threshold, your
processor dies.The need to manage power to reduce temperature will become
increasingly important as device power consumption is growing exponentially, and
as ad-hoc and sensor networks become more prevalent. We propose to reexamine
power management problems from a temperature perspective to try to better
understand the difference between managing power to conserve energy and managing
power to minimize temperature. We plan to start with speed scaling problems
within devices and with routing problems in ad-hoc networks. It is anticipated
that this project will produce novel optimization techniques and analytical
results that will be useful in the design of temperature-efficient protocols for
large-scale ad-hoc and sensor networks. The work will be a joint inter-
disciplinary effort, involving investigators with expertise in on-line algorithm
design and in network protocol design and development. It is further anticipated
that the project will provide students with a unique opportunity to investigate
and experiment with new ways of thinking about important design parameters for
this emerging class of networks.