* 0448730
* CAREER: Irregular Environmental Loading and Response of Offshore Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2011
* John Sweetman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract for: &lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Irregular Environmental Loading and Response of
Offshore Structures, CMS proposal 0448730&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sweetman,
Texas A&amp;M - Galveston&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent computer and sensor
hardware developments have dramatically increased field
data&lt;br/&gt;collection capabilities, outpacing development of new
methodologies to make optimal use of&lt;br/&gt;these data. Hydrodynamic loading
and fluid-structure interaction on offshore structures have&lt;br/&gt;long been
targeted with computer-intensive deterministic calculations, but these processes
are&lt;br/&gt;inherently stochastic, for which no adequate methodologies exist
to quantify structural loads and&lt;br/&gt;response. Here, random process
theory, structural dynamics, hydrodynamics, and measured data interpretation
will be combined to improve design methods for offshore structures and enable
verification of deterministic hydrodynamic theories with full-scale measured
data. New methodologies and associated numerical tools for prediction of fluid-
structure interaction in both shallow and very deep waters are proposed. Example
applications will be worked in detail relevant to load and response predictions
for offshore wind turbines and marine risers. Marine risers are the vertical
pipes carrying fluids between the sea-floor and sea-surface. The PI's doctoral
research at Stanford integrated fluid-structure interaction, random vibrations
and extreme value theory and included extensive comparison with measured data.
He also has ten years of industry experience in advanced methods for design and
construction of offshore structures where he saw the need for new ways to
quantify environmental load and response of offshore
structures.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research increases the
fundamental understanding of fluid-structure&lt;br/&gt;interaction in both
shallow and very deep waters, develops new engineering methods, and applies
these new methods to develop new numerical tools for use in design and test of
hydrodynamic theories. The wind turbine work combines statistical methods and
stream function wave theory with a new dynamic numerical model to better predict
wave loading on the structure and to better understand the complicated
interaction between winds, waves, and the structure. The marine riser work
addresses vortex-induced vibration (VIV), a fluid-structure interaction problem
dominating design of long marine risers in high currents. A new random vibration
methodology will be developed where statistical distributions built from
measured data are used to quantitatively assess the effectiveness of
hydrodynamic theories. The new methodology may find use in various structural
vibration applications.&lt;br/&gt;Specific research goals include: (1) develop a
new irregular wave simulation methodology&lt;br/&gt;to predict ocean wave
profiles and kinematics based on stream function theory; (2) develop&lt;br/&gt;a
new random process model to combine the new irregular wave methodology with
irregular&lt;br/&gt;wind characterizations to predict extreme loading on
offshore wind turbines; (3) critically compare&lt;br/&gt;the results from (1)
and (2) with full-scale measured data to verify the new methods;
(4)&lt;br/&gt;develop a deterministic dynamic model of a marine riser in very
deep water; (5) develop statistical&lt;br/&gt;distributions of riser
accelerations from measured data; (6) use results of (4) and (5)
to&lt;br/&gt;quantitatively assess the likelihood that hypothesized hydrodynamic
theories explain observed&lt;br/&gt;acceleration data; and (7) other
applications of the new methodology.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed work
will have direct impact on future design of offshore wind&lt;br/&gt;turbines and
marine risers by providing a better understanding of complex interactions
between&lt;br/&gt;a structure and its environment. Both of these areas are
relevant to present and future world&lt;br/&gt;energy supplies. The project will
also enhance cross-pollination of ideas between two
different&lt;br/&gt;technical cultures: European-dominated offshore wind energy
and the US-dominated deep-water&lt;br/&gt;offshore oil
production.&lt;br/&gt;Specific educational and broader impact goals include: (1)
development of a new course in off-&lt;br/&gt;shore and near-shore structural
dynamics and fluid-structure interaction including some results&lt;br/&gt;from
this research; (2) outreach to science and technology students from historically
underrepresented and financially challenged situations through the NSF-funded
"GATES" program; (3) outreach to K-12 students and educators through the
existing Sea Camp Program, which has hosted over 10,000 K-12 students and 1,000
K-12 teachers at TAMUG to date, and (4) education of promising graduate students
in important emerging technical areas.&lt;br/&gt;