* 0448234
* CAREER:    Computation Platform for the Design of Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Takkuen Koo, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 03/31/2008
* USD 173,279.00

&lt;br/&gt;Title: Computation Platform for the Design of Hybrid
Systems&lt;br/&gt;PI: Takkuen John Koo, Dept. of EECS, Vanderbilt
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;From home appliances to
aircraft and from medical devices to power distribution&lt;br/&gt;networks,
embedded software systems monitor and control our physical world in
a&lt;br/&gt;computational manner. The goal of this NSF CAREER Development
project is to &lt;br/&gt;develop the theoretical foundations, design tools and
education programs to enable the &lt;br/&gt;modern system engineers to
effectively and efficiently design embedded software based &lt;br/&gt;on hybrid
systems theory for performance-critical and safety-critical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;The research has four focus areas of research. (a)
Multi-resolution Computation &lt;br/&gt;of Interface Evolution. The focus here
is to develop computational methods,&lt;br/&gt;by combining the Level Set
Methods with the Multi-resolution Analysis, for computing&lt;br/&gt;the
evolution of interfaces of high-dimensional continuous systems with level-of-
control&lt;br/&gt;in solution resolution. (b) Model-Based Computation Platform.
The goal is to&lt;br/&gt;develop a computation platform that allows systematic
construction of algorithms for the&lt;br/&gt;design of hybrid systems and
enables automatic synthesis of associated embedded&lt;br/&gt;software. (c)
Experimental Research. Two experimental testbeds, which are a FPGAbased
reconfigurable power electronic circuit and a multi-vehicle &lt;br/&gt;multi-
model system, provide case studies for the computational methods &lt;br/&gt;and
software tools developed in this research. (d) Improving Undergraduate and
&lt;br/&gt;Graduate Education. The research advancements made in this research
&lt;br/&gt;would be integrated into an Interdisciplinary Curriculum that
combines lecture and laboratory instruction in the design of hybrid systems for
both undergraduate &lt;br/&gt;and graduate education. The broader impact on
society made by this CAREER Development Plan is the generation of new paradigms
and tools for the design &lt;br/&gt;of complex embedded software systems to
ensure reliability and performance.&lt;br/&gt;