* 0448488
* CAREER: Core Promoter-Selective Transcription by RNA Polymerase II
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2011
* Ernest Martinez, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 03/31/2011
* USD 767,000.00

Differential transcription regulation of eukaryotic protein-coding genes is
controlled at multiple levels and involves the combinatorial function of
regulatory DNA sequences and core promoter DNA elements. The core promoter is
the minimal DNA region encompassing the transcription start site of a gene that
is recognized by the ubiquitous basal/general transcription machinery and is
sufficient to direct specific transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II in
vitro. In contrast, regulatory DNA sequences are located at varying distances
from the core promoter and are recognized by a variety of sequence-specific DNA-
binding transcription regulators, which can be tissue-specific or
developmentally regulated and influence the recruitment or activity of the basal
transcription machinery at the core promoter. Thus, the core promoter and the
associated basal transcription machinery are the ultimate targets of
transcription regulatory signals. Significantly, the structure of the core
promoter influences not only the basal activity of a promoter but also its
selective response to specific enhancers and transcription regulators. How core
promoters contribute to gene-selective transcription regulation is however
unclear. Various core promoter DNA elements including the TATA box, the
initiator, the DPE, and others have been identified. With the exception of the
TATA box, the functions of the other elements are still poorly characterized.
Surprisingly, recent analyses in Drosophila and humans have revealed that most
protein-coding genes lack a TATA box. Although much has been learned about the
mechanisms of transcription initiation and regulation of TATA box-containing
genes, the basal machinery and the mechanisms of transcription initiation at the
larger class of TATA-less genes remain poorly understood. Previous work by Dr.
Martinez has indicated the existence of core promoter-specific basal factors and
alternative pathways for specific transcription initiation at TATA-less core
promoters. The specific research goals of this CAREER project are (i) to purify
and identify the core promoter-specific basal factors that are essential for
initiator function and initiator-dependent transcription from TATA-less
promoters and (ii) to characterize the molecular functions of these core
promoter-specific basal factors in vitro and in human cells. Through the
educational component of this project (undergraduate and graduate courses in
molecular biology, transcription and chromatin, and the development of a new
undergraduate laboratory course focused on research in gene regulation,
chromatin, and cell signaling), undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
education and training in biochemistry and molecular biology will be enhanced.
Participation of minority students at the University of California-Riverside
will be emphasized. Undergraduate minority students in Dr. Martinez's laboratory
have been participating in various "minority access programs" including the
California Alliance for Minority Participation in Science (CAMP) program.