* 0448287
* CAREER: Adaptive Reliable and Self-Managed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Dina Katabi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2011
* USD 400,000.00

This project develops protocols that allow a network to use multiple paths to
deliver traffic demands between any two points, adaptively balancing the load
across these paths. The project studies load balancing in both wired and
wireless networks taking into account the characteristics of each environment.
The work combines theory with practice providing easy-to-implement solutions
that are provably stable. The contributions of this work are multifold. First,
the developed protocols allow the ISPs to cope with unanticipated changes in
traffic demands. Current traffic engineering mechanisms react only to a subset
of anticipated events such as single-link or two-links failures, for which they
have pre-computed alternate routes. In contrast, the new protocols rebalance the
load in realtime to cope with unanticipated changes in traffic demands caused by
outages involving multiple links and routers, major BGP reroutes, or network
attacks. Second, this work provides the first implementation of multipath
routing in an operational wireless access networks. It improves the network
throughput and increases the community understanding of how to build better
802.11 access networks. Finally, the work compares end-system multipath routing
using overlays and multi-homed domains, and in-network multipath traffic
engineering, and provides valuable insights into the interaction between TCP
congestion control and the control loop of adaptive multipath load balancers.