* 0448058
* CAREER: Composition, Internal Cycling and Losses of Dissolved Organic Nitrogen Along a Temperate Forest Fertility Gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* David Rothstein, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 01/31/2011
* USD 500,000.00

Nitrogen (N) is the nutrient element most limiting to plant growth and forest
productivity in temperate regions. Only recently, scientists have recognized
that plants have the potential to acquire organic forms of N from the soil, and
that leaching of dissolved organic N (DON) contributes significantly to the loss
of N from forest ecosystems. This research project will determine the
contribution of DON to tree nutrition across a range of temperate forest
ecosystems, will characterize the chemical composition of DON leaching from
forests, and will strive to better understand the environmental controls over
the production, internal cycling, and loss of DON in forests. To accomplish
these goals plant uptake, DON composition, internal cycling, and losses of DON
will be compared across a series of forest ecosystems in Michigan that vary
systematically in fertility, tree species composition, and productivity. These
forested experimental sites also will serve as the foundation for a series of
teaching activities designed to introduce concepts of ecosystem science and
sustainable forestry to undergraduate students and minority high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of the form in which N is
cycled (organic vs. mineral) has important implications for managing forest
productivity, understanding the response of forest ecosystems to anthropogenic N
deposition, and understanding the impacts of N leaching on surrounding wetlands,
rivers and groundwater. The teaching component of this project will convey
fundamental principles of ecosystem science and sustainable management to the
next generation of land managers. &lt;br/&gt;