* 0448082
* CAREER:     Self-Organization Services and Application Support Constructs for Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Andreas Savvides, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Min Song
* 09/30/2010
* USD 470,000.00

Autonomous self-configuration is an essential component for the deployment of
scalable wireless sensor networks. Despite the significant progress of network
services, experience with even modest sized testbeds has shown that the per-node
configuration is a significant barrier for large scale deployments. To address
this issue this research will consider three main components of self-
configuration in distributed sensor networks: location calibration, grouping and
mobility. The emphasis will be on the careful design of distributed self-
organization algorithms drawing from multiple disciplines in engineering and
computer science and their integration with the state-of-the-art technologies in
wireless communication, processing and sensing. The results will be applied to
the development of a set of application constructs that will serve as an
"alphabet" for understanding mobility patterns and orchestrating behaviors using
wireless microsensors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed application constructs
will be pursued through the design and implementation of a game application that
will interpret the behavior of its users and generate responses aiming to change
the player's behavior. The impact of this work will arise from the rigorous
exercise of the developed concepts in the context of the game and the actual
deployment of the game variants in everyday life environments, where intelligent
sensors will seamlessly interact with their users. The results of this work will
be published in conferences, taught in a new course on sensor networks and will
be posted on the web for other institutions interested in adopting it. The
hardware and software developed under this project will be made available to the
community so that they can be applied in other sensor network
applications.&lt;br/&gt;