* 0448547
* PECASE:  A Synthetic Delivery Vehicle for Gene Transfer to Non-dividing Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Suzie Pun, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Theresa Good
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

0448547&lt;br/&gt;Pun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticle formulations of imaging
and therapeutic delivery agents are revolutionizing biomedical technologies.
Currently, there are several approaches being developed for cell-specific
targeting of nanoparticles from systemic administration, but the fate of these
particles inside the cell is generally not well controlled nor well understood.
Technologies that enable efficient delivery of nanoparticles to specific
intracellular locations would significantly impact healthcare. The objective of
this CAREER Award is to develop materials that overcome transport limitations in
order to accomplish rapid intracellular delivery to target organelles. Specific
project objectives include: (i) identifying a peptide sequence that binds
specifically to motor protein complexes, (ii) integrating this peptide into a
synthetic gene delivery vehicle designed to promote nuclear delivery, and (iii)
assessing the vehicle's delivery efficiency in non-dividing cells in cell
culture and animal models. The techniques developed in this work may be applied
to enhance the efficiency of other drug delivery systems. The educational plan
includes initiatives to nurture and encourage under-represented students in
engineering. Junior high and high school students are exposed to the field of
Bioengineering and to higher education through a summer camp experience that
incorporates short lectures with lab tours, hands on activities, and device
demonstrations. The teaching modules developed for the camp will also be
presented in local schools to reach a broader audience.&lt;br/&gt;