* 0448767
* CAREER:     Molecular-Based Engineering of Nanoparticle Self-Assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Jee-Ching Wang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 02/28/2010
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT - 0448767&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the CAREER proposal is to
establish a rigorous scientific base that enables better control of nanoparticle
self-assembly for nanotechnology. Possessing novel properties unavailable in
either isolated molecules or bulk materials, nanometer-sized particles are one
of the most important ingredients in nanotechnology and have been recognized as
an ideal basis for next-generation nanodevices and smart materials. To fully
realize their potential, nanoparticles must be fabricated into multidimensional
ordered arrays and predesigned nanostructures. Significant progress has been
made recently. However, current avenues of nanoparticle fabrication still remain
highly empirical and produce only partially satisfactory results. Existing
studies nevertheless revealed clearly the pivotal role of atomic-scale
characteristics in nanoparticle self-assembly. This points out not only the
value of fundamental research but also a fruitful direction for future studies.
The proposed research will first perform molecular dynamics simulations with
atomistic models that incorporate important atomic-scale characteristics to
focus on early self-assembly stages of surfactant-capped nanoparticles. The
results will provide microscopic insights into the initial phase of self-
assembly and will be utilized as input to Brownian dynamics simulations to
investigate larger-scale phenomena and issues in nanoparticle self-assembly, and
to statistical mechanics for the attempt to identify favorable self assembly
conditions. New nanobuilding unit (nanochain) and nanofabrication strategies
(stepped and grooved surfaces) are also proposed based on theoretical analyses.
Their feasibilities and processing protocols will be carefully assessed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Theoretical study
in the respect of nanoparticle self-assembly is important but still scarce.
Because of the complexity in microscopic detail and in the time and length
scales involved, it is a major challenge not only to conventional macroscopic
theories but also to molecular simulation. This proposal employs a multi-scale,
multi-phenomena modeling approach that combines the advantages of finer-scale
molecular dynamics simulation, larger-scale Brownian dynamics simulation, and a
new framework of statistical mechanics. The roles and relative importance of
atomic-scale characteristics in nanoparticle self-assembly will be investigated
in detail. The new framework of statistical mechanics for nanoparticle systems
will be substantiated. The new nanofabrication ideas will be carefully assessed.
The proposed research thus presents a range of theoretical studies that has not
been attempted for the investigation of nanoparticle self-
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The proposed research
will provide a comprehensive characterization and understanding of nanoparticle
self-assembly at a level that has not been achieved before.
The&lt;br/&gt;generated results and insights will be useful to improve current
nanofabrication avenues and to offer suggestions for future nanotechnological
development. The proposal also has a strong educational component that
effectively integrates the PI's research expertise into education at several
levels on a continuous basis. It enriches Chemical Engineering education with
molecular simulation by implementing a required undergraduate course entitled
"Molecular Chemical Engineering" and a senior/graduate elective course entitled
"Molecular Simulation in Engineering and Science." A Molecular Simulation
Laboratory is also being developed to bring molecular simulation closer to
students. These efforts are entirely new in the Department of Chemical and
Biological Engineering and at the University of Missouri-Rolla, and will begin
to put in place a new culture for students to look at engineering systems and
problems from molecular perspectives. The PI will continue to engage
undergraduate students in fundamental research and encourage them to pursue
advanced studies. Two undergraduate researchers will be sponsored by the project
and part of their job is to talk to high school students to promote their
interest in engineering education and fundamental research. The educational plan
will have a significant impact because molecular simulation has evolved into a
practical tool of tremendous academic and industrial significance and because
modern technologies have made molecular perspectives imperative by adopting
bottom-up approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;