* 0448010
* CAREER: Pre-mRNA Splicing and the Coordinated Network of Gene Expression Machineries
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Tracy Johnson, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2011
* USD 911,950.00

One of the most important challenges in biology is understanding how genetic
information is expressed and how this expression is regulated. Human genes (and
the genes from other eukaryotic organisms) are interrupted by long stretches of
noncoding DNA sequence. Once the DNA is "read" by the cellular machinery to make
messenger RNA (the intermediate, information-containing genetic material that
directs protein synthesis), the noncoding RNA must be removed, and the remaining
protein-coding regions are joined. This process, "pre-messenger RNA splicing,"
takes place with exquisite accuracy and is crucial for proper gene expression.
Another remarkable feature of the genome is that its DNA is packaged in a
compact protein/DNA structure, chromatin. In order for the DNA sequence to be
read for messenger RNA synthesis, the chromatin must undergo extensive
modification that regulates DNA accessibility. While the reactions involved in
gene expression have typically been studied as independent, isolated processes,
there is new evidence that RNA synthesis and splicing are, in fact, tightly
coordinated. The RNA synthesis reaction can affect the process of splicing, and
pre-mRNA splicing can affect RNA synthesis; however, the mechanism by which this
occurs remains to be elucidated. Using the biochemically and genetically
tractable model organism, the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, this CAREER
project characterizes interactions between components of the pre-mRNA splicing
and RNA synthesis machineries and the role that these interactions play in
modulating gene expression. Additionally, this work describes an unexpected role
for splicing factors in modulating chromatin modification and explores how this
activity coordinates RNA synthesis and pre-mRNA splicing. The educational
component of this CAREER project focuses on (1) development of an undergraduate
course to explore emerging models of eukaryotic gene expression and (2)
increasing access and opportunities for underrepresented students by working in
collaboration with local high school teachers and students developing inquiry-
based science curricula exploring the molecular biology of gene expression.