* 0448423
* CAREER: Reconsidering Security for Storage and Distributed File Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Yongdae Kim, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 02/28/2011
* USD 424,000.00

Despite the tremendous improvement in technology of networked storage, and the
vast improvement in cryptographic techniques, the directly-applicable state-of-
the-art cryptographic techniques are rarely used in today's real-life storage
systems and research. There exists a wide gap between the recent cryptographic
advances and the existing cryptographic techniques used to secure storage
systems. This project narrows the gap between the state-of-art cryptographic
solutions and the existing storage security solutions as well as continuing to
identify and resolve new security problems. In particular, this research
provides the following solutions: 1) Security for Minimally Trusted Storage
Systems: Securing data on minimally trusted storage is particularly important,
because of frequent insider misuse as well as the current trend of outsourced
storage services. In this project, new cryptographic mechanisms are provided for
temporal access control and secure file sharing. 2) A Secure and Practical Data
Sharing System: Relying either on system administrator or on the data users to
add a new user in global file system may cause possible misuse of privilege.
This project resolves this "dilemma" by splitting the trust between system
administrators and data owners and making them co-operatively work together to
add users to the system. 3) Symmetric-key role-based access control: This
project provides efficient decentralized access control mechanism. For all these
project, complete cryptographic analysis as well as implementation on diverse
storage platforms are considered. The output of this research will be
disseminated to diverse audiences ranging from cryptographers to storage
industries.