* 0448186
* CAREER:   Identification and Characterization of Factors Promoting Cytokinetic Ring Formation in Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Petra Levin, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2011
* USD 712,000.00

Research in the Levin laboratory seeks to understand how bacterial cells
integrate external and internal signals to determine when and where to divide.
The focus of this work is a protein called FtsZ that is found in most bacteria.
When a cell is ready to divide, FtsZ forms a ring that establishes the location
of the nascent septum. During division the FtsZ ring constricts, like a
drawstring, ultimately splitting the cell in two. This project seeks to
characterize the signals that tell FtsZ to form a ring initiating the process of
cell division, and the guideposts that direct FtsZ to midcell ensuring daughter
cells are of the appropriate size and shape. The impact of this work is two-
fold. Mechanistically, the process of cell division is conserved across
evolutionary boundaries. Thus, dissecting the regulatory networks that control
division in a simple bacterium, should reveal general principles that coordinate
cell division with growth and differentiation in all organisms. Moreover,
because cell division is an essential process, FtsZ and the factors governing
its activity hold promise as potential targets for antibiotic development. The
educational component of this project is directed towards developing a sequence
analysis module for students taking Microbiology at Washington University. In
addition to reinforcing concepts covered in lecture, this module will provide
the means to introduce a significant number of undergraduates (~65 to 70 per
semester) to key aspects of basic research, an essential component of a well-
rounded education in biology.