* 0448029
* CAREER: Quantitative Atomistic Simulations of Molecular Associations
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Adrian Elcock, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2010
* USD 722,413.00

The objective of this CAREER project, jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, is to use molecular
dynamics (MD) simulation methods to develop insight into the factors that govern
small-molecule associations in aqueous solutions, and to use this insight to
guide the development of much faster but approximate simulation methods. First,
unforced MD simulations will be used to study the association of pairs of rigid
small molecules in explicitly-modeled aqueous solution. A variety of different
molecule types will be studied in order to obtain unambiguous dissection of
hydrophobic, electrostatic and hydrogen-bonding interactions. Molecule-types
that combine these interactions will also be simulated to explore the way
coupling of different interaction types affects associations. Second, similar MD
simulations will be performed of rigid small-molecule associations in a wide
range of salt solutions. Third, comparison of MD simulations in which small
molecules are allowed internal degrees of freedom will reveal the extent to
which conformational flexibility modulates associations. In all three aims
attempts will be made to reproduce the explicit-solvent MD data with much faster
but simpler Brownian dynamics (BD) methods. These comparisons will provide the
necessary testing to enable thermodynamically-accurate BD simulations of large,
subcellular systems to be performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goals
of this project will complement these aims and fill a considerable void in the
academic course offerings of the University of Iowa by incorporating teaching of
molecular simulation methods into the curriculum. In a first step, the teaching
of MD methods will be integrated with an established Biophysical Chemistry
course to provide a simulation perspective to experimental techniques. In a
second, more ambitious step, an entirely new three semester hour course
dedicated exclusively to molecular simulation methods will be developed.
Teaching of this course will give access to new research methodologies,
especially to students from the Biochemistry, Chemistry and Chemical Engineering
Departments. The MD simulation data accrued during the course of this research
will be made freely available to a broad scientific community developing novel
molecular simulation methods.&lt;br/&gt;