* 0448883
* Space Weather Outreach Program
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Paul Dusenbery, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 01/31/2009
* USD 510,000.00

Both the National Science Foundation (NSF) and National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) have identified the need to educate the public about the
effects of solar activity on Earth's near-space environment, including possible
harm to astronauts, disruption of satellite communications, and adverse effects
on power grids. This project will expand on the previous activities of the Space
Science Institute by expanding and developing the following project components:
(1) the Space Weather Center Web Site; (2) Micro Exhibits for Science Centers
and Shopping Malls; (3) Radio Programs on Ancient Observatories/Space Weather;
(4) the Family Guide to the Sun; and (5) Professional Development Workshops. The
proposed components of the Space Weather Outreach Project cross the major realms
of science communications: formal education, informal education, and public
outreach. The proposed project is integrated so that each of the components
makes use of aspects of the other components. For example, the micro exhibit
will take advantage of the web site's interactive activities as well as
selections from the radio programming. Radio programs can be archived on the Web
site along with the Family Guide and Educator Guide. The guides will be used in
the educator workshops along with the Web site. These interconnections serve to
strengthen each individual component and the project as a whole. This project
will contribute to the field of informal education evaluation by incorporating
various evaluation results into the project and gathering data contrasting
public understanding with student understanding of space physics and astronomy
concepts. In addition, the Institute will conduct further evaluations of its
Family Guide to the Sun that builds on an earlier evaluation in order to find
out what works best in family learning environments. The findings from both
evaluation studies will be made available to other education and outreach
professionals by publishing them in relevant journals. It will also apply the
lessons from the evaluations to activities and materials that it develops for
after-school programs, which will be a new area for SSI's outreach program. SSI
will distribute new, multi-media space weather-related content and activities
through the following channels: (1) the Space Weather Center Web site; (2)
professional development workshops for middle and high school teachers; (3)
English and Spanish language radio broadcasts across the country; (4) NASA's
distribution outlet for printed materials; (5) after-school and community-based
programs; and (6) shopping malls and science centers as venues for micro
exhibits.