* 0448556
* CAREER:  Mechanism of Penta-snRNP Function in Pre-mRNA Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2011
* Scott Stevens, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 03/31/2011
* USD 830,700.00

The way in which genes are expressed in all of our cells is a highly regulated,
complex process involving hundreds of protein factors and several non-coding
snRNAs. The process of pre-mRNA splicing is required to remove stretches of RNA
called introns, which if not removed would interfere with proper expression of
that gene. Almost all human genes contain introns and their faithful and rapid
removal is required for proper functioning. The machinery in eukaryotic cells
charged with the removal of introns is called the spliceosome, a collection of
RNAs and many proteins that rearranges several times during the course of a
single intron removal, recruiting factors and ejecting others in a highly
coordinated manner. The recent discovery of the penta-snRNP in yeast cells has
challenged a paradigm in the mechanism of spliceosome assembly, specifically,
that the machinery is largely pre-assembled and that the rearrangements occur
within this pre-assembled complex. The single-celled eukaryotic organism
Saccharomyces cerevisiae will be used to study the process of spliceosome
assembly and the pre-mRNA splicing reaction as it is amenable to genetic and
biochemical analysis and executes the pre-mRNA splicing reaction in a way that
is chemically identical to the human splicing reaction. This CAREER project will
address the mechanism of spliceosome assembly and the means by which the penta-
snRNP engages its pre-mRNA substrate. Compositional and functional analyses of
the early splicing intermediates will allow a comprehensive biochemical and
genetic analysis of the initial events in spliceosome assembly. In conjunction
with the Austin Independent School District, this project also endeavors to
initiate and execute a comprehensive outreach program involving area high school
teachers, administrators and students to provide exposure of interested junior
and senior students to modern molecular biology and the educational and research
options available to them.