* 0448789
* CAREER:  Research and Education on Deformation of Coated Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2011
* Jyhwen Wang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2011
* USD 416,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Caree Development (CAREER) Program project
is to advance fundamental understanding of deformation of coated materials and
to develop their processing technologies. Deformable coated materials have
diverse applications, from polymer coated sheet metal for stamping to metallic
thin film coated polymer for flexible electronics. The major challenges in
forming coated materials into useful products are in keeping the coating from
tooling contact damage and in maintaining the adhesive bond in the elastic-
plastic deformation process. The approach toward the research objective is a
multidisciplinary methodology that consists of both experimental and theoretical
efforts. Specifically, the research will develop novel experiments to improve
the understanding of contact damage and interface decohesion. The modeling
framework will be based on the development of phenomenological descriptions and
constitutive models of the coatings, substrates, and polymer-metal interface.
Applied mechanics and adhesion science theories will be integrated to devise
novel fabrication techniques for coated
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing the understanding of deformation of
coated materials will accelerate the development of new coating materials and
new coating processes. Application of coated material can lessen environmental
impact and reduce manufacturing cost. Development of new deformation techniques
will result in enabling technologies for new products. The CAREER project will
undertake various efforts in curriculum development, student mentoring,
industrial collaboration, and outreach activities such as local science museum
exhibitions. The project will spark students' interest in the process of
knowledge discovery and will prepare students to take on future challenges.
Through the integration of research and education, new intellectual capital will
be developed.