* 0448639
* CAREER:     A Receiver-Driven Framework for Scalable and Adaptive Peer-to-Peer Streaming
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Reza Rejaie, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 01/31/2011
* USD 409,998.00

Existing solutions for streaming on overlay networks adopt the idea of
application level multicast, where participating peers form a topologically
aware tree structure to minimize overall delay. These approaches are unable to
maximize quality of delivered stream to individual peers because of the inherent
bandwidth limitation of the tree structure. This project designs, develops and
evaluates a receiver-driven framework to construct "bandwidth-aware" overlays
for streaming in Peer-to-Peer (P2P) networks, called PALS. PALS departs from the
common tree-based approach to overlay construction and allows each peer to
independently and selfishly determine the best way to connect to the overlay in
order to maximize its own delivered quality. Similar to a group of competing TCP
flows, independent and selfishly competing peers in an overlay reach an
``equilibrium'' in which not only delivered bandwidth to each peer is maximized
to its fair share of available bandwidth, but also the resulting unstructured
overlay is globally efficient. This project investigates three broad areas: (i)
techniques for adaptive streaming from multiple congestion controlled senders,
(ii) techniques for scalable resource discovery and adaptive resource selection,
and (iii) distributed multimedia caching schemes for seamless support of
asynchronous peers. Furthermore, this project delivers a prototyped
implementation of PALS framework as an open-source modular middleware that will
be made publicly available. The prototype enables researchers to conduct
Internet-wide experiments and investigate interactions between PALS and various
encoding schemes. The prototype also serves as an educational tool in the
classroom to bring hands-on experience with P2P streaming technology to
students.