* 0448707
* CAREER:    Structural Stability and Thin-walled Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Benjamin Schafer, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 07/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract for: CAREER: STRUCTURAL STABILITY AND THIN-WALLED STRUCTURES, CMS
proposal 0448707 PI: Ben Schafer, Johns Hopkins

Thin-walled structures form the backbone of the nation's industrial
infrastructure and enjoy wide application in civil and mechanical systems. While
stability is a fundamental requirement for any successful structure, for thin-
walled structures, cross-section stability is the primary constraint. Complex to
analyze and difficult to design, thin-walled structures are nevertheless highly
efficient. Material is minimized in thin-walled members, a must when embracing
costly new materials for use in our high volume, low-cost, physical
infrastructure.

This proposal advances an integrated plan of theoretical, computational, and
experimental work to (1) implement new techniques in computational stability of
particular need for thin-walled members; (2) develop and verify new methods that
provide more efficient, robust, and reliable designs; and (3) create new
resources that increase the breadth and depth of the PI's efforts in structural
stability education while strengthening partnerships at Hopkins and in the
community. Cross-section instability greatly complicates the behavior of thin-
walled members; and current computational stability techniques do little to add
clarity. Proposed here is a new modal decomposition technique that provides (i)
model reduction, the ability to isolate the strain fields consistent with
specific classes of cross-section instability, and then perform meaningful
analysis with as little as one degree of freedom, and (ii) modal identification,
a means to classify a general member deformation field into the basic modes of
cross-section instability which make up that field, and thus quantify modal
interactions. Development of modal decomposition provides a unique means to
investigate a variety of open questions in structural stability, particularly
related to coupled and mixed modes. Empiricism and an over-reliance on classical
plate buckling solutions complicates the design of thin walled structures and
hinders efficiency as designers are tied to the solutions of the past. A new
design method, developed by the PI for thin-walled steel structures, seeks to
provide flexibility and reliability by attacking cross-section instability
computationally and integrating the results into a comprehensive design process.
New developments to extend this design methodology to beam-columns and members
with perforations are proposed. Large changes in design such as those proposed
here require careful experimentation and computation to understand the
ramifications and provide a valid and verified methodology. Further, a specific
plan is provided for extending the new design method to thin-walled members made
of materials other than steel, including aluminum and thermoplastics.

Intellectual Merit: this proposal provides for (i) the development of a novel
modal decomposition technique of use in model reduction and modal identification
in computational structural stability problems and its application to a variety
of important stability issues, and (ii) the practical extension and verification
of computational structural stability into everyday design of thin-walled steel
members, including the unique role of cross-sectional stability under complex
loading as in beam-columns, and members with perforations. The proposed modal
decomposition technique and the developed design methodologies represent
significant advances for both the theory and design of thin-walled members and
have the potential to spur new discoveries and innovation. A plan is proposed
for extending the design methods to a variety of other important thin-walled
materials including aluminum and thermoplastics. The proposed activity relies
extensively on the PI's experience in experimental and computational structural
stability for thin-walled members and provides a needed platform for continued
development.

Broader impact: The PI's involvement in development of design specifications and
technical committees ensures that both the practicing engineering community and
the research community will benefit in the findings. Additionally, the education
plan detailed herein insures that high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students will also all benefit from the proposed work. The high school outreach
efforts focus on enriching the PI's ongoing collaboration with Baltimore
Polytechnical High School (Poly), a school with predominately minority student
enrollment. Strengthening the relationship with Poly provides an important venue
for science and engineering activism with underrepresented groups. The
undergraduate education efforts are teamed with the Hopkins Center for
Educational Resources and will enable the development of pedagogically sound
online teaching guides in structural stability. Research findings, including the
educational efforts, will be disseminated by journal papers, conference talks,
and by the PI's ongoing efforts with several technical committees.