* 0448313
* CAREER:    A Framework for Early-Stage Computer Architecture Design Space Exploration and Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2011
* David Brooks, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Ahmed Louri
* 01/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: A Framework for Early-Stage Computer Architecture Design Space
Exploration and Optimization
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future advances in high-
performance, consumer, and embedded computing will be limited by power and
thermal issues. As we seek to develop novel computing devices for these domains,
it is critical to understand the power requirements at the earliest stages of
the design and development process. This project will develop an accurate and
flexible modeling infrastructure that can be used to quantify power,
performance, and design complexity and will utilize this infrastructure to
explore future power-aware computing design decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to develop novel technical solutions to architectural power and
cycle-time modeling and to the problem of quantifying design complexity. The
proposed models combine the flexibility advantages of analytical models with the
superior accuracy that fully-empirical models provide. In this methodology,
detailed empirical characterization of active power, leakage power, and delay is
performed on building blocks and analytical models are then developed to chain
them appropriately to model microarchitectural structures. These models will be
applied to study architectural design tradeoffs between power, performance, and
design complexity. In particular, this project seeks to understand the relative
power-performance efficiency and design complexity of embedded and high-
performance architectures and methods for extracting parallelism at the
instruction and thread-level.&lt;br/&gt;