* 0448240
* CAREER: Liberative Pedagogies in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Donna Riley, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 01/31/2011
* USD 404,813.00

Intellectual Merit: Many educators in the humanities and social sciences employ
pedagogies based to engage students in creating a democratic classroom that
encourages all voices. The goal of this CAREER award is to bring these
pedagogies to engineering education and encourage their widespread use in
curriculum development as a means to improve the discipline's capacity to
successfully attract, retain, educate and advance the broadest possible spectrum
of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work on cognitive approaches to
engineering education and on increasing diversity in the engineering profession
affirm techniques proposed by liberative pedagogies, which have a three-decade
track record of successful implementation in the social sciences and humanities.
These philosophies should be applied, tested, and enhanced in a constructive
feedback loop in engineering education because they represent good educational
practice, because they may advance the engagement of underrepresented groups in
engineering, and because they challenge educators to rethink the purposes and
goals of engineering education itself. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
Liberative Pedagogies project include: (1) Develop and implement curricular
innovations based on liberative pedagogies and student input; (2) Evaluate
curricular and pedagogical changes based on liberative pedagogies using both
conventional and liberative assessment tools; (3) to understand how women
students conceptualize their identities as engineering students and/or future
engineers; (4) Disseminate results on campus, in local preK-12 education, and
throughout the engineering education community; and (5) Involve students in
curricular development based on liberative pedagogies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The findings will assist engineering
educators nationwide in the shift toward learner-centered education by providing
important data about student beliefs and attitudes toward &lt;br/&gt;liberative
pedagogies in engineering, as well as assessing their implementation in first-
year, core, and upper-level elective courses including Engineering
Thermodynamics, Mass and Energy Balances, Heat and Mass Transfer, and
Engineering and Global Development. The project will develop and test assessment
tools and methods based on these pedagogical approaches that will be of service
to faculty seeking to adapt their classrooms and curricula to diverse
learners.&lt;br/&gt;