* 0448168
* CAREER:     Content and Cohesion Models, with Applications to Text Summarization and Natural Language Generation
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2012
* Regina Barzilay, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

Within the last decade, probabilistic methods have delivered successful analyses
of natural language texts that, in turn, have enabled a broad range of valuable
and practical applications, such as machine translation, question answering, and
summarization. Despite this success, existing methods suffer from a fundamental
limitation: they process each document with little or no ability to take
advantage of its global structure. All too often, this results in suboptimal
performance for the task at hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to develop probabilistic models for two fundamental, orthogonal dimensions of
text, content and cohesion. A model based on the first dimension, content,
describes the topics present in a text and their organization. The second
dimension, cohesion, is concerned with how information is realized in a given
text. Development of these models requires new unsupervised techniques able to
capture complex text properties and novel algorithms for topical discretization
and discourse grammar induction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gaining a computational
measure of what constitutes a good text will open new research avenues on the
edge of humanities and computer science. Probabilistic text models will form a
basis for novel approaches to text summarization and generation that will make
on-line information much more accessible than is currently the case. This will
substantially affect the way people experience the many forms of textual on-line
information, including news reports, consumer health information, and government
documents. Students will become involved in this research through hands-on
projects, outreach programs, and courses at both the undergraduate and graduate
level.