* 0448977
* 2005 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Confernce on Learning and Memory, to be held in Cold Spring Harbor, NY April 20 - 24, 2005
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2006
* USD 8,000.00

This conference on learning and memory (April 20-24, 2005) will bring together
researchers interested in understanding common mechanisms of information
acquisition and storage. Projects will be discussed covering synaptic plasticity
and memory across invertebrate and vertebrate systems. Young scientists, woman,
and minorities will be recruited to participate. The meeting will include
platform and poster presentations, and discussions of current research and
concepts. Sessions will cover not only invertebrates and vertebrates, but also
in vivo and in vitro approaches, raging from cellular molecular to systems
approaches. The impact of this conference will extend to numerous fields of
study that are interested in computational models and cellular and molecular
mechanisms underlying plasticity and learning. Prior meetings of a similar
nature have been held at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory almost every other year
since 1992. However, the present conference will be unique in that it will
integrate across levels, paradigms and preparations to characterize the
cognitive aspects of learning and memory using biochemical, molecular,
behavioral, and electrophysiological analyses that induce plasticity and
learning. The meeting will include approximately 200 scientists from the US and
around the world.