* 0448078
* PECASE:  The Effect of Surfactant on Topological Transitions in Interfacial Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2005,05/31/2007
* Ashley James, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 05/31/2007
* USD 140,067.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0448078&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: ASHLEY
JAMES&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: UNIVERSITY OF
MINNESOTA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: THE EFFECT OF SURFACTANT ON
TOPOLOGICAL TRANSITIONS IN INTERFACIAL FLOWS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interface
rupture is critical to spray cooling, spray coating, emulsification,
encapsulation, fuel atomization, drug delivery, the formation of raindrops,
chemical separation, and many other industrial, biomedical, and natural
processes. Surfactant is present in many of these applications, either as
impurities or by design, but its effects are not well understood. The primary
objectives of this grant are: to improve understanding of the physics of rupture
in interfacial fluid flow with surfactant; and to develop numerical tools to
accurately simulate these processes. Numerical simulations will be based on an
axisymmetric volume-of-fluid method for interface tracking on an unstructured,
adaptive mesh. The method will include algorithms to simulate the dynamics of
soluble and insoluble surfactant. Additionally, van der Waals forces will be
included. Comparison to theory and experiments will be used to validate the
numerical algorithms. Additional impacts of this grant are the educational and
outreach components. Involving undergraduate students in research will enhance
learning by providing the students with exposure to cutting-edge research and
with the opportunity to think more deeply about fluid mechanics problems. The
research program will also be integrated with the re-development of a
computational fluid dynamics course. Active learning often equates with better
learning, yet most engineering courses still rely on a lecture format. In the
new course format students will actively participate in deriving numerical
methods, developing codes, debugging, comparing various methods, post-
processing, and interpreting results. The final component of the grant is
outreach to underrepresented groups with the aims of promoting education and
increasing participation in science and engineering. A collaborative project
with the Circle of Life School on the White Earth Indian Reservation is aimed at
interesting Anishinaabe Indian youth in science and engineering, and at lowering
the school's drop-out rate. Hands-on, group activities will be designed to
excite the students about learning and to give them a sense of achievement. This
program has the potential to greatly impact the students' futures by stimulating
them to stay in school. It will also enhance partnerships between the University
of Minnesota and the Reservation. An additional outreach activity is for the PI
to serve as a role model for women engineering students. Fostering a sense of
belonging in women engineering students is critical to their professional
fulfillment and to retention as engineering majors. By acting as a mentor, the
PI can help woman students make informed choices about their careers.
&lt;br/&gt;