* 0448023
* CAREER:A Unified Architecture for Data Mining Large Biomedical Literature Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2005,08/31/2010
* Xiaohua Hu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 08/31/2010
* USD 415,000.00

The large number of documents in biomedical literature databases and the lack of
formal structure in the natural-language narrative in those documents make the
search and processing very difficult to many scientists involved in
bioinformatics research. This CAREER project is investigating the efficiency and
effectiveness of information retrieval procedures, the effectiveness and
robustness of pattern learning methods for information extraction, and
information overload in text mining simultaneously in a coherent and unified
framework for biomedical literature data mining. The deliverables of this
project are: (1) to develop a semantic-based query expansion method for large
biomedical literature databases; (2) to design an automatic pattern generation
and evaluation method from unlabeled text files based on mutual bootstrapping
and dynamic programming; (3) to develop a set of novel text mining algorithms
such as ontology-enhanced textual clustering and text summarization. This
project is testing its application in real-world bioinformatics domains such as
chromatin interaction networks and microarray data analysis.

The broad impact on society made by this project is the generation of a novel
unified architecture for biomedical literature data mining. This integrated and
complementary approach in a unified architecture has the potential to create a
very powerful novel tool for bioinformatics and for most text processing tasks.
This project has the potential to attract diverse collaborators who have an
interest in accessing complex biomedical or general scientific data and
information. Students are involved in this research through hands-on projects, a
Co-Op program and courses at both the graduate and undergraduate level.