* 0448796
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education in Nano- and Microscale Photoacoustic and Photothermal Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Todd Murray, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 04/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

CMS 0448796 CAREER: Integrated Research and Education in Nano- and Microscale
Photoacoustic and Photothermal Microscopy T.W. Murray: Boston University

Abstract

The primary objective of this CAREER project is to enable rapid, accurate
imaging of thermal and mechanical properties on micrometer and nanometer length
scales, thereby contributing to the effort to improve the performance and
reliability of micron scale systems and in the effort to understand and control
the thermal and mechanical behavior of materials at the nanoscale. The PI
develops novel photoacoustic and photothermal (PA/PT) measurement capabilities
for the noncontact and nondestructive imaging of surface properties and
subsurface defects at the nanoscale, along with an understanding of how the
measured quantities relate to the thermo-mechanical properties of the target
material. A technique for producing highly localized heat sources and probes for
PA/PT imaging is explored, with the goal of pushing the lateral resolution of
PA/PT microscopy to the nanoscale regime. This novel imaging modality makes use
of the high absorption and local field enhancement around nanoparticles excited
at the plasmon resonance frequency, and will have a broad impact in the quest to
understand and characterize material behavior at the nanoscale. Next, A high-
resolution photoacoustic microscopy system is developed which uses a high-
frequency (GHz) modulated excitation source. Improvements in signal to noise
ratio over pulsed systems are expected through bandwidth reduction and pulse
coding techniques, expanding the range of applications for which this NDE
technique is suitable. The final thrust area in this proposal focuses on the
modeling of laser generation of acoustic and thermal waves in complex materials
systems, an area which is essential for the interpretation of thermal and
acoustic signals in these systems, and for accurate inversion of these signals
to obtain material property information. The research results will have direct
applications in nanofabrication: for online monitoring of the fabrication
process as well as in the measurement of the fundamental properties of "as-
fabricated" materials systems. This project supports both graduate and
undergraduate researchers, and trains these students in a wide cross-section of
engineering science that this project draws upon including NDE, applied optics,
elastic wave propagation, and nanoscale engineering.

This CAREER project supports the development and implementation of the Learning
Experiences for New Scientists (LENS) program in which academically at-risk 7th
and 8th grade students come to Boston University for a week of hands on
demonstrations and problem solving activities. This program targets students at
a critical time in the development of science skills, and is aimed at reducing
the number of students graduating from high school who lack basic proficiency in
science and math. The multi-media presentations developed for the LENS program
are placed on the Web to disseminate to other educators, and are made available
for other outreach programs through the Learning Resource Network (LERNet)
program at Boston University. The PI has arranged for a graduate student to work
at Lawrence Livermore National Lab for one summer under this project. This
opportunity allows the student to interact with several experts on laser
ultrasonics at LLNL, and to broaden his/her educational background. The PI
develops a new undergraduate course in the area of mechanical behavior of
materials, in which the NDE of materials will be discussed. The PI also develops
NDE demonstrations for a graduate course in experimental techniques in solid
mechanics. The PI serves as the faculty advisor for a professional society
student group, and will host a future regional student conference at BU. The PI
plans to invite representatives from local companies and educational
institutions to speak to the students about the importance of NDE.