* 0448567
* Assembly and Function of Cyanobacterial Photosystem II
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Robert Burnap, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2008
* USD 442,240.00

Photosystem II (PSII) is a crucial but complex enzyme that forms the foundation
of the photosynthetic machinery that supports all life on earth. This enzyme is
responsible for using light energy to extract hydrogen from water. The overall
process results in food for life on earth along with the removal of inorganic
carbon from the earth's atmosphere and production of oxygen essential for
earth's animals and other heterotrophic life forms. From an economic
perspective, an understanding of this process is important if successful
biomimetic devices are to be developed for such things as solar energy
conversion to produce utilizable hydrogen or hydrides as an energy source to
power future electric cars. Despite its importance, many aspects of the enzyme's
mechanism remain poorly understood. Furthermore, photosystem II sustains very
high rates of damage during its normal operation and is, thus, the 'Achilles
Heel' of the plant. Many types of plant stress, including drought, result in the
rapid and potentially lethal loss of photosystem II because of this damage.
Plants must therefore constantly replace the damaged parts of photosystem II and
this presents important biosynthetic challenges that are also still not
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is developing an
understanding of the water-splitting mechanism and how the high rates of
photosystem II repair are accomplished. The research takes the perspective that
photosystem II is a molecular machine and that it is possible to understand how
this machine operates by changing its parts using state-of-the-art genetic
methods and probing the resultant changes in the machine's operation using a
variety of informative biochemical and biophysical techniques. This research
takes advantage of the recent crystallization and visualization of the molecular
structure of the PSII 'machine'. It combines structure-based mutagenesis to
study the assembly and function of the photosystem II complex in a model
organism, Synechocystis PCC 6803. Specifically, this project will address
hypotheses on the mechanism of photoactivation of photosystem II and will better
define the protein factors participating in the repair cycle using microarray
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: These extend beyond the
immediate scientific area: 1) The proposed work will provide significant
training opportunities for undergraduate students, graduate students, and
postdoctoral fellows. 2) The project will have positive impact on the production
of Synechocystis microarrays (distributed on a cost-return basis) and the
workshops that the Oklahoma Microarray Core Facility conducts. These arrays
serve teaching objectives and are being used to teach the principals of
microarray production and applications in summer workshops serving the
university and surrounding regions. 3) It will allow increased participation in
the recently renewed Native Americans in Biological Sciences (NABS) program at
Oklahoma State University.