* 0448506
* CAREER: Influence of Amino-Acid Transport and Partitioning on Nitrogen Profiles in Legume Seeds
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Mechthild Tegeder, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 07/31/2010
* USD 800,000.00

This CAREER project will develop and strengthen a research and teaching program
studying distribution and transport of nitrogen in plants. The major transport
form of nitrogen in most plants is as amino acids, which are the basic building
blocks for synthesis of enzymes and proteins. These metabolites are crucial for
plant growth and also play a significant role for human nutrition either
directly or as feed for animals. The economic and nutritional value of many
crops is related to the amount and quality of proteins they accumulate, which is
dependent upon transport of amino acids from sites of synthesis. However, the
mechanisms regulating transport or partitioning of amino acids from sites of
production in leaves or roots (source) to sites of utilization such as seeds
(sinks) are not well understood. The hypothesis underlying this project is that
partitioning of various amino acids between leaves and seeds is controlled by
specific transporters located in the source and sink cells. Pea has been chosen
as a model as it has large seeds and provides experimental access to the plasma
membrane transport events responsible for amino acid import.&lt;br/&gt;Amino
acid transporters responsible for uptake of a broad range of amino acids in pea
will be analyzed with respect to their cellular localization and function.
Transport processes will be manipulated by overexpressing the transporters in
source and sink organs followed by analysis of effects on amino acid
translocation to seeds and on nitrogen composition. The genetically-modified pea
plants will provide excellent tools to explore questions about the regulation of
partitioning of amino acids, and how transport of specific amino acids can
affect growth and seed composition. The information gained can potentially be
transferred to other crops to ensure plant productivity and enhance nutritional
quality of seeds or other plant organs used as food.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will generate
important new data on the fundamental processes of amino acid allocation to sink
organs (e.g. seeds), and will provide the platform for future strategies aimed
at manipulating amino acid and protein quality and quantity in crop plants. It
will also strongly promote teaching and training of students in plant biology at
all educational levels through incorporation of the research techniques and
results into undergraduate and graduate level courses taught by the principal
investigator (PI). These courses will provide cutting-edge research and
technology information to the students. A summer course stipend will be offered
to four top undergraduate students who have previously taken the PI's Plant
Physiology course for work on specific parts of the project to gain first hand
experience in plant molecular physiology. A graduate and postgraduate student
will be involved in undergraduate tutoring and research. The project will
promote effective integration of plant biology education and research at all
levels and advance the PI's professional development and her contribution to the
department and to student training in plant science. &lt;br/&gt;