* 0448052
* CAREER: Establishment of Hirudo medicinalis as a model for digestive-tract symbioses
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Joerg Graf, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2011
* USD 738,461.00

The digestive-tract community of animals has been hypothesized to play important
roles for the well-being of the host. The inherent complexity of most of these
communities has hindered progress in understanding the molecular mechanisms that
are critical for bacterium-host and bacterium-bacterium interactions. A CAREER
grant has been awarded to Dr. Joerg Graf of the University of Connecticut to lay
the foundation for using the medicinal leech as a model for digestive-tract
associations. This leech houses two simple, multispecies digestive-tract
communities. The microbial community of the crop, which is the largest
compartment of the digestive tract, is dominated by Aeromonas veronii biovar
sobria and a presently uncultured symbiont related to Bacteroides. The community
of the intestinum is more complex with five species accounting for over 88% of
the detected 16S rRNA genes. Dr. Graf will use a state-of-art technique,
signature-tagged transposon mutagenesis, to identify genes that Aeromonas
veronii requires for successful colonization. This analysis will provide new
insights into the molecular mechanisms and physiological adaptation critical for
establishing and maintaining a successful symbiosis. The location of the
symbionts in the crop and intestinum will be determined using fluorescent in
situ hybridizations. Fundamental questions will be investigated, including the
function of the symbionts and the way the symbionts are transmitted between
generations. This research program will be closely integrated with two
educational components. A workshop in genetic engineering will be developed for
high school students that participate in the Mentor Connection, a summer program
at the University of Connecticut for talented juniors and senior of diverse
backgrounds. In addition, a bacterial genetics laboratory class for
undergraduate students will be developed that uses organisms and techniques used
in this research program. Dr. Graf's work will provide important information
that is applicable to more complex digestive-tract associations and train the
next generation of scientists.