* 0448405
* CAREER:  Coordinated Resource Management in IP-based Cellular Radio Access Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2005,09/30/2006
* Xin Wang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 09/30/2006
* USD 102,797.00

Flexible and efficient management of resources is imperative in the air
interface and backhaul network, given the many challenges including the limited
radio spectrum, high cost of radio access networks, volatile wireless channel
conditions, and diverse and demanding QoS requirements. This research develops a
comprehensive resource management framework for supporting both circuit-switched
and packet-switched traffic seamlessly over an (initially CDMA-based) radio
access system. Specific goals include studying the fundamental resource-
allocation problems in the air interface and IP-RAN, understanding and
incorporating the many interactions while implementing resource management, and
trading-off optimality with control and management overhead. This work is part
of a broad and ambitious effort to fundamentally advance the understanding of
the inter-dependency between different network layers and systems. Specific
research results will include the development of new cross layer design and
optimization techniques, and the enhancement of QoS and energy efficiency at
various layers. The growth of powerful multimedia services over wireless
terminals is having a profound impact on societies across the world. The
practical implication of this research is to facilitate the integration of these
services with the Internet, and to enable their seamless delivery over different
wireless devices. In turn, these services can be deployed with lower cost, and
with increased reach and quality. Finally, this research brings novel wireless
networking projects into the undergraduate and graduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;