* 0448277
* CAREER:    Information Theoretic Methods in Communication and Computational Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Amit Chakrabarti, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

From the very early years of computer science it has been clear
that&lt;br/&gt;computational problems vary greatly in difficulty, ranging from
easy to&lt;br/&gt;moderately hard to intractably hard to outright unsolvable.
&lt;br/&gt;Computational complexity theory is the branch of computer science
that&lt;br/&gt;seeks to rigorously and mathematically study the inherent
difficulty of&lt;br/&gt;computational problems, measured as the amount of a
certain resource (or&lt;br/&gt;resources) required for their solution, and
organize problems into&lt;br/&gt;classes based on their inherent difficulty.
Examples of relevant&lt;br/&gt;resources include processing time, storage space
and inter-computer&lt;br/&gt;communication. Communication complexity involves
the latter&lt;br/&gt;resource and asks how many bits must be communicated
between different&lt;br/&gt;computers to solve a problem whose input is split
between these&lt;br/&gt;computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is plenty of
intrinsic interest in communication complexity,&lt;br/&gt;because of the large
variety of Internet-driven applications where it is&lt;br/&gt;relevant. In
addition, over the last decade and a half, communication&lt;br/&gt;complexity
has been emerging as an area that unites many seemingly&lt;br/&gt;disparate
areas of theoretical computer science some of which do not&lt;br/&gt;directly
involve communication; examples are circuit complexity,
query&lt;br/&gt;complexity, quantum computing, algorithmic game theory,
optimization and&lt;br/&gt;distributed computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent years, information theory has proved itself to be a
powerful&lt;br/&gt;tool in the study of communication complexity, and therefore
in the&lt;br/&gt;various other areas of complexity theory that communication
impacts. I&lt;br/&gt;have already explored this theme in my recent work and was
an author of&lt;br/&gt;a recent paper that formally introduced the concept of
information&lt;br/&gt;complexity and described its relation to communication
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;Other subsequent work of mine has applied information
theoretic&lt;br/&gt;techniques to prove theorems about communication complexity
and applied&lt;br/&gt;these theorems in turn to explore the inherent difficulty
of problems&lt;br/&gt;not directly involving
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to continue
this line of work in two&lt;br/&gt;ways. First, I shall continue to develop and
extend what I call the&lt;br/&gt;information complexity framework and attempt to
apply it to models of&lt;br/&gt;computation where it hasn't yet been applied
successfully. A noteworthy&lt;br/&gt;subgoal of the first goal will be to use
this framework to understand&lt;br/&gt;the limitations of quantum computation.
Second, I shall seek to study&lt;br/&gt;certain concrete problems in
communication complexity that have known&lt;br/&gt;connections to other areas of
complexity theory. Two specific areas I&lt;br/&gt;shall focus on are (1) the
complexity of data stream computations and&lt;br/&gt;(2) circuit complexity,
with an emphasis on the power of shallow&lt;br/&gt;circuits. &lt;br/&gt;