* 0448844
* Brain Maturation Subserving Cognitive Control Development
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Silvia Bunge, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 449,997.00

To produce meaningful, goal-directed behavior, it is necessary to be able to
keep relevant information in mind and to mentally manipulate this information as
needed (i.e., use working memory). It is also necessary to remember and use
rules that specify how to respond under different circumstances and to switch
flexibly between tasks and rules as the circumstances change. Working memory
manipulation and the ability to use and switch flexibly between task rules are
among the functions referred to as cognitive control functions, in that they
enable us to control our thoughts and actions. Cognitive control is thought to
rely on prefrontal cortex (PFC) and its interactions with other brain regions.
However, brain imaging research in adults suggests that different control
functions may rely on different brain regions. Moreover, behavioral research on
the development of cognitive control over childhood suggests that these
functions may mature at different rates. Dr. Silvia A. Bunge, with support of
NSF, is examining the changes in brain activity over childhood that give rise to
developmental improvements in specific cognitive control functions. To this end,
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data is being acquired while
children and young adults (ages 8-25) perform tasks that require working memory
and flexible rule use.

Characterizing developmental changes in the neural mechanisms underlying
cognitive control will further our understanding of normal cognitive development
and lead to insights regarding control mechanisms in the adult brain. These
findings will lay the foundation for understanding how cognitive control
development is compromised in neurodevelopmental disorders, and how teaching in
schools might be modified to benefit children with disordered control. This
project will provide research training and mentoring to a number of students,
including a graduate student, a research assistant, and several undergraduates.
The project will promote the scientific careers of at several female scientists.
The findings will be disseminated via neuroscience conferences and child
development conferences, and will be published in peer-reviewed journals.