* 0448432
* CAREER: Role of Zebrafish N-cadherin in Neurulation and Neuronal Differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Rachel Brewster, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 01/31/2011
* USD 583,986.00

ABSTRACT - RACHEL, M., BREWSTER - PROPOSAL # 0448432&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
central nervous system (CNS) carries out highly complex functions, which enable
us to sense our environment, think and coordinate movements. Not surprisingly,
even slight perturbations in the proper assembly of the CNS can have a dramatic
impact on our lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this research proposal
is to analyze the role of two critical genes, N-cadherin (N-cad) and bumpy brain
(bpb), in CNS development, using the zebrafish as a model system. While N-cad
encodes a cell adhesion molecule, the molecular identity of bpb is currently
unknown. Both N-cad and bpb are essential for the shaping of the neural tube,
the precursor of the CNS, and genetic evidence indicates that the products of
these genes interact. In addition, N-cad appears to be required for the
maintenance of stem cell-like populations in the CNS. The specific aims of this
research proposal are to investigate, at a cellular and molecular level, how
N-cad and bpb function and interact to mediate these processes. Since zebrafish
CNS development bears multiple similarities to that of other vertebrates, these
studies should reveal fundamental mechanisms underlying CNS development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader educational goals of this research proposal
are to 1) expose students at all levels to basic research and foster an interest
in research-related careers, 2) increase the participation of underrepresented
minorities in the sciences. The first goal will be accomplished by recruiting
high school students from neighboring schools to carry out research projects in
the laboratory, participation of the PI and her students in science-related
lecture series at these high schools and the creation of innovative curricular
offerings. Finally, by leveraging the institutional strengths of the University
of Maryland Baltimore County, the PI will continue to provide a nurturing and
stimulating learning environment for students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;