* 0448670
* CAREER: Combined Computational and Experimental Approaches for the Design of Protein-Protein Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2013
* John Love, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2013
* USD 655,639.00

Molecular self-assembly is the spontaneous association of molecules into stable,
structurally well-defined complexes joined by noncovalent bonds. The objective
of this CAREER project is to understand and ultimately control the forces that
drive protein self-assembly. To achieve this aim, the PI will use an inverse
approach that combines cutting-edge computational docking methods with advanced
protein design algorithms to drive the self-assembly of previously monomeric
proteins. The proteins will be computationally docked together and then treated
as one where interfacial side chains are mutated and repacked in a manner
analogous to the core of a well-folded protein. The goal is to select the
specific amino acids that, upon mutation, will provide the physical chemical
interactions that drive complex formation. To complement these efforts powerful
experimental techniques will be employed that function to screen combinatorial
libraries of mutant candidate proteins for those that bind target proteins with
high affinity.

This CAREER project will contribute to the development of the PI as a teacher-
scholar as it incorporates educational programs for undergraduate, graduate,
postgraduate and middle/high school students. In addition to the above research
efforts a laboratory course is being developed that is meant to provide students
with a firm understanding of the chemical and biological principles that
underlie the emerging field of forensics science. The educational impact of this
research is exemplified by the fact that the PI is working collaboratively with
San Diego County agencies to develop a series of inquiry-based lab modules for a
pilot program in which students from underserved areas explore basic methods
used in forensic science. The merit of this educational aim is to instill in
youth the lifelong desire to learn and thereby succeed.