* 0448185
* CAREER:    The Light Portal:    3D Reconstruction and Visualization Over Space and Time
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Ruigang Yang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2011
* USD 592,000.00

The focus of this project is on the problems associated with reconstruction and
visualization of three-dimensional objects from images or video streams. The
PI's ultimate goal is to first develop the fundamental algorithms underlying,
and then to implement, an end-to-end light portal that can capture and "re-
enact" real-world objects or events in a different time or space. A light portal
captures a scene using a number of cameras with different viewpoints. From these
input images, intelligent software to be developed by the PI will either
reconstruct a coherent parametric scene model that includes not only geometry
but also lighting and surface reflectance properties (suitable for storage,
editing, and playback over time), or directly interpolate the complete bundle of
color rays to be displayed (suitable for live transmission over space). These
results will then be visualized on a unique light-field display that utilizes an
array of projectors and micro-lens screens to emit a large collection of
controllable light rays, so that any number of viewers can simultaneously
perceive view-dependent stereoscopic effects as if they were in the real
scene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Realization of the light portal poses many
scientific and engineering challenges in vision, graphics, image processing,
networking, human-computer interaction, optics, etc., which the PI expects to be
able to successfully tackle by building on his prior work and focusing on the
core scientific problems in 3D reconstruction and visualization. On the
reconstruction front, two paths will be explored. One is aimed at allowing
robust 3D reconstruction for a much broader class of scene types by finding
invariants from the complex interactions among geometry, lighting and surface
reflectance properties. Alternatively, an inverse formulation to estimate
directly the final image will be developed; by incorporating new constraints
that are difficult to adopt in a geometric setting, such as nature image
statistics, this inverse formulation should allow more realistic image synthesis
even when explicitly reconstructing the 3D model is ill-conditioned. These two
approaches are complimentary to each other, with one optimized for storage and
editing, and the other for direct transmission and visualization. On the
visualization front, the proposed light-field display will have a unique design
that de-couples regular 2D displays and 3D screens, made possible by novel
calibration and rendering algorithms. Therefore, in addition to its auto-
stereoscopic capability, this display will offer an unprecedented level of
flexibility and scalability in terms of resolution, size, field of view,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In a manner analogous to the
ubiquitous digital cameras and video displays in use today, the PI expects the
light portal to provide the ultimate three-dimensional recording and viewing
experience that may lead to profound changes in the way people communicate,
educate, and entertain. In particular, the 3D capability may enable new
paradigms for surgical training and tele-collaboration. This project also has an
integral educational component; in addition to the usual course development,
student participation, and broad dissemination through various venues
(publications, demonstrations, a project web site, etc.), the PI will make
efforts to attract minority students by taking an active part in the exchange
program between the University of Kentucky and the University of Puerto Rico.