* 0448316
* CAREER:     Local Information Based Distributed Optimization of Resources in Large-Scale Adhoc and Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2005,08/31/2011
* Koushik Kar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2011
* USD 400,539.00

Efficient usage of bandwidth and/or energy is necessary for the success of a
majority of ad-hoc and sensor network applications. This project focuses on the
development of distributed bandwidth/energy optimization algorithms that require
only local network topology or state information, and yet guarantee a
performance close to the global or local optimum. More specifically, this
project involves the development of distributed node wakeup, medium access
control, routing and flow control algorithms that optimize (exactly or
approximately) the throughput or lifetime of the network, while posing minimal
overhead of communication on the individual nodes. The project objectives also
include understanding the fundamental trade-offs between optimization accuracy
and communication complexity, so that the appropriate level of accuracy can be
chosen based on the network and application
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The questions considered in this project
are crucially important for the efficient management of ad-hoc and sensor
networks in a wide range of application scenarios, including environmental data
gathering, military and relief operations, and health monitoring. Moreover,
although the project is focused only on large-scale ad-hoc and sensor networks,
the results of this research are expected to influence a larger body of science
and engineering, including optimization theory, stochastic control and
distributed algorithms. The expected outcomes of this project also include a
publicly available simulation tool, a junior museum exhibit, and a graduate
level course on distributed optimization methods in networking. A conscious
effort will be made towards engaging women and other under-represented groups in
the research and educational programs related to this project.&lt;br/&gt;