* 0448682
* Collaborative Research: Putting the Lake Back Together: Integrating Littoral Productivity Into Lake Food Webs
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Yvonne Vadeboncoeur, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2010
* USD 207,998.00

Collaborative Research: Putting the Lake Back Together: Integrating littoral
productivity into lake food webs Yvonne Vadeboncoeur Wright State University

Lake shore (littoral zone) habitats of lakes are highly sensitive to human
disturbances and activities. Lake biologists have traditionally directed their
studies towards open-water (pelagic) components of lake ecosystems. As a result,
the contribution of littoral habitats to lake ecosystems remains poorly known.
What is their role in supporting lake biodiversity? What is their role in
supporting fish populations? This project will assess littoral zone productivity
relative to pelagic zone productivity, and will assess how the relative
importance of these two habitats change with lake size and nutrient levels.
Second, it will test the hypothesis that littoral zone productivity is more
efficiently channeled up the food chain to support fish production, thus
indicating a higher importance to littoral habitats for supporting fisheries.
Third, it will test whether littoral habitats support more biodiversity than
pelagic habitats. This research will also investigate connections between food
chains in littoral and pelagic zones, and in doing so, will provide a more
holistic understanding of how natural lakes function. Importantly, this work
will provide mangaement insights into how littoral habitat destruction and lake
eutrophication (nutrient enrichment) affect littoral zone productivity. This
research will improve our understanding of these habitat changes and the
implications for the productivity of higher trophic levels. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in limnology and analytical chemistry.