* 0448534
* CAREER:     Career Development Plan:    Behavioral Modeling, Simulation and Optimization for Mixed-Signal System on a Chip
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2012
* Sheldon Tan, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2012
* USD 430,002.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal#: 0448534&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Xiang-Dong (Sheldon Tan)
Tan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of California at
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to develop an integrated
research and education program on behavioral modeling, simulation, and
optimization techniques to address and overcome the mixed-signal (MS) system-on-
a-chip (SoC) design challenges and enable a leap to a new generation of mixed-
signal VLSI systems. The focus is to develop efficient techniques for modeling,
simulation and optimization of MS SoCs designs, which consist of both analog and
digital blocks and operates in mixed frequency ranges (base-band frequency or
radio frequency (RF)). The project specifically targets at (a) development of
efficient parametric behavioral modeling and hierarchical piecewise linear (PWL)
nonlinear modeling techniques based on a graph-based approach for linear and
nonlinear analog circuits; (b) investigation of efficient algorithms for
optimizing analog circuits and on-chip power-delivery systems for MS-SoC
circuits based on modeling techniques. The new modeling techniques will explore
a determinant-design diagram (DDD) based symbolic analysis method to construct
behavioral models that consider device parameter ranges and design variations to
cope with increasing manufacture uncertainty. For modeling nonlinear analog
circuits, DDD-based hierarchical piece wise linear (PWL) modeling techniques
will be investigated, which promises high fidelity behavioral modeling of very
large nonlinear circuits at various abstract levels. As more physical effects
become prominent, design practice, especially for the analog circuits, has
become an optimization-like process because performance, reliability and
manufacturability specifications have to be satisfied or optimized
simultaneously. Such optimization-like design paradigms require new different
design strategies and methodologies from that of digital circuits and will be
explored in this research.&lt;br/&gt;The education component of the program
consists of development of new curriculum in behavioral modeling, simulation and
optimization of MS SoCs, and exploration of innovative learning approaches via
web-enabled instructional tools and project-oriented learning for the education
of future engineers with the knowledge of behavioral modeling, design and
verification for mixed-signal SoCs. Engineers very versed in MS VLSI design and
MS CAD development will be trained under this research project. &lt;br/&gt;