* 0448835
* CAREER:    Engineering Nucleic Acid Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Niles Pierce, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2011
* USD 400,000.00

The Pierce Lab at Caltech proposes a research program that combines theoretical,
computational&lt;br/&gt;and experimental components to advance the field of
structural nucleic acid nanotechnology in developing rigorous and robust methods
for encoding arbitrary mechanical function in nucleic acid sequences. Modeling
and algorithm development projects will address key analysis and design
challenges. The investigation of pseudoknot biophysics will help to create a
physically based potential for partition function algorithms and illuminate the
role of topology in the behavior of the "kissing hairpin" mechanism under
experimental study for catalytic fuel delivery to autonomous devices as well
as:&lt;br/&gt;-on implementing an efficient hierarchical mutation algorithm for
optimizing affinity and specificity for target secondary structures using
partition function information&lt;br/&gt;-on methods for identifying and
designing multiple features of an energy landscape including networks of
metastable states relevant to autonomous device design&lt;br/&gt;-and on
formulating and optimizing the multi-objective design problem that characterizes
device engineering, in which multiple strands must conditionally adopt different
structures depending on the subsets of strand species that are
present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
program seeks to develop analysis and design tools that will dramatically
increase the level of rigor, accuracy, and automation with which nucleic acid
devices are engineered. The work encompasses physical modeling, algorithm
development, mechanism design, and experimental validation, with the unifying
goal of enabling the manipulation of subtle features in the multiple energy
landscapes that underlie the design of devices with many conditionally stable
states. The development of a practical catalytic fuel delivery method and
subsequent construction of a robust autonomous walker that can take hundreds of
unassisted steps would represent a breakthrough in the field. Likewise, HCR
provides a new functional paradigm for nucleic acid nanotechnology, creating
many attractive avenues for investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The ability to engineer autonomous devices at the nanometer
length scale may someday have importantmedical applications including the
targeted delivery of toxic drugs. In the nearer term, HCR has the potential to
facilitate the construction of versatile and inexpensive biosensors.
Undergraduates have the opportunity to participate fully in this
interdisciplinary research through the Caltech Summer Undergraduate Research
Fellowship program. Researchers at other universities can freely download source
code for the analysis and design software developed in the Pierce Lab. At
Pasadena public schools, 62% of students participate in free or reduced-price
meal programs and more than 80% of students are underrepresented minorities. For
many students, the Jr. Teacher program will provide a rare opportunity to
consider the attractions of pursuing a career in science or
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;