* 0448554
* CAREER:     Adaptive Quality of Service Control in Distributed Real-Time Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2012
* Chenyang Lu, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2012
* USD 400,001.00

Distributed real-time embedded (DRE) systems play a crucial role in many
mission-critical applications such as disaster recovery command and control,
power grid management, and agile manufacturing. These applications have
stringent requirements for end-to-end timeliness and availability whose
assurance is essential to their proper operation. In recent years, many DRE
systems become open to the Internet and volatile physical environments where
system workloads may vary significantly at run-time. Such systems require a
paradigm shift from classical real-time computing to adaptive solutions that
handle workload variations dynamically. This CAREER research develops adaptive
Quality of Service control, a control-theoretic framework for adaptive DRE
systems. This framework includes a suite of adaptive strategies and algorithms,
formal models and analysis techniques, and a middleware architecture that
integrates multiple adaptation strategies via distributed software feedback
control loops. This research will significantly impact the field of DRE systems
as it will enable DRE systems to achieve and maintain critical performance
assurances despite dramatic changes in operational conditions and system
failures. As a result, mission-critical DRE systems will be able to provide
significantly more robust and reliable services in a broad range of highly
unpredictable environments.