* 0448658
* CAREER:     Realistic Models and Simulations of Systems for Quantum Information Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Todd Brun, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Quantum information processing (QIP) holds the promise of distinctly new and
more powerful information systems, including quantum computation, quantum
communications, and quantum information theory. &lt;br/&gt;However, this promise
can only be achieved if the theoretical advances up to the present can be
transformed into actual technology. This requires steady experimental advances
over the next few years, which in turn requires a far better practical
understanding of realistic quantum systems for QIP. The aim of this proposal is
to provide such an understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit.&lt;br/&gt;QIP is still a young field, but one that has grown explosively
over the last ten years. From the discovery by Peter Shor that quantum computers
could factor large numbers, a problem widely believed to be intractable on
ordinary computers, and on which the well-known public-key encryption algorithm
RSA is based, there has been rapid theoretical development, demonstrating
numerous applications of quantum systems to information processing
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;Experimental development, while also rapid, still lags far
behind theory in almost all areas. This is largely due to the inherent
difficulty of controlling large quantum systems while isolating them from
quantum noise (or decoherence). In addition to improved experiments, careful
theoretical treatment is needed to understand the sources of noise in realistic
quantum systems, and their effects on QIP. The PI will draw on extensive
experience in decoherence to improve both the theoretical and numerical tools
for such treatments, and apply them to a wide variety of related problems
relating to near-term QIP experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;As a new field, QIP has so far penetrated only shallowly into the
academic community and public consciousness. It is important to train the next
generation of quantum engineers. To these ends, the PI will:&lt;br/&gt;-create
two new courses: one, an introductory graduate course in quantum information and
computation, the other an advanced topics course. &lt;br/&gt;-The extensive
lecture notes will be made publicly available&lt;br/&gt;-PI will also host the
SQuInT summer retreat for graduate students in QIP at USC, andHe will also reach
out to the larger academic community at USC&lt;br/&gt;-PI will serve as
associate editor of IEEE Transactions on Computers, editing a special issue on
QIP. &lt;br/&gt;-The software library will also be made available for the use of
others in the field, and provided with a suitable easy-to-use
interface.&lt;br/&gt;