* 0448762
* CAREER: Interactive Process Visualization in Virtual and Augmented Reality for Innovative Learning, Analysis, and Design of Field Construction Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Vineet Kamat, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 05/31/2011
* USD 400,998.00

CAREER: Interactive Process Visualization in Virtual and Augmented Reality for
Innovative Learning, Analysis, and Design of Field Construction
Operations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to bring powerful operations visualization capabilities within the
reach, ability, and training of all construction practitioners, researchers,
educators, and students. The project in-volves basic research, design of
appropriate tools, and development of educational materials to enable accurate
3D animation of construction operations in immersive Virtual Reality (VR) and
outdoor Aug-mented Reality (AR) environments. The research addresses fundamental
limitations in knowledge, and includes the investigation of automated methods to
describe dynamic evolving terrain, techniques to de-fine accurate resource
motion paths, methods to portray accurate physical behavior of articulated re-
sources, and approaches to animate fluid construction materials. The research
also explores methods to accurately overlay (augment) graphical images of
operations over real jobsites, techniques for intuitive and safe user-computer
interaction in AR, and approaches to make operations animation in AR highly
adaptable and mobile. The educational objectives are intricately related to and
dependent on the research, and include the design of VR-based educational
modules, workshops for educators and researchers, cur-riculum development and
improvement, AR-based teaching material for K-12 students, strategies to re-
cruit and retain the brightest women and minority engineers, and efforts to
develop the PI's personal skills as a teacher and educator. This project aims to
significantly improve the verification, validation, and communication of
discrete-event simulation models, thus facilitating their use in operations
planning and decision-making. Performance of field operations is also expected
to improve by allowing proper com-munication of planned work prior to execution.
In addition to communicating what may happen in the future (from simulation), it
will be possible to re-create what happened in the past (from records), and what
is currently happening (from real-time data).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to enable improved planning, analysis, and design of field construction
operations. This can result in substantial cost and time savings, improvement in
industry competitiveness, and reduction in life cycle costs of civil
infrastructure and other constructed facilities. The cumulative impact across
the $899 billion U.S. construction industry is expected to be significant. Such
benefits also accrue in fields such as manufacturing, transportation, mining,
and ship-building where operations visualization is as vital as in construction.
The project is expected to significantly impact education by fostering innova-
tion in curriculum at construction schools, and spawning an area of
specialization in Construction Engi-neering and Management. The tools and
educational materials resulting from the project are expected to enhance the
construction curriculum, and are being made publicly available to educators at
other institu-tions. The project's contributions to knowledge impact future
research by allowing researchers to spend major efforts on studying and
addressing operations, safety, and educational issues, and less effort on cre-
ating animations. Several Graduate and Undergraduate students are also involved
in the project. The PI has been proactively working to recruit and retain women
and minority engineers in the project by work-ing with the Society of Women
Engineers, the Minority Engineering Program Office, and the Under-graduate
Research Office Program at the University of Michigan. In summary, the societal
benefits of the project are: 1) the reductions in construction life-cycle costs
that can be possible through proper planning and design of construction
operations; 2) the effective education and training of future construction engi-
neers; and 3) the career development of the personnel participating in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;