* 0448377
* SGER:      Analysis, Modeling and Determination of the Three-Dimensional Behavior of the Human Knee Joint in Deep Flexion
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Vijay Goel, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2006
* USD 49,443.00

0448377 Hefzy For the first time an evaluation is to be made of the biomechanics
of the knee during kneeling and during a deep squat when the knee is maximally
flexed past 120o and up to 165o, and to determine the role of the cruciate
ligaments during such activities. The novelty of the proposed work also includes
the development and validation of a 3-D anatomical mathematical simulation for
kneeling and deep squatting using a dynamic model that, again for the first
time, i) accounts for the "thigh and calf" contact that occurs during deep
squat, ii) includes 3 body segments involving the tibio-femoral and patello-
femoral joints, iii) accounts for ligamentous structures, and quadriceps,
hamstring and gastrocnemius muscular forces, and iv) employs realistic piecewise
mathematical representation of the articular surfaces.

An international dimension is brought to the research by the participation of
Dr. Tadaatsu Satomi, Professor of Intelligent Mechanical Engineering, Tokyo
Denki University, who has developed an electro-capacitance sensor to measure
contact pressure. Dr. Satomi is to provide the sensor and all peripheral
instrumentation and compare outputs with the contact stresses measured using the
K-Scan sensors.

Results from this research will help to establish design guidelines for the
development of total knee replacements that allow maximum flexion. The research
activities will enhance human resource development by providing for the
education and training of a graduate student at the masters' level, and the
participation of undergraduate students in research.