* 0448774
* CAREER:  Design and Analysis of Experiments for Developing Robust Products and Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2005,09/30/2011
* Roshan Joseph, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 09/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
project aims at developing an efficient method for experimentation that will
save time and money for conducting experiments. Design of experiments is an
engineering-statistical tool for improving the quality of products with minimal
cost. The research plan consists of three parts: physical experiments, computer
experiments, and computer-aided physical experiments. Physical experiments are
the usual hardware experiments, whereas computer experiments refer to those
experiments that are performed in computers using engineering models and finite
element analysis. The methods currently employed for these two types of
experimentation differ widely. To remedy this situation a unified approach will
be used, which in turn should lead to new discoveries in each type of
experimentation methods. In particular, a new Bayesian methodology will be used
for the design and analysis of experiments. This project also introduces a novel
experimentation strategy known as computer-aided physical experiments. Physical
experiments are expensive and time-consuming to conduct whereas computer
experiments are cheaper and faster, but their validity depends on model
assumptions. The new strategy combines the advantages of the two types of
experiments and therefore will have a significant impact on industrial
experimentation. The education plan is aimed at disseminating and popularizing
the new methods in industries to ensure its long-term
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new methodology will make an immediate impact
in US economy by helping automotive companies; semi-conductor, nano materials,
and other hi-tech product industries to cut down their product development cycle
and to improve quality. Although the main focus of this research is on
industrial applications, the methodology is general and will help in
accelerating discoveries in many scientific disciplines that use experimental
investigation. The education plan will help develop a new workforce that will be
instrumental in improving product quality, lowering manufacturing costs, and
reducing wastes, thereby benefiting the society as a whole in the long-term.