* 0448062
* CAREER:    Unified Probabilistic Localization for Sensor Networks: Theoretic and Practical Foundations
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Richard Martin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 01/31/2011
* USD 448,065.00

Spatial localization is a prerequisite for a range of sensor network tasks, such
as monitoring, tracking, routing and security services. Currently, a variety of
approaches are employed in providing critical positioning information to sensor
nodes. Although these approaches provide a rich environment for innovation,
their diversified strategies introduce problems of standardization and
inefficient resource use. For example, many techniques require unique
infrastructures, and among different localization technologies, little is
understood about cost performance tradeoffs in the presence of systematic
distortions and noise. This research addresses the need to construct a scalable,
unified family of localization services over a variety of sensor node types. The
algorithmic methodology centers on Bayesian networks. These networks allow for a
systematic way to manage signal distortion and noise and enable the integration
of the spectrum of current sensor network positioning modalities: signal
strength to distance, angle of arrival, time difference of arrival, and
fingerprinting. This research will result in a universal localization
infrastructure capable of integrating location information into any computing
device and provide new benchmarks that describe the limits of localization
performance in the presence of distortion and noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
findings will allow designers to select the localization modalities that
maximize their application's performance goals given their cost constraints and
will promote the ubiquitous use of low-cost sensor nodes. Through dissemination
of the results in both archival publications and new curricula, this project
will advance the development of sensor applications by enabling scalable
localization services for a diverse range of sensor networks.&lt;br/&gt;