* 0448042
* CAREER:     Nano-Robotic Manipulation Systems using Atomic Force Microscope Probes
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Metin Sitti, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas C. Henderson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 452,000.00

IIS-0448042&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Nano-Robotic Manipulation Systems&lt;br/&gt;using
Atomic Force Microscope Probes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano-robotics has recently
emerged as a new robotics field that encompasses the programmable manipulation
of nano-scale objects where the manipulation dynamics is dominated by nano-scale
physics, chemistry, and scaling effects. This career development program is
aimed to advance nano-robotics science and engineering related research and
educational activities with novel approaches. The research activities in this
program will be focused on developing theories and methodologies for analyzing,
designing, building, and controlling Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) based nano-
robotic manipulation systems. The primary educational goal of this program is to
train undergraduate, graduate level, and underrepresented students to be near
future intellectual leaders and workforce for newly emerging nano-robotics and
nanotechnology areas. To achieve this goal: a new interdisciplinary
undergraduate level nanotechnology minor program will be initiated, novel,
interdisciplinary and fundamental nanotechnology related engineering courses
will be developed, and novel educational tools for remote and interactive
nanotechnology training will be introduced. As scientific merits of this work,
the understanding of nano-scale physics and dynamics for reliable nano-robot
design, prototyping, and control by modeling will be improved, AFM based novel
three-dimensional, autonomous, miniature, and massively parallel nano-robotic
manipulation systems will be investigated for high volume nano-manufacturing
applications, and advanced human-machine user interfaces for intuitive nano-
robotic interactions will be proposed. As broader impacts, in addition to
training undergraduate and graduate students, the developed research and
educational activities will include underrepresented groups such as black and
women minorities in Pennsylvania through the CMU summer internship program.
Moreover, this program will create a 'cyberinfrastructure' using an internet
based remotely controlled AFM system to enable students and researchers from
institutions with limited resources remote access to advanced nanotechnology
equipment. Finally, the products such as nano-material characterization
workstation, nano-wire bonder, and nano-fiber puller resulting from the research
activities of this program will have a significant industrial
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;