* 0448788
* CAREER: Multiparticle Cell Deposition in Realistic Geometries
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Michael King, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 04/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0448788&lt;br/&gt;King &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work to be performed will
establish a multi-processor computing cluster to (i) facilitate computational
study of cell adhesion under flow and (ii) introduce a bioinformatics practicum
into an existing undergraduate numerical methods course in biomedical
engineering. The work is based on a rigorous numerical simulation that
successfully models the adhesion of cells to surfaces or other cells in a
general flow field by fusing stochastic receptor binding with a deterministic
boundary elements flow calculation. This prior simulation approach will now be
extended to model events in realistic pathological geometries such as arterial
bifurcations and stenosed vessels. By focusing on the interplay between fluid
mechanics and receptor-ligand adhesive recognition, predictive models of
monocyte accumulation in atherosclerosis and platelet deposition in acute
thrombosis will be developed. Predictions will then be tested by performing cell
adhesion experiments in novel flow chambers that emulate pathological
geometries. The success of this project will elucidate the basic physical
mechanisms of blood cell adhesion in cardiovascular disease, while developing
computational models that can ultimately be used to aid diagnosis and evaluate
new molecular and surgical therapies. The proposed multi-processor computing
cluster will enhance the computational infrastructure. The undergraduate
bioinformatics practicum that also shares this cluster with the research
activities will address a lack of bioinformatics training in biomedical
engineering programs nationwide by developing a new pedagogical approach and
then disseminating assessments. Members of the Functional Genomics Center and
the Department of Computer Science at the University of Rochester will give
guest lectures to expose students to current research in the field.
Additionally, pre-college students from the Career Internship Program of the
Pittsford Central School District (Pittsford, NY) will actively participate in
the analysis of cell adhesion experiments.&lt;br/&gt;