* 0448213
* CAREER: Rapid Lateral Solidification in Thin Metallic Films:  A New Route to Engineered Microstructures for Advanced Micro-Device Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* John Leonard, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 06/30/2010
* USD 398,422.00

Rapid lateral solidification (RLS) is a unique new laser-melting process that
allows thin metallic films on dielectric/amorphous substrates to be rapidly
solidified. It can be viewed as 'nonconventional' or 'integrated' rapid
solidification that can provide rapidly solidified films of extremely high
purity and uniformity. This grant aims to perfect and use this technique for a
detailed study of three technically promising Cu-based systems, and to leverage
related numerical modeling efforts into a comprehensive computer modeling
initiative in Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Pittsburgh.
&lt;br/&gt;The experimental effort: (1) investigates the rapid solidification
process in-situ using laser melting and RLS of Cu, Cu-Cr and Cu-Sn thin films
under well-controlled conditions (this includes in-situ measurements of
solidification velocities, and analysis via transmission and scanning
microscopy); (2)? extends metal rapid solidification research farther into non-
equilibrium regimes, exploring the boundaries of amorphous and glass formation
in Cu-Sn alloys; (3) measures application-critical properties on RLS
microstructures of Cu and Cu-Cr alloys, including conductivity and
electromigration; (4) models the experiments using the numerical simulation code
3DNS, which will be integrated with a new computer modeling education initiative
in MSE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will open up a broad new arena for
applications of non-equilibrium metallic phases, engineered and composite
microstructures, shape memory functionality, and amorphous metals into thin-film
advanced devices, including engineered microstructures for Cu and Cu-alloy
interconnects, shape memory and metallic glass alloys integrated into sensors,
MEMS, and SAW devices, and new metal-based connections/electrodes with advanced
metal-oxide devices. A new comprehensive computer modeling initiative is planned
that will integrate instruction, support, and outreach to transform the MSE
curriculum at the University of Pittsburgh. Another goal recruits graduate
students, boosts undergraduate enrollment, as well as increases diversity
through student exchanges with the University of Augsburg exchange program and
the Research Experience for Teachers (RET) program. &lt;br/&gt;