* 0448147
* CAREER: Steering Chemical Reactions Through Spatial Confinement: Catalytic Reaction Engineering in Microchannel Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Goetz Veser, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2011
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Goetz Veser &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University
of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0448147&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims to investigate, control and
ultimately steer catalytic reactions through spatial confinement in a
microchannel reactor. It is based on the development of a micromachined
catalytic reactor system for detailed experimental and numerical investigations
of coupled heterogeneous-homogeneous reactions, and specifically comprises the
following steps:&lt;br/&gt;Probe and identify contributions from homogeneous and
heterogeneous reaction pathways by varying the microchannel diameter to either
allow or gradually suppress homogeneous reactions;&lt;br/&gt;Control
heterogeneous-homogeneous reactions by quenching, i.e. completely suppressing,
potentially explosive gas phase reactions, thus opening up new parameter ranges
for exploratory studies of chemical reactions in these 'forbidden
regimes';&lt;br/&gt;Steer multiple reaction systems by selectively quenching
reaction pathways and thus introduce process selectivity in a new, non-
conventional way;&lt;br/&gt;Investigate the reacting flow (and in particular
boundary-layer kinetics) via non-invasive, in-situ IR spectroscopy over a wide
range of realistic operating conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The approach will be tested
with high-temperature catalysis, a class of reactions with broad industrial and
environmental impact as well as fundamental scientific significance. However,
the developed system will be applicable well beyond these conditions to the
study of a range of multiphase reaction systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major parts of the
research project are closely integrated into the education plan, which is based
on the introduction of process intensification and microreactor engineering
throughout the undergraduate curriculum. It will furthermore use microreactor
engineering as an example to introduce students to 'multi-scale thinking' across
the many length and time scales that characterize modern engineering problems.
The plan will be integrated within a broader educational program for
implementation at the University of Pittsburgh and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
could have a major impact on the development of fuel reformers for hydrogen fuel
cells and thus on the development of the 'hydrogen economy' through the
successful demonstration of perfectly selective CO oxidation in CO/H2-mixtures
(one of the planned test reactions). The detailed investigation of the quenching
of explosive reactions in microchannel reactors, and hence the demonstration of
intrinsic reactor safety, could have significant impact on the safety of
industrial processes and, in particular, on a widespread and decentralized
hydrogen distribution system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;