* 0448297
* CAREER: Developing Site-Specific Photocrosslinkers Using Unnatural Amino Acids for Studies on in vivo Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2012
* Ryan Mehl, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2012
* USD 520,846.00

A major challenge confronting biochemists is the ability to dissect,
reconstruct, and manipulate each of the thousands of metastable protein
complexes that exist in organisms. Structure/function analyses on protein
signaling assemblies, membrane-bound transporters, and protein machines are
limited by the fact that many only assemble and function properly in vivo. A
crosslinking tool that works under native conditions, crosslinks with all amino
acids, needs no chemical initiation, and results in predictable structural
changes would revolutionize the methods for studying protein complexes. This
work will determine if site-specific incorporation of photocrosslinking amino
acids into proteins in vivo can overcome the current limitations for studying
how the function of protein complexes relates to their assembly and structural
changes. While this research focuses on photocrosslinking of bacterial
chemoreceptors and dimeric model systems, it will define the experimental
parameters for site-specific photocrosslinking amino acids so they will have
broad application in biochemistry and biological
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Within the curriculum, this
project will be used to stress how the fundamental principals of chemistry and
biology are combined to study the structure and function of complex biological
systems. Introductory students will see how the basics of chemical reactions,
kinetics and thermodynamics relate to future understanding and solving of
biological problems. Conversely, biochemistry students will experience how the
chemical basis of biological problems is instrumental in deciphering a
biological process. This research connects biology and chemistry in the teaching
and research laboratories, and trains undergraduates in experimental design,
data interpretation, the scientific method, and in the use of specific
biochemistry and organic chemistry techniques.&lt;br/&gt;