* 0448702
* PECASE:  Solid Freeform Fabrication of Multi-Material Functional Devices using Colloidal Inks
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* James Smay, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
project is to investigate process variables and material properties that will
enable the assembly of complex devices by utilizing a direct write manufacturing
process. Colloidal inks consisting of microscopic metal, ceramic, and polymer
particles suspended in water will be housed in separate reservoirs and dispensed
in a designed pattern. Unlike an inkjet printer, these inks maintain a three
dimensional structure. Thus, functional devices such as electronic packages and
advanced tissue engineering scaffolds may be designed on a computer and printed
as a functioning device. The approach to achieve these aims includes ink
formulation and rheological characterization, materials compatibility studies
for compositional grading in heterogeneous structures, and testing of functional
devices. The education objectives of this project are to merge research themes
into classrooms from high school through graduate student levels. A focal point
of the educational plan is to encourage science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics careers among Native American high school students in the state of
Oklahoma. The approach to achieve this educational goal will be the
establishment of online access to research at Oklahoma State University and a
mentoring program to promote early scientific socialization in a targeted
minority high school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to print heterogeneous
structures that contain combinations of metals, ceramics, and polymers will open
new avenues for device design. Composition grading will allow materials
combinations that were difficult or impossible to implement in the past due to
incompatible properties such as thermal expansion. The investigation of printing
polymer-based inks may lead to the development of novel tissue engineering
scaffolds. Such scaffolds may open new avenues for joint replacements in
arthritic patients. These biological scaffolds will offer unprecedented control
of material and cell placement in an engineered tissue construct. The results of
the educational program will be to enhance the science exposure of undergraduate
and graduate students at Oklahoma State University. The high school mentoring
program will increase the level of participation of minority Native American
Students in science and engineering fields leading to a more diverse and strong
scientific community.