* 0448668
* CAREER:    Design Optimization and Quantitative Evaluation of Wireless Embedded Sensing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Pai Chou, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 12/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Wireless embedded sensing systems (WESS) are enabling innovations in many
disciplines while driving research and education activities. Unfortunately, even
experts today cannot easily compare competing WESS designs due to the lack of
commonly accepted metrics and benchmark suites, and difficulties with
reproducing sensing conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI identifies fitness-
based metrics for quantitative evaluation of WESSs. To maximize fitness to the
diverse sensing requirements, including size, power, and timing, the PI
constructs a modular, configurable, multi-microcontroller WESS architecture
called pico-cluster that spans the space from ultra-compact, wirelessly-
networked event detectors to high duty-cycle data acquisition units. True
parallelism of a pico-cluster enhances timing fitness, while de-centralized,
multi-supply, load-matching power management techniques maximize power fitness
and improve data fitness. Embedded systems so optimized will achieve new levels
of energy efficiency by balancing energy harvesting and consumption while
delivering high-quality data in a timely manner. To enable WESS benchmarking,
the PI extends the B# battery emulator to emulating environmental stimuli and
non-ideal power sources with full reproducibility. To advance the field of WESS
based on concrete, measurable results from actual applications, the PI assembles
and distributes a comprehensive, real-world benchmark suite, emulation-based
evaluation framework, and the WESS architecture openly to the research community
at large. The PI evaluates WESS architectures by actual deployment with
collaborators in civil and mechanical engineering, medicine, and performance art
while advancing the state-of-the-art in these fields. The compelling application
drivers make project courses rewarding for students and add excitement to
outreach activities particularly for women and minorities. &lt;br/&gt;