* 0448816
* CAREER:  A Research and Education Program in Surface Tension Driven Fluidic Assembly of Functional Nano-Scale Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* David Gracias, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 06/30/2010
* USD 413,500.00

The research objective of this CAREER program is to develop a methodology to
assemble functional, nano-scale components (50-500 nm), to form three-
dimensional (3D) networks, structures and arrays in a cost-effective and highly
parallel manner. The strategy proposed is based on surface tension driven
fluidic self-assembly. The assembly of structures that result from the
minimization of interfacial free energy between chemically patterned nano-scale
components that are agitated in a fluidic medium. The specific CAREER objectives
are (a) to develop nano-solder based assembly to form 3D, integrated electrical
networks; (b) to develop nano-epoxy based assembly to fabricate 3D mechanical
structures; (c) to characterize chemically functionalized nano-components used
for assembly, and the 3D structures that result on assembly; and (d) to design
robust, functional assemblies by quantifying yields, and generating strategies
for overcoming defects. The educational objectives of the CAREER program are
focused on significantly impacting the careers of undergraduate students at
Johns Hopkins University (JHU), and the large numbers of minority students in
Baltimore public schools. At JHU, the PI proposes to develop a new laboratory
course titled, "Novel methods in micro- and nano-fabrication" that will train
students in emerging methods of nano-manufacturing. The PI will continue to
expand undergraduate research in his laboratory, thereby invigorating classroom
based education with the joy of discovery and invention. The PI plans to
strengthen collaborations with the Baltimore public school teachers that
participated in a workshop in his research laboratory in the summer of 2004
titled, "Micro and Nanotechnology: A Glimpse into the Future". Specific goals
include expanding the workshop to a three-day event, holding technology
demonstrations at Baltimore public schools, inviting exceptional school students
to participate in research, and encouraging undergraduate researchers to mentor
at-risk school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research plan will
greatly impact the fields of nano-manufacturing, nano-electronics, nano-
electromechanical systems (NEMS) and nano-medicine. The strategy being developed
enables a methodology for cost-effective, parallel, nano-manufacturing of 3D
systems. At the present moment no such methodology exists. The 3D electronic
networks being proposed have high densities with short interconnects and high
interconnectivity. These features will enable the design of 3D nano-electronic
and neuromorphic devices. The 3D mechanical structures being developed will
significantly impact the emerging fields of NEMS and nano-medicine since these
structures (a) have a high surface area to volume ratio that allow for large
interactions with the surrounding media, (b) have small form factors, and (c)
can be made complex and isotropic. These characteristics are especially
attractive for the design of drug delivery systems, nano-magnetic coils for
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), early diagnostic devices, and spherical
sensory arrays for use in the human body. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;