* 0448717
* CAREER:  Understanding and Predicting the Dynamic Behavior of Mine Tailings Dam Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Michael Kalinski, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Approximately one-third of the 1,555 tailings structures in the United States
are high-hazard potential, where failure would result in loss of human life.
Over the past 40 years, approximately 15 tailings dams have failed worldwide as
a result of liquefaction of fine refuse due to earthquake shaking. Methods to
analyze liquefaction resistance exist for soil, but mine tailings, including
coarse and fine refuse, are inherently different than soil. Some efforts have
been made towards understanding and predicting the cyclic behavior, liquefaction
resistance, and shear strength of tailings materials, but a comprehensive
understanding and unified approach towards the assessment of the dynamic
behavior of mine tailings is lacking, partly due to the difficulties involved
with testing and sampling of tailings dam structures. This work will focus on
laboratory and field testing to understand and predict the dynamic behavior of
mine tailings dam materials. Laboratory resonant column testing will be used to
measure the relationship between shear modulus, material damping, and shear
strain. Laboratory cyclic triaxial testing will be used to determine
liquefaction resistance in terms of the cyclic resistance ratio (CRR). The
effect of parameters such as void ratio, fines content, age, water content, pore
pressure and confining stress on the dynamic behavior of the materials will be
investigated. Special measures will be taken to recover specimens for laboratory
testing, including fixed piston sampling, and construction of work pads in the
impoundments to reduce surface pressures of field equipment. Field standard
penetration testing (SPT), cone penetrometer testing (CPT), and seismic testing
will be performed, and methods will be developed to use overburden-corrected SPT
blow count ((N1)60), CPT cone tip resistance (qc1), and shear wave velocity
(vs1), to assess in situ liquefaction resistance. In situ vane shear data will
be correlated with CPT data to develop a method to estimate peak and residual
undrained shear strength of fine refuse for stability
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By measuring the dynamic behavior of these
materials, methods used for soils will be adapted, including in situ methods.
Geoscientists will be able to better predict the response of tailings dams to
dynamic excitation, which will result in improved estimates for earthquake-
induced loading in terms of cyclic stress ratio (CSR). They will be able to
better predict reductions in effective stress and reductions in strength due to
earthquake-induced excess pore pressures and liquefaction, which will allow them
to more accurately assess the stability of dams during earthquakes and under
post-earthquake conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;