* 0448896
* CAREER:     Developing Asymmetric-Polarization AC Electroosmosis for Lab-on-a-chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2012
* Jie Wu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2012
* USD 405,938.00

The research objective is to develop and validate an electrokinetic lab-on-chip
for robust and rapid detection of low concentration bioparticle (eg. virus,
bacteria, cells) in water, food and clinical samples. The research tackles the
long-standing bottleneck issues of sensitivity and selectivity for such
detection. The approach is: 1) to differentiate bioparticles by their response
to electrokinetic transport based on various charge/mass ratio, 2) to rapidly
enrich local particle concentration by expediting bioparticles' diffusion to
sensors with convection, and 3) to quantify particle concentration by
impedimetric measurement while incorporating electrokinetic signal
amplification. The above functions are to be realized by asymmetric-polarization
AC electro-osmosis, which is newly discovered and at the forefront of
electrokinetic microfluidic research. Such lab-on- a-chip operates at small
voltage with low power consumption, and its all electrical processes facilitate
portability, parallelism and automation for on-site bioparticle detection.
Bioparticle detection is of great significance because bioparticles often serve
as carrier/indicator of pathogens and/or toxins. As the world becomes
increasingly concerned with toxin/pathogenic contamination in food, water and
environment from infectious diseases and bioterrorism, and because the threat of
pathogen/toxins to societies could be substantially mitigated with early
detection, the demand for rapid bioparticle detection is expanding for both
civilian and military applications. The PI proposes a novel electrokinetic lab-
on-a-chip to detect bioparticles at low concentrations. The research will not
only lead to a practical detection chip but also afford students a unique
opportunity to explore the state-of-art of interdisciplinary research in
microsystem, bio/chemi/electronics and microfluidics.