* 0448542
* CAREER:   Advancing the Theory and Practice of Meta-Learning with Applications in Physics
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2010
* Ricardo Vilalta, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Sven G. Koenig
* 12/31/2010
* USD 512,000.00

This project focuses on the field of meta-learning by investigating the relation
between learning mechanisms and the tasks and domains where these mechanisms are
applicable. An important activity of this project is to propose effective data
structures and meta-features that characterize example distributions. We plan to
extend model-based and information-theoretic characterizations, and to exploit
multivariate density estimation techniques to generate a concise mapping of an
example distribution. Results from this project will be used in the design and
construction of meta-learning assistants that will be able to provide automatic
and systematic user guidance for model selection and model
ranking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is multidisciplinary in nature, with
a particular emphasis on physics and astronomy. The principal area of
application lies in the classification of Mars landscapes from geo-morphological
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of this project is to combine
research and educational strategies aimed at the establishment of a Pattern
Classification and Machine Learning Laboratory at the University of Houston.
This laboratory will be used to analyze, learn, and perform predictions using
real scientific data. It will also be used to help local youth, especially women
and minorities, acquire a deep appreciation for science. Through the formation
of science clubs and learning communities among high school and undergraduate
students, this project strives to have a strong impact in fostering interest
among young students in choosing scientific or technological paths as their
professional career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;