* 0448208
* US-Egypt Workshop on "Nanostructured Materials and Nanotechnology", November 2005, Alexandria, Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Mohamed Samy El-Shall, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 03/31/2009
* USD 58,220.00

0448208 &lt;br/&gt;El-Shall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a "US-Egypt Workshop on Nanostructured Materials and Nanotechnology" to
be held in Alexandria, Egypt in November 2005. The organizers are Dr. Mohamed S.
El-Shall, Department of Chemistry at Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond,
Virginia, Dr. Mostafa El-Sayed, Department of Chemistry, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia and Dr. Medhat Seif-al-Nasr, President, Mubarak
City for Science and Technology (MuSCAT) in Borg al Arab, Alexandria, Egypt. The
workshop will be hosted by MuCSAT in Borg El-Arab, Alexandria and by the Central
Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDI) in Helwan, Cairo. These
combined efforts will ensure a broad participation of the Egyptian scientists
from multidisciplinary areas including Chemistry, Physics, Materials Science and
Engineering and representing the different universities and research institutes
in Egypt. The workshop objectives are to: 1. discuss utilization of the recent
research in the synthesis, characterization and industrial applications of
nanoparticles and nanostructured materials in both countries. A major focus of
this workshop will be directed toward chemical and biological applications of
nanoparticles and nanostructures. 2. address the fundamental science dealing
with nanoscale phenomena and the environmental, educational, health, and
societal impacts of nanotechnology, and 3. stimulate cooperative research in
nanotechnology between U.S. and Egyptian scientists. The cooperative research is
expected to lead to economic developments involving the private sectors in Egypt
and the US. It is planned to invite 15 U.S. researchers from multi-disciplinary
areas to interact with the Egyptian researchers over a five-day workshop. The
focus will be on mixing fundamental problems with industrial and technological
applications of nanoscale materials. The PIs will invite several industrial
scientists from both countries to interact with the academic-based scientists.
The synergism produced is expected to enhance the scientific collaboration
between the two countries, which will take this field a step closer to realizing
its enormous potential for novel nanotechnologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope
and broader impact: The workshop will allow scientists from the U. S. and Egypt
to exchange their experiences, ideas, and information and to build
collaborations to promote nanotechnology for the benefit of the public and
private sectors. This will help facilitate economic development in Egypt and
other regions of the Middle East. The workshop will advance the scientific and
technological aspects of nanostructured materials. It will address new
opportunities for research, discovery and invention based on the applications of
nanoscale materials to fundamental, materials and biomedical sciences. This is
expected to enhance the scientific knowledge in these and other related fields,
and it may lead to new exciting technologies. This project is being supported
under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out these joint scientific activities.
&lt;br/&gt;