* 0448396
* CAREER: Protein Metabolism During Mammalian Hibernation
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2015
* Frank van Breukelen, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 799,995.00

During hibernation in ground squirrels, core body temperatures may be as low as
-2 degrees C, heart rates may fall from around 200-250 beats per minute to as
low as 3-4 erratic beats per minute, and metabolic rates can approach 1/100th of
normal rates. The amazing metabolic depression of hibernation means that
critical metabolic activities like protein synthesis and degradation must be
reversibly turned off. However, the maintenance of protein pools is required if
one is to survive. Biochemical and molecular strategies will be employed to
examine the mechanisms by which protein metabolism is depressed as well as the
implications of that depression. This research will address specifically the
mechanism of how the bulk of protein synthesis initiation is down-regulated
during hibernation. Also studied will be the role of a novel mechanism of
protein synthesis initiation that could promote the survivorship of hibernation
by increasing the production of stress proteins. Finally, the mechanism of how
protein degradation is depressed will be examined. This research will not only
answer basic questions on how a fundamental process like protein metabolism can
be depressed while still allowing for survivorship, but in addition, should
provide insight for future applied efforts that exploit these natural lessons
for human health therapies. For example, a better understanding of hibernation
may have profound implications for designing therapies for cardiac dysfunction,
muscle disuse atrophy, and kidney failure. Education at both undergraduate and
graduate levels will be an integral part of this research. An outreach component
of this grant will be a local, children's television show produced in
conjunction with UNLV-TV entitled 'Desert Survivor'. This program will showcase
the local flora and fauna and is designed to promote scientific literacy in the
local elementary schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;