* 0448012
* CAREER:  From Shannon to TCP: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications of Nonlinear Optimization in Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Mung Chiang, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* William H Tranter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 406,500.00

This research aims at establishing new theoretical foundations for nonlinear
optimization of communication systems, developing efficient and distributed
solution algorithms, and applying the methodologies to enable next generation
broadband access networks. An important goal is to transfer the elegance of
mathematical models and analysis to practical communication system design, with
significant impacts on economics and ways-of-life in the society through
collaboration with several major companies. Furthermore, two new courses are
developed on optimization methodologies for communication systems. Using a just-
in-time pedagogical approach and a modular structure, these courses traverse the
disciplinary boundaries among electrical engineering, computer science, and
operations research, and the traditional divide between physical layer and
networking layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation utilizes the power of
recent developments in nonlinear optimization to tackle a much wider scope of
problems in the analysis and design of communication systems than what the
traditional linear programming methodologies allow, touching every layer of the
layered network architecture, making practical impacts to real world
deployments, and leading to a new intellectual foundation for communication
systems. There are two major thrusts of research on several indispensable and
interdependent areas in wireless and wired communications. First is information-
theoretic limits characterized and computed using optimization methods. The
investigator develops a Lagrange duality approach to prove, bound, and compute
channel capacity and rate distortion functions for single and multiple terminal
systems. Second is network resource allocation in the utility maximization
framework, including analysis of Internet protocol of TCP congestion control and
it's interact ional with other protocols as distributed algorithms solving
implicit network utility maximization problems. The 'layering as optimization
decomposition' approach is developed to provide a unified view on disparate
problems in communication networks. &lt;br/&gt;