* 0448298
* CAREER: Assembly and Dynamics of Class I Peptide/MHC Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Brian Baker, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2011
* USD 711,710.00

The protein encoded by the class I major histocompatibility complex (class I
MHC) is responsible for binding and "presenting" antigens, small peptides of
8-12 amino acids, to cytotoxic T cells. The protein is a heterotrimeric complex
consisting of a heavy chain, peptide, and the small subunit b2-microglobulin
(b2m). Despite the central role of class I peptide/MHC complexes in the immune
system and many years of critical study, important questions remain about how
these molecules assemble, the physical properties of the assembled complex, and
how peptide binding correlates with sequence, structure, and biological
activity. This CAREER project describes a study of class I peptide/MHC complexes
that addresses these gaps. By taking advantage of recent advances allowing
characterization of peptide-free MHC molecules and their interactions with
peptides, the work in this project will 1) generate correlations between peptide
binding, protein structure, and biological activity, 2) characterize the link
between protein conformational dynamics and peptide recognition, and 3)
investigate residual peptide dynamics in the peptide-binding groove. The results
will be of significant interest to those interested in the functional and
physical properties of these important molecules. They will provide data on
which more rigorous strategies for the prediction and design of peptides with
desired affinity and biological activity can be built. The results will also be
applicable to more basic questions related to protein dynamics, protein folding
linked to binding, strategies used for the recognition of small flexible
ligands, and the assembly of multi-subunit complexes.

The education and training component of this CAREER project proposal mirrors the
research component in its focus on molecular biophysics. A recently developed
graduate/senior undergraduate course in molecular biophysics will be enhanced,
and select biophysical concepts will be emphasized in the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry's core curriculum for biochemistry undergraduates. To
enhance on-campus training and collaboration, an interdepartmental interest
group in molecular biophysics will be formed, with the long-term goal of forming
a formal training program. Finally, in recognition of the desire to enhance
opportunities in science for under-represented minorities, informal arrangements
have been made with faculty at a Department of Education-designated Minority
Institution to assist in increasing enrollment of under-represented minorities
in the University of Notre Dame graduate biochemistry program.