* 0448392
* CAREER: Mining Salient Localized Patterns in Complex Data
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2012
* Wei Wang, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/29/2012
* USD 437,000.00

One of the greatest challenges in modern data analysis is to find significant
and non-obvious patterns within immense and complex data sets. The detection of
such salient patterns is an indispensable tool for comprehending the trends and
meaning of data. Such tools are required by scientists, economists, marketing
analysts, and all other data analysts. This project is developing new methods
and tools for identifying the salient patterns within complex data sets and has
the following objectives: design robust and scalable algorithms for mining the
most salient patterns; evaluate the significance of mined patterns in the
context of complex and noisy data; and integrate and correlate heterogeneous
data sets based on corresponding patterns. The project is focussed on problems
related to bioinformatics with four driving applications: Integrative Genetics
of Cancer Susceptibility, HIV Salivary Gland Disease (SGD) Pathogenesis,
Discovering Family Specific Residue Packing Patterns of Proteins, and
Integrative Functional Annotation of Proteins. All of these applications produce
massive quantities of data thereby providing an excellent testbed for the
salient pattern mining algorithms being developed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits include a new class of
data analysis tools for analyzing the huge data sets generated by modern
quantitative genetics technologies. These tools will assist biologists in their
study of functional proteomics, aid in their understanding of disease
progression, and assist in the search for effective treatments. In order to be
useful, the data mining techniques must also be accurate, computationally
efficient, and operate autonomously. If successful, this project will make
significant contributions to bioinformatics and computational biology. Results
from this research will be disseminated through publications and the software
will be made publicly available through a web portal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research include interdisciplinary collaboration and
training, immediate applications to fields other than life sciences, a multitude
of educational impacts, and outreach to underrepresented groups in the sciences.
The pattern mining methods will be applied to analyze the administrative
paperwork of child welfare cases from the North Carolina Department of Health
and Human Services (NC-DHHS) in an effort to improve services and achieve better
outcomes for children in the welfare system. Long-term interdisciplinary
collaborations with scientists have been established and will be strengthened
during the course of this project. Educational impacts include new curriculum
developments for computer science and bioinformatics, support of
multidisciplinary educational experiences, and services to the research
community. &lt;br/&gt;