* 0448845
* CAREER: Morphological Control in Polymer Blends Using Polymeric Surfactants
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2005,04/30/2011
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 04/30/2011
* USD 425,900.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT - 0448845&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivation: Blending of
immiscible polymers is an effective and efficient strategy to obtain materials
with unusual properties. Often the desired properties are realized only if the
blend has a specific morphology, e.g. a diffusion-barrier material requires that
the low-diffusivity component be in the form of lamellae or platelets. An
ability to control the morphology is therefore crucial for design of new
polymeric materials. The hypothesis of this proposal is that the morphology of
immiscible polymer blends can be controlled by addition of polymeric
surfactants. Specifically, we propose to exploit the coupling between
interfacial flow and surfactant concentration to manipulate the morphology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Proposal: The structure obtained from a two-phase
blending operation is a result of the interplay between hydrodynamic stresses
due to blending, and interfacial stresses due to interfacial tension. The latter
make it difficult to obtain small-scale anisotropic morphologies in blends. A
well-known effect of added surfactant is to reduce these interfacial stresses by
decreasing the equilibrium interfacial tension between the immiscible phases.
Less obviously, a coupling between the flow and the concentration of the
surfactant on the interface causes deviations of the interfacial tension from
its equilibrium value, as well as interfacial tension gradients, along the
interface. The focus of this proposal is to quantify these nonequilibrium
surfactant effects, and exploit them to control structural evolution. Key
elements of the methodology are simple materials and flow fields to help
highlight interfacial phenomena, and a surfactant that is generated by an
interfacial coupling reaction. The latter ensures that most of the surfactant
remains at the interface, and very little dissolves in the bulk. A crucial
innovation is the use of fluorescently-tagged surfactants, which allows locating
the surfactant in the blend, and measuring the local interfacial tension, by
confocal laser scanning microscopy. The mechanisms by which surfactants can
achieve unusual morphologies such as dispersed plates, dispersed ribbons, or
dual-phase continuity, will be elucidated. Rheological methods to determine the
viscoelastic properties of surfactant-laden interfaces will be explored.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education Plan: The education plan addresses the need to
shift the undergraduate Chemical Engineering curriculum towards Chemical Product
Design. The central educational goal is to introduce product design ideas
throughout the curriculum, and not only as an add-on Product Design course.
Short modules that can be incorporated into existing classes in Chemical
Engineering will be designed to facilitate a curriculum-wide introduction to
Chemical Product Design. These will culminate in a newly developed capstone
course on Chemical Product Design. In the modules as well as in the course, all
case studies will be chosen to emphasize core Chemical Engineering disciplines
such as Transport Phenomena and Thermodynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Polymeric surfactants, (more commonly
referred to as "compatibilizers") are routinely used to facilitate blending of
immiscible polymers. This proposal is based on the idea that the same
surfactants can also be used to manipulate the morphology. The chief scientific
advances over past research in this area are that the anisotropy of the
structure, and the coupling between the flow and the surfactant on the
interface, will be quantified for the first time. This research will offer
fundamental insights into the fluid mechanics of multiphase flow and will lay
guidelines for using surfactants to control structure in immiscible polymer
blends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: While the research will be
conducted on polymeric systems, the results are applicable to all liquid-liquid
emulsions with surfactants, such as those encountered in the foods, personal
care products, or oil industries. The rheological properties obtained in this
research will guide the design of processing equipment for polymer blends. A
significant portion of the research will be performed by undergraduate students.
The product design modules, to be made available to instructors everywhere, is
likely to influence the pedagogy of product design in other Chemical Engineering
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Feasibility: The PI has extensive knowledge
and experimental skills in the research topics covered here. All necessary
experimental resources are either available, or will be purchased during this
research. The Department whole-heartedly supports the curricular changes
proposed in the education plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;