* 0448820
* CAREER:  Disordered Systems and Stochastic Growth Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2011
* Ilya Gruzberg, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award falls under the umbrella of the NSF-wide Mathematical Sciences
Priority Area and supports integrated research and education in theoretical
condensed matter physics. The PI plans to address localization in
superconducting wires with broken spin-rotation symmetry, network models for
quantum Hall effects, rare fluctuations in disordered superconductors, and
stochastic Loewner evolution and its generalizations. Superconducting wires with
broken spin-rotation symmetry exhibit delocalized quasiparticle states leading
to unusual thermal transport properties. This happens at a critical point. The
PI plans to study the nature of this critical point using scattering theory and
supersymmetry methods. Quantum Hall transitions are challenging examples of
critical points. Network models for quantum Hall transitions and their
generalizations will be studied with an aim to understanding the nature of these
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;The supersymmetry method adapted for network models
provides the formal approach for the research. Density and spatial structure of
quasiparticle states in disordered superconductors are essential parts of our
understanding of these fascinating systems. The optimal fluctuation method and
self-consistent treatment of the suppression of superconductivity by impurities
will be combined to study rare fluctuations in disorder configurations and
ensuing low-energy states in disordered superconductors. The PI plans to study
stochastic Loewner evolution and its generalizations. The stochastic Loewner
evolution is a recent development in the study of criticality in two dimensions
and fractal structures emerging as results of stochastic growth phenomena.
Possible applications include such long-standing open problems as diffusion-
limited aggregation and other growth phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;The education
component involves developing graduate level courses in modern condensed matter
physics, supervision of graduate and undergraduate research students, and making
novel contributions to the Research Experiences for Undergraduates, Young
Scholars, and Seminars for Elementary Specialists And Mathematics Educators
programs as well as working with professionals at the Museum of Science and
Industry (MSI). These activities will be closely coupled with feedback from
education professionals. Courses will focus on conceptual understanding rather
than theoretical techniques, and will be accessible to experimentally inclined
students. The REU and Young Scholars programs reach out to underrepresented
groups, while the MSI each year serves about one half million school students.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award falls under the umbrella of the NSF-
wide Mathematical Sciences Priority Area. It supports integrated research and
education in theoretical condensed matter physics. The PI will use advanced
theoretical methods to study two problems at the heart of condensed matter
physics connected by a common theme of randomness. The first involves electrons
in a random environment, for example, in materials in which the atoms are
randomly displaced from a regular periodic lattice. The PI focuses on
interesting physical cases when the motion of the electrons is further
restricted to a plane or a wire, and when novel states of matter and
transformations among them are involved, like superconducting or quantum Hall
states. The second area involves materials growth processes, like those at work
in the formation of snowflakes. The PI seeks intellectual advances by pursuing a
recent breakthrough in the mathematical description of these processes. The
research brings together ideas from physics and mathematics including
localization, superconductivity, statistical mechanics of random systems,
critical phenomena, complex analysis, probability theory, fractals, and random
matrices. The education and outreach component of the proposal will integrate
research into teaching of physics from high school to graduate level, provide
new course material for high school students, and help keep professionals at a
major science museum scientifically up to date. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;