* 0448886
* CAREER:    A System for Extracellular Recording from Patterned Neuronal Networks with Sensing Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2012
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 04/30/2012
* USD 406,000.00

The objective of this research is the development of a novel multi-electrode
array (MEA), accompanied by a multi-channel recording and simulation system,
which will allow stimulating and recording from patterned neuronal networks.
This system can be used as a sensory platform for detection of compounds with
detectable and/or harmful impact on a nervous system, and it will be a useful
tool for neurobiologists to investigate processes of learning and memory on
cultured cells. This goal will be met via accomplishing the following
milestones: 1) developing a technique for confining a nerve cell solely on the
electrode area; 2) establishing methods to enable growth of neurites in pre-
defined directions; 3) fabricating a multielectrode array with these unique
features; 4) devising an experimental setup, and; 5) investigating effective
parameters for the stimulation of cultured neurons. Two implementations of this
important tool will be studied: a) determining in vitro toxic levels and
signatures of selected neuroactive compounds, and; b) exploring the learning
process in simple neuronal circuits.

The proposed system can be used as a cell-based sensor system for the detection
of neuroactive compounds, as well as for the fabrication of neuronal circuits,
which are valuable tools in experimental neuroscience. Additionally, the
experimental setup devised will be integrated into the new, inter-disciplinary
bioengineering program at Lehigh University. Two new courses will be developed,
and an outreach program is proposed in the form of a Micromachine Drawing
Contest for elementary and junior-high school students.