* 0448795
* CAREER:   Thermal Engineering of Nitride Semiconductor Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Samuel Graham, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2011
* USD 431,658.00

CAREER: Thermal Engineering Of Nitride Semiconductor
Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of gallium nitride (GaN) as a
semiconductor material has been heralded for its potential use in optoelectronic
and power semiconductor applications. GaN semiconductors are poised to make
large contributions to the advancement of RF-communications systems as well as
solid state lighting. A potential saving $40 billion per year in energy consumed
by lighting is expected by 2025. While early laboratory demonstrations have
clearly shown the potential revolutionary effects of GaN semiconductors,
reliability issues arise from localized heating and poor heat dissipation in
these devices. &lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this research program is to
provide fundamental knowledge of the thermal transport properties of GaN
semiconductors and increase the accuracy of thermal transport models for
devices. Models will be verified through measurements of temperature
distribution in both solid state lighting and rf-communication devices
fabricated in this program. The knowledge gained in this program will lead to
more efficient thermal management schemes which will enable high power devices
for future applications. &lt;br/&gt;This project will achieve Broad Impact by
enhancing Georgia Tech's efforts to develop programs in microscale heat transfer
and nitride semiconductor technology. The educational plan will develop of a
graduate course on the thermal metrology and property characterization of
nitride semiconductor devices. In addition, students will be exposed to a broad
set of technical and cultural experiences through joint collaborations and
technical exchanges. &lt;br/&gt;The outreach plan will be focused on the
development of a six week course module in mechanical engineering for a Pre-
engineering course in the magnet program at Westlake High School. This course
module will be disseminated to a broader audience by Georgia Tech through the
NSF Digital Library for Engineering (Teach Engineering: Resources for K-12).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;