* 0448879
* CAREER:  Nanoscale Surficial Disordered Films:  Multilayer Adsorbates in Oxide Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2011
* Jian Luo, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER project will investigate a class of surficial films in oxide
materials that exhibit self-selecting thicknesses of 0.5-5 nanometers. These
surficial films, recently discovered as a free-surface counterpart to
equilibrium-thickness intergranular films, have compositions and structures that
are neither observed nor stable as bulk phases. The temperature/chemistry
dependent equilibrium-thickness, composition, and structure (including partial
order) of these nanoscale films will be characterized in several model oxide
systems using high resolution and scanning transmission electron microscopy in
conjunction with other surface analysis methods. The existence of surface phase
transitions and electrostatic space-charge will be explored. In a parallel
theoretical study, phase-field and lattice-gas models will be developed to
simulate the surficial film stability. Successful investigation of equilibrium
surficial films as a previously-unrecognized class of ionocovalent adsorbates
will enhance multilayer adsorption theories, as well as provide new perspectives
for understanding several related interfacial phenomena such as prewetting,
premelting, and equilibrium intergranular films. Moreover, the project will make
possible exciting applications of these surficial films as two-dimensional
nanomaterials in catalysts, sintering, and nano-devices. The research findings
will also be treated in the broader context of interfacial science and utilized
in materials science education. Education and research integration activities
will include 1) developing a series of free, web-based, materials science
minicourse in which the results of this project will be utilized as research-
based education materials; 2) establishing a high school outreach and research
exposure program; and 3) educating, inspiring, and mentoring students while they
perform research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will build the
fundamental scientific knowledge for a new class of adsorption and thin-film
behaviors on oxide surfaces. It is expected to have a broad impact on several
scientific and technological fields including ceramics, surface science,
catalysts, and microelectronics. The project integrates research and education.
Special effort will be made at the K-12 level to motivate high school students
in South Carolina to continue their education at institutions of higher
learning. Professional education and enhancement of public scientific
understanding are also addressed in the web-based educational subproject, where
open and free materials science education resources will be developed for self-
learners around the world. &lt;br/&gt;