* 0448055
* CAREER: Designing Large-scale Ad Hoc Networking Systems: Models, Analysis, and Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2005,12/31/2012
* Dmitri Perkins, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 12/31/2012
* USD 479,235.00

Designing large-scale ad hoc networking systems capable of supporting
heterogeneous traffic types involves a large number of factors (e.g., protocols,
parameters, network size, traffic characteristics) that interact in a very
complex manner, making system optimization a non-trivial problem. The principle
goal of this project is to develop a deeper understanding of the fundamental
performance, scaling properties, and tradeoffs and includes two main research
thrusts. The first is focused on constructing analytical and empirical models
that accurately characterize the functional relationship between performance
metrics (e.g., end-to-end delay) and significant factors. Analytical end-to-end
delay and packet discard models are being developed that account for
interactions among the traffic arrival process, wireless channels, error control
mechanisms, and mobility-induced path failures. The empirical models are based
on two modeling approaches: (1) response surface methodology and regression
analysis and (2) the class of Levenberg-Marquardt multilayer perceptron neural
networks. In the second research thrust, we are using the above models to
explore several scaling and performance properties, including which system
configuration(s) lead to optimal, robust, scalable, or satisfiable performance
response(s) over specified regions of interests. Using the predictive empirical
models, adaptive cross-layer feedback-based mechanisms are being designed for
transport and QoS-sensitive routing strategies. The success of the proposed
project will produce solid models, principles, and protocols on which to build
large-scale ad hoc networks. An educational component will enhance education by
integrating statistical experimental design and modeling research into wireless
networking courses and will enhance national research initiatives by
establishing research partnerships with non-Ph.D. granting
universities.&lt;br/&gt;