* 0448516
* CAREER: Designing Efficient Information Exchanges: A Program for Research and Teaching
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Michael Smith, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2010
* USD 509,749.00

This CAREER proposal will investigate three key areas of online information
exchange: the exchange of information about competing products, the exchange of
information goods in peer-to-peer networks, and the exchange of ideas and
opinions within online communities. Each area has a particular design
characteristic that is underutilized in current information exchanges, but which
can be used to improve the efficiency of online information provision and
consumption. In the case of product information exchange, the PI will analyze
the malleability of information display -- the ability to passively learn
customer preferences and dynamically alter the assortment of information shown
to customers based on their individual tastes and needs. In the case of peer-to-
peer networks, the PI will analyze the malleability of incentive design -- the
ability to easily change the incentives provided within information exchanges to
achieve socially desirable outcomes. In the case of communities, the PI will
analyze the malleabilty of social interactions -- how rich media interactions
can change the organization of communities of discourse and the dissemination
and persuasiveness of messages exchanged in these communities. This project will
have a direct impact on the education of social science, economics and
engineering students through course development at CMU. The PI has developed
course modules and data exercises related to market efficiency, consumer surplus
gains in Internet markets, and customer online behavior. A new course is
proposed entitled, "Designing Efficient Electronic Markets." This course will
include new modules on improving efficiency in Internet markets, designing
online reputation systems, designing online collaborative filtering systems,
designing a better shopbot, incentives to peer-to-peer networks, and efficient
regulation of Internet markets. Each module will include a lecture on the
relevant market and design issues and an exercise designed to statistically
analyze available data and based on this analysis to propose technical solutions
to improve market design.