* 0448465
* Workshop on Theoritical Science in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate;  October 28-29, 2004;  Arlington, VA
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2005
* Thomas Appelquist, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/2005
* USD 63,000.00

This award, supported by the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, will provide funds for a workshop to address
support for theory throughout the MPS Directorate. The MPS Directorate includes
the Divisions of Astronomical Sciences, Chemistry, Materials Research,
Mathematical Sciences, and Physics. The workshop is being held at the request of
the MPS Advisory Committee (MPSAC). The workshop will survey some of the
exciting theoretical science being pursued in MPS and identify challenges and
opportunities for the MPS support of theory in the 21st century. The workshop
will also survey the various funding modalities for theory, as well as education
and workforce issues. In coordination with MPS, the workshop is being organized
by a Steering Committee (SC) comprised of members of the MPSAC plus additional
ad hoc members to provide balance. The SC will be responsible for writing a
report summarizing the findings of the workshop including recommendations. The
report will be presented to the MPSAC for its consideration.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award, supported by the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS) Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, will provide funds for a
workshop to address support for theory throughout the MPS Directorate. The MPS
Directorate includes the Divisions of Astronomical Sciences, Chemistry,
Materials Research, Mathematical Sciences, and Physics. The workshop is being
held at the request of the MPS Advisory Committee (MPSAC). The workshop will
survey some of the exciting theoretical science being pursued in MPS and
identify challenges and opportunities for the MPS support of theory in the 21st
century. The workshop will also survey the various funding modalities for
theory, as well as education and workforce issues. In coordination with MPS, the
workshop is being organized by a Steering Committee (SC) comprised of members of
the MPSAC plus additional ad hoc members to provide balance. The SC will be
responsible for writing a report summarizing the findings of the workshop
including recommendations. The report will be presented to the MPSAC for its
consideration. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;