* 0448489
* CAREER:     New Paradigm for Wireless Multimedia Communication Systems with Resource and Information Exchanges
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2005,09/30/2005
* Mihaela van der Schaar, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2005
* USD 158,051.00

Existing wireless networks provide dynamically varying resources with limited
quality of service support for multimedia applications, which often results in
unsatisfactory user experience. This research addresses these challenges by
introducing a new communication paradigm that allows competing wireless stations
to dynamically exchange communication and computation resources. This paradigm
was inspired by a successful economics concept known as "coopetition", which
suggests that a judicious mixture of competition and cooperation is advantageous
in competitive environments. When applied to wireless multimedia systems, this
research fundamentally changes the passive way stations currently adapt their
transmission strategies to match available wireless and power resources, by
enabling them to proactively influence the wireless systems dynamics through
resource and information exchange. To achieve this, the investigator models
wireless stations as rational players competing for available wireless resources
in a dynamic repeated game. Optimal resource exchange policies are determined
for different application requirements, wireless conditions, multimedia content,
and different levels of collaboration and advantages of forming coalitions among
applications/stations are explored. In the new proactive paradigm, the resource
exchanges are made possible by adapting the transmission strategies of the
participating stations. Currently, these strategies are optimized at the lower
OSI layers without considering the multimedia traffic characteristics. This
research develops a new cross-layer optimization framework that adapts to
varying channel conditions and available resources, while explicitly considering
the specific characteristics and requirements of wireless multimedia
applications. Moreover, to enable different resource exchanges, user-centric
scalable multimedia coding and streaming algorithms are investigated that
consider the user experience and stations resources. This research considers
both existing wireless networks and next-generation Spectrum Agile Radio
networks in which stations can utilize multiple channels, thereby dynamically
gathering additional resources to satisfy multimedia requirements.

