* 0448170
* CAREER: Development of an Integrated Framework for Capturing, Modeling and Visualizing the History of Construction Projects
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Burcu Akinci, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 06/30/2011
* USD 406,623.00

CAREER: Development of an Integrated Framework for Capturing, Modeling and
Visualizing the History of Construction Projects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
history of a construction project can have a multitude of uses in supporting
decisions throughout the lifecycle of a facility/infrastructure, in advancing
professionals' knowledge, and in supporting decisions on new projects. Current
approaches for capturing, modeling, analyzing and visualizing project history
are less than optimal and do not take advantage of advances in reality capture
and information technologies. With increasing complexities in
facility/infrastructure design and construction and with increasing owner
demands, next generations of civil engineers need to understand the capabilities
of such technologies to utilize them effectively at construction sites and
leverage them in their processes. The proposed career development plan builds on
advancements in reality capture, project data modeling and visualization
technologies and is aimed at developing an integrated framework for capturing,
modeling and visualizing an evolutionary, semantically-rich, computer-
interpretable representation of the history of a project by incorporating
product-, process- and situation-related data to enable active project control
and learning. The proposed plan also targets development of educational problem-
based and information technology-based learning units, a multi-disciplinary
project course, and outreach activities to middle and high-school students,
especially women and minority students. The research, education and outreach
activities will be conducted in close collaboration with national and
international construction and owner companies and organizations, a national
research lab, and an international research center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expected research contributions of the proposed five-year career plan include
detailed use-cases and requirements analysis for utilization of project history
for construction project management purposes; formalized approaches for fusing
data collected from different reality capture technologies; representation
schema for modeling project history information; and an environment for
visualizing project history. Altogether these contributions will provide the
first integrated approach towards a framework for capturing, modeling and
visualizing project history. This new paradigm is expected to be a springboard
for a multitude of novel research approaches and projects in construction
management, facility/infrastructure management, information modeling and
technology development, visualization and knowledge management throughout the
lifecycle of a facility/infrastructure. Through this career plan, it is expected
to educate the next generation of civil engineers so as to provide them with a
strong information technology knowledge and experience, a positive attitude
about problem-solving and a mastery of self-directed inquiry. Given the size of
the construction industry, these research, education and outreach contributions
are expected to directly impact the US workforce and economy and will
potentially enable better design, operation and management of the civil
infrastructure systems.&lt;br/&gt;