* 0448860
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research:   Evolution of the Pangean Megamonsoon:  Plant Taphonomy in Triassic Sedimentary Rocks of the Ischigualasto Basin
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2004,08/31/2005
* Judith Parrish, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2005
* USD 16,828.00

0228426&lt;br/&gt;Parrish-Jones&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas award will
support collaborative research between Dr. Judith T. Parrish-Jones of the
University of Arizona and Dr. Oscar Alcober and Ms. Carina Colombi, Dr.
Alcober's Ph.D. advisee, of Universidad Nacional de San Juan in Argentina for
their work on the evolution of the Pangean megamonsoon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Pangean megamonsoon was a global climate system whose history is relevant to
understanding climate dynamics. The southwestern portion of Pangea, in what is
now South America, has received little attention in the documentation of this
climate system, particularly of the Triassic. A well-exposed and complete
Triassic stratigraphic sequence in western Argentina (Ischigualasto Basin) can
help address the gap in our knowledge of the Pangean record, and is the focus of
this project. The Pis will conduct plant taphonomic studies in the Ischigualasto
Basin. Plant taphonomy is a powerful method for paleoclimate interpretation and
has not been applied widely in South America. Integrated with the sedimentologic
studies by other workers and with the vertebrate taphonomy to be carried out by
the Argentines, this study of the paleovegetation will provide an excellent
record of the Triassic climate in this part of the world.&lt;br/&gt;