* 0448319
* CAREER: Learning about Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2013
* Neil Heffernan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2013
* USD 646,075.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will investigate methods of building
web-based intelligent tutoring systems that teach as they assess. The project
focuses upon the creation of a system to help 8th grade students learn math for
the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment Survey (MCAS). The system provides
what the PI and his colleagues at CMU call assistments: individual pieces of
computer-generated tutoring that combine assessment of learning with scaffolded
assistance to the students such that as they receive individualized computer
help, teachers can monitor, in real time, precisely the kinds of difficulty
students are having and what progress they are making. The project will have 5
main research thrusts: In the first research thrust, designing cognitive models,
the PI will use methodologies such as difficulty factors analysis and learning
factors analysis in order to create good-fitting models that can predict student
learning and transfer. In the second research thrust, inferring what students
know and are learning, the PI will study novel model learning and inference
mechanisms in order to try to predict when learning and transfer occur. This
effort will entail combining psychometric methods with intelligent tutoring
systems. In the third thrust, optimizing learning, the PI will focus on
discovering what pedagogical strategies used by teachers lead to better learning
by students. Through the iterative refining of his models, he will devise
mechanisms that select problems that maximize the ratio of expected test-score
gain to the expected time needed for completion. In the fourth thrust, informing
educators, the PI will study how best to present information from the finer-
grained model to teachers. In the final thrust, allowing user adaptation, the PI
will attempt to provide a means for allowing K-12 teachers to design the
pedagogy used in an intelligent tutoring system. On his website, he will provide
the research team's current "best hypothesis" of an ideal 8th grade intelligent
tutoring system. Teachers will be able to adapt the system for their own uses,
changing existing assistments or creating new problems for their students. The
hope is that such systems could eventually be made available to large numbers of
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;