* 0448613
* CAREER:Smart-Radio-Technology-Enabled Opportunistic Spectrum Utilization
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Xin Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 06/30/2011
* USD 416,000.00

Spectrum is among the world's most expensive natural resources and demand is
skyrocketing due to the rapid proliferation of broadband wireless services. On
the other hand, preliminary studies indicate the presence of a significant
amount of white space, or unused space, in the radio spectrum. Thus, it is
spectrum access, instead of true spectrum scarcity, that limits the potential
growth of versatile wireless services. This project is motivated by this
dilemma. Opportunistic utilization of the white space is studied, which has the
great potential to mitigate the spectrum scarcity. The project focuses on
modeling and protocol design. The expected results include new metrics to
quantify the impact of exploiting white space and analytical models to capture
the spatial and temporal characteristics of white space, and thus a better
understanding on the potentials of opportunistic spectrum utilization.
Furthermore, centralized and distributed algorithms will be developed that
provide dynamic, efficient, and fair sharing of the opportunistically-available
spectrum. Suitable solutions for different application scenarios will be
identified. The results of the project will benefit the research community and
provide theoretical data for policy-makers. The project will also enhance the
education curriculum and foster the participation of under-represented groups in
engineering.