* 0448272
* CAREER: Disruption Tolerant Routing in Wired and Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2005,12/31/2011
* Srihari Nelakuditi, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Min Song
* 12/31/2011
* USD 444,000.00

Disruptions occur often even in well-managed wired networks due to various
failures and more so in emerging wireless networks due to additional causes such
as external interference. With the increased use of the Internet for many real-
time business applications, there is a growing demand for high service
availability despite such disruptions. The goal of this project is to develop
resilient routing schemes that mitigate the impact of disruptions on mission-
critical applications and services. Specifically, this project aims to: (i)
devise a failure inferencing based fast rerouting scheme to provide failure
protection similar to MPLS fast-reroute without altering the destination-based
forwarding paradigm prevalent in IP networks; (ii) design scalable localized on-
demand link state routing schemes that ensure reliable delivery in spite of
disruptions without requiring accurate state at each node; (iii) explore ways to
utilize both topology and position information for handling disruptions; (iv)
extend and apply these methods for load balancing and resilient multicasting.
This project will boost the robustness of the Internet and enable services that
improve the lives of everyone. It also has significant educational value in
addition to facilitating knowledge sharing and distance education as a result of
an always-available Internet. The results from this project will be assimilated
into advanced graduate level and introductory undergraduate level theory courses
as well as hands-on laboratory courses. Furthermore, the research advances will
also be disseminated to the industry and the broader community through several
publications and prototypes. &lt;br/&gt;