* 0448111
* CAREER: Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methods for Large Scale Correspondence Problems in Computer Vision and Robotics
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2011
* Frank Dellaert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 03/31/2011
* USD 422,000.00

The goal of this project is to investigate tractable approaches to large-scale
correspondence problems in computer vision and robotics. Correspondence is a
central problem in many vision and robotics applications, and the proposed
research centers on three of those: large-scale 3D reconstruction from digital
imagery in space and time, simultaneous localization and mapping using mobile
robots, and tracking large numbers of visually similar objects, such as ants in
an ant-hill or people in a crowd. To eclipse existing state of the art methods,
this proposal aims to investigate approximate inference through Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling. MCMC provides an approximate solution for an
otherwise intractable problem, and has a number of attractive advantages with
respect to other approaches. In addition, practical insights gained in applying
MCMC to this problem can cross-pollinate other fields and spawn new theoretical
investigations. In terms of broader impact, this project's integrated research
and education plan will help produce a next generation of researchers,
intimately familiar with these new methods first discovered in statistical
mechanics. In addition, the project has a strong outreach component through
museum exhibits and interaction with local high schools. Taking a longer view,
the proposed research will enable novel and large-scale applications of computer
vision and robotics that are expected to have far-reaching implications for
society. Robots are on the verge of playing a much larger role in our lives, as
evidenced for example by the increasingly popular consumer robots now available.
More immediately, the advent of cheap digital photography and video is
exponentially increasing the volume of digital imagery that can be used,
analyzed, and re-synthesized in new and creative ways. The correspondence
problem lies at the heart of many of these novel uses.