* 0448246
* CAREER: Systematic Design of Distributed Protocols -  from Methodologies and Toolkits to Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Indranil Gupta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 02/28/2010
* USD 456,000.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: CNS-0448246 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gupta, Indranil
INSTITUTION: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign PROPOSAL TITLE: CAREER:
Systematic Design of Distributed Protocols - from Methodologies and Toolkits to
Systems

Distributed protocols such as resource discovery, cooperative caching,
replication, etc., are crucial to the scalability and reliability of large-scale
distributed systems such as the Web and the Grid. Today, however, the critical
activity of designing a distributed protocol relies on an ad-hoc approach -
literature, experience, and basic Computer Science knowledge provide the only
assistance. This often leads to complex protocols, increased design times and
costs, and eventually to inefficient use of research potential.

This project is exploring systematic techniques for designing distributed
protocols, assisted by the use of Design Methodologies for distributed
protocols. Design methodologies augment the creative process of protocol
innovation, without stifling it. The project is creating new methodologies that
systematically convert naturally observed phenomena into protocols with
predictable properties. One innovative methodology translates differential
equation systems into equivalent distributed protocols. Composable methodologies
are also being developed, allowing protocol designers flexibility to enrich
protocols with desired properties.

The methodologies invented and discovered in this project will be used to design
new system designs for cooperative web caching, adaptive Grid computing,
persistent distributed file systems, and disaster response and recovery. The
methodologies will be made available to the community as Integrated design
Toolkits (IdTs) that automate methodologies and enable a designer to
automatically generate compilable code for a protocol. While methodologies have
been used with varying degrees of success in other fields of science, this
project is the one of the first to study its benefits and drawbacks in certain
focus areas of distributed systems.