* 0448881
* CAREER:    Novel Conducting Polymer Nanocomposites with Tailored Thermal and Electrical Properties - Designing High Performance Thermoelectric Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2005,08/31/2010
* Alexis Abramson, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Novel Conducting Polymer Nanocomposites with Tailored Thermal and Electrical
Properties - Designing High Performance Thermoelectric
Materials&lt;br/&gt;Alexis Abramson, Case Western Reserve University,
PI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectric devices (e.g. solid state coolers) are
especially attractive because they do not contain moving parts, they are
environmentally benign, and they may be easily incorporated into technologies
for heat removal or for energy conversion. While the use of thermoelectric
devices is not widespread today, by replacing conventional
semiconductors/semimetals with high performance thermoelectric nanomaterials, a
revolution in energy conversion and generation and heat removal applications
will undoubtedly ensue. This is because certain nanostructures exhibit enhanced
thermoelectric properties; although there is a limited understanding of the
phenomena involved. In view of this lack of understanding and its scientific and
technological importance, this research plan will consist of a focused
investigation into thermal and electrical properties of nanocomposites comprised
of Bi, PbTe or Bi2Te3 nanoparticles (of variable volume fraction and
nanoparticle size) embedded within a conducting polymer. The proposed program
will integrate three major ingredients, i.e. synthesis, experimentation and
modeling. Experiments will include Seebeck coefficient, and thermal and
electrical conductivity measurements. Additionally, using molecular dynamics
simulations, benchmark studies to examine how thermal transport is affected by
the presence of nanoparticles in a matrix material (i.e. interfacial regions)
will also be conducted. The program will involve and encourage collaborations
among educators, researchers, faculty, students of all ages and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;