* 0448758
* CAREER:    On the Prevention of Selenium and Arsenic Release into the Atmosphere
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2005,09/30/2008
* Jennifer Wilcox, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 09/30/2008
* USD 399,761.00

CAREER: On the Prevention of Selenium and Arsenic Release into the
Atmosphere&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed work is to aid in the
prevention of the release of the volatile metals, selenium and arsenic, from the
flue gases of coal combustion. There have been extensive research efforts aimed
at capturing mercury and understanding its speciation in flue gases, but not as
much is known of selenium and arsenic in the chemically complex flue gas
environment. The proposed research will also examine novel sorbent technologies
for the capture of these trace elements, and a mechanism responsible for their
retention will be determined. Model development will take place through high
level ab initio energetics calculations. The research activities proposed will
advance discovery through the development of two kinetic models that will
elucidate, for the first time ever, the mechanism of retention of selenium and
arsenic on calcium based sorbents. In addition, the proposed plan includes the
development of a high school outreach program, which will involve undergraduate
students training high school teachers on the incorporation of computational
chemistry and molecular modeling techniques into their science courses. The
research and educational activities combined will advance understanding through
the incorporation of molecular computational applications in the classroom,
which will provide both college and high school students the opportunity to gain
a deeper understanding of chemical interactions using multimedia-based
approaches for effective teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
speciation of selenium and arsenic in the flue gas environment is essential for
developing effective technologies to control their emissions. Homogeneous
reactions involving these species will be examined through the theoretical
prediction of rate constants obtained from quantum mechanical derived potential
energy surfaces. Effective core potentials that include relativistic effects
will be incorporated into the basis sets, and this will be carried out for all
calculations using both Quadratic Configuration Interaction (QCI) and Coupled
Cluster (CC) techniques. Heterogeneous reaction investigations will also take
place to elucidate the mechanisms responsible for the retention of arsenic and
selenium on calcium-based sorbents. Heterogeneous rate constant predictions will
be experimentally validated through the analysis of the reacted sorbent material
using an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS). In total, this
research will benefit the scientific community in that there will be a greater
understanding of the speciation of these trace elements in the flue gases of
combustion processes and also further understanding on methods involving their
capture. The impact that the proposed research could have on society is the
possible prevention of the release of these toxic elements into the atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;