* 0448558
* CAREER: Integrated Automation Strategy for Interconnect Design: A New Paradigm for Mixed-Signal Nanoscale Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Yehia Massoud, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal No: 048558 &lt;br/&gt;PI name: Massoud, Yehia &lt;br/&gt;Inst.: William
Marsh Rice Univ &lt;br/&gt;Title: Integrated Automation Strategy for
Interconnect Design: A New Paradigm for Mixed-Signal Nanoscale Integrated
Circuits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to aggressive
technology scaling and increasing operating frequencies, interconnect has become
the main performance limiting factor in integrated circuits. Consequently,
interconnect synthesis plays a vital role in facilitating today's mixed-signal
designs, but current design automation techniques fail to include deep sub-
micron interconnect effects directly into the synthesis process, resulting in
costly redesign. To promote synthesis strategies that handle the increased
complexity of mixed-signal nanoscale integrated circuits, the PI proposes a new
interconnect synthesis paradigm that evaluates the circuit signal integrity and
performance during interconnect synthesis. Under this new paradigm, interconnect
in mixed-signal systems is modeled, optimized and synthesized taking all aspects
of the system's interconnect into account. This includes analog interconnect
structures and integrated components as well as interconnect in digital portions
of the design. To facilitate and develop our new system-oriented interconnect
synthesis paradigm for mixed-signal nanoscale ICs, the PI will research and
create: (i) analytical modeling, optimization and synthesis methodologies that
facilitate generalized design automation in integrated mixed-signal and system-
on-chip designs; (ii) system-oriented interconnect synthesis strategies
utilizing statistical modeling methodologies incorporating inductance to produce
layout that meets design constraints. To further prepare students for mixed-
signal interconnect design, the PI will employ dynamically changing computer
engineering curriculum in both his graduate class, which utilizes innovative
semester-long projects emphasizing original research, and his undergraduate
class, which stresses the fundamentals of the VLSI design process and provides
students with an intuitive understanding of critical concepts. &lt;br/&gt;