* 0448357
* CAREER: Implementing Mixed-Signal Circuits with Self-Testing and Self-Repairing Capabilities
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Haibo Wang, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 02/28/2010
* USD 400,000.00

0448357&lt;br/&gt;WANG&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
advance the state of the art in the area of fault-recovery in analog circuits
and thus to provide cost-effective methods for designing and implementing mixed-
signal IC's with self-testing and self-repairing capabilities. The proposed
research is based on the utilization of reconfigurable mixed-signal hardware. It
achieves self-testing and self-repairing design goals by developing novel
techniques of: (1) exploiting circuit reconfigurability to perform analog on-
line self-testing; (2) repairing faulty analog circuits through partial
reconfiguration in both analog and digital domains. The project outcome is a
comprehensive methodology to implement self-testing and self-repairing mixed-
signal circuits. A fully programmable mixed-signal hardware platform will be
also implemented to demonstrate the developed methodology and techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixed-signal IC's with self-testing and self-repairing
capabilities will significantly enhance the reliability of systems working in
harsh environments without easy access for maintenance. Such IC's, however, are
not currently widely available, primarily because of the limited progress in the
area of analog fault-recovery techniques. This research will address this
daunting challenge and provide a viable technology to implement more reliable
circuits for military, space, and certain commercial applications. It will also
positively impact the development of intelligent micro-systems. The project
involves a thorough educational plan, which aims to enhance education in VLSI
and prepare the students for life-long learning. The PI's Department has an
excellent tradition in attracting and graduating minority students. Minority
students, therefore, are expected to benefit from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;