* 0448250
* CAREER: Evolution and Development of Numeracy
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Elizabeth Brannon, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,309.00

Adult humans quantify, label, and categorize almost every aspect of the world
with numbers. The ability to use numbers is one of the most complex cognitive
abilities that humans possess and is often held up as a defining feature of the
human mind. Are there developmental precursors to adult mathematical cognition
in human infants? Are there evolutionary precursors to the human computational
mind in non-human primates? Is number a salient dimension for human infants or
non-human primates (in this case, rhesus monkeys) or do other perceptual
variables such as color and shape always trump number? Can human infants and
monkeys add or subtract? Can they represent the number of objects in a
heterogeneous array of objects? Are there nonlinguistic ways of representing
number that are common to non-human primates and human infants? With support
from a National Science Foundation CAREER award, Dr. Brannon will investigate
these questions using both behavioral looking time methods and touch screen
tasks that measure accuracy and reaction time in human infants, young children,
and rhesus monkeys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is that it will provide unique new insights into the building blocks of adult
human mathematical abilities and shed light on the nature of thought without
language. The broader impact of the research includes educating students at the
undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral levels. The research is also the
bases of a Duke University methods course on nonverbal cognition and a published
reader that will pair empirical papers on animal and human developmental
cognition, which will allow broad dissemination of the comparative developmental
approach to studying cognition.&lt;br/&gt;