* 0448740
*  CAREER:    A Multi-scale Approach to Particle Breakage in Stirred Vessels and Its Integration into Education
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2011
* Priscilla Hill, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 06/30/2011
* USD 410,681.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT-0448740&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: A Multi-
scale Approach to Particle Breakage in Stirred Vessels and
Its&lt;br/&gt;Integration into Education&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Priscilla J. Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attrition and fragmentation of particles
are of significant scientific and industrial interest. Process applications span
a range of industries including the fertilizer, chemical, and pharmaceutical
industries. One of the reasons that particle breakage is so important in the
chemical process industries is that it alters the size and the shape of the
particles. Both product quality and process operability strongly depend on
particle size and shape, yet little research has been done on the affect of
breakage on particle shape. The objectives of this project are to correct this
deficiency by investigating the evolution of both particle size and shape in a
stirred vessel, and to train future engineers to account for particle size and
shape in the evaluation of solids processes. The project has two major sections:
research and education. The research program of theory, modeling, and
experimentation aims to: 1) determine the effect of Ostwald ripening on breakage
experiments in a saturated solution, and 2) to link a macroscale model of
breakage in a stirred vessel to microscale particle fracture mechanics using
mathematical models based on first principles. This model will be tested
experimentally. The research and education programs are integrated by
introducing new research results into the graduate and undergraduate curriculum
and by having selected students actively participate in ongoing research.
Specifically the education program consists of: 1) developing a new graduate
elective course in particle and crystallization technology, 2) developing
educational software based on the research program models, 3) engaging graduate
and undergraduate students in active research, and 4) developing educational
modules in particle technology for use with K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research is expected to
benefit both academia and industry. The key to designing better solids processes
is quantitatively incorporating fundamental physical phenomena and properties
into the design process. The proposed work would make a significant addition by
providing a basis for including particle shape changes due to breakage and
attrition in a design methodology. Although this research is developed for
particle fragmentation and attrition in stirred vessels such as crystallizers,
it has broader impact in other unit operations that have particle breakage such
as crushers, fluidized beds, pumps, and mixers. It is expected that this work
would lead to models of potential interest to commercial chemical process
simulation companies. Not limited to chemical engineering operations, it would
have applications in other industries such as minerals and food
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This plan provides for
educational outreach to students at a wide range of educational levels: K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students. Diversity is enhanced by actively
recruiting undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups to
participate in research activities, and by including students from
underrepresented groups in the K-12 educational activities. Since deficiencies
in particle technology knowledge and education harm the global competitive
position of the U.S., this project contributes to society by improving the
understanding and modeling of particle behavior and by educating people to
better address particle technology issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;