* 0448968
* CAREER: Reactive Fluid Mechanics of Mesoscale Hydrocarbon-based Power Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Dimitrios Kyritsis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 12/31/2009
* USD 407,445.00

CAREER: Reactive fluid mechanics of mesoscale hydrocarbon-based power
generation&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dimitrios C. Kyritsis, Department of Mechanical and
Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt; Miniaturization to
impressively small dimensional scales has already been demonstrated in
information storage, electronics, manufacturing, and recently, micro-electro-
mechanical systems (MEMS). However, development of equivalent small-scale power
sources seems to be lagging in this quest for systems miniaturization. Currently
available, grid-independent power sources are predominantly chemical batteries,
which are devices of notoriously limited power density. Exploiting the high
power density of hydrocarbons in "liquid fuel batteries" could increase
drastically the autonomy of portable power sources and provide a substantial
degree of independence of human activity from centralized grids. In order for
this to be achieved, the fundamentals of the related reactive fluid mechanics
have to be known.&lt;br/&gt;This research is a comprehensive experimental and
theoretical investigation of the regime of reactive fluid mechanics that is
relevant for mesoscale, hydrocarbon-based power generation. Using a combination
of gaseous phase and surface experimental techniques, we investigate the flow
elements that will be the "building blocks" of mesoscale burners, such as the
flat plate boundary layer, the flow around a cylinder, as well as the flow
around arrays of cylindrical and flat elements and through mesoscale channels.
These flows are studied in the regime of intermediate Reynolds, Peclet, and
Damkhler numbers that is relevant for small-scale power generation and where
several usual approximations are not valid. A particular emphasis is placed on
flows over catalytically coated surfaces, since the relatively small combustion
temperatures desired in battery-size applications make catalysis a necessary
prerequisite for stability. Laser Induced Fluorescence measurements and Gas
Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry analysis of the gaseous phase are combined with
infrared thermography and Fourier Transform Infrared measurements on the surface
to provide data regarding fuel depletion, reactive zone structure, and exhaust
gas temperature and composition as a function of surface temperature and species
adsorption/desorption. Based on these results, a refinement of early theoretical
analyses of these flows, which relied on uniform surface temperature and
infinite rates of surface reactions, is pursued. In concert with the research
component, modern challenges in thermal science are the theme of parallel
educational and outreach activities. A senior/graduate level course in laser
diagnostics was introduced to the University curriculum. A digital photography
competition under the title "Flames" is regularly organized among K-12 students
of Eastern Central Illinois to investigate naturally occurring and/or laboratory
flames. Autonomous power generation will be introduced to the continuing
education program of AIAA through a short course the PI will develop based on
his results. Enhancement of interest in engineering and participation of
minorities and underrepresented groups is pursued through outreach activities
and graduate student recruitment for the project.&lt;br/&gt;