* 0448763
* CAREER: Time-Dependent Density-Functional Approach for Ultrafast Nonlinear Excitations in Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2005,12/31/2005
* Carsten Ullrich, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2005
* USD 160,000.00

TECHNICAL EXPLANATION: This CAREER award supports theoretical research on
ultrafast nonequilibrium carrier dynamics in photoexcited bulk semiconductors
and semiconductor heterostructures. The education component focuses on
developing an innovative course for teaching condensed matter physics to
undergraduate students. The PI plans to reformulate the semiconductor Bloch
equations within time-dependent density functional theory to study
nonequilibrium carrier dynamics in photoexcited bulk semiconductors and
semiconductor heterostructures on femtosecond to picosecond time scales. Time
dependent density functional theory offers a computationally tractable formalism
for describing dynamical correlation effects. The PI aims to evolve a more
realistic theoretical picture by developing a formal framework that includes
non-parabolic bands beyond the effective mass approximation, a treatment of
exchange and correlation accounting for memory and retardation effects, and a
microscopic description of disorder scattering of "hot" electron distributions.
The PI will investigate whether a spatially long-ranged exchange-correlation
potential together with the reformulated semiconductor Block equations can
capture ultrafast excitonic dynamics. Previous work using long ranged exchange-
correlation potentials did not enter the nonlinear ultrafast regime to be
explored by this work. The PI ultimately aims to apply this formal framework to
the coherent control of nonlinear intersubband effects such as optical
bistability, harmonic generation, terahertz pulse shaping, and populating
selected excited subbands. In the education component, the PI will focus on
education in condensed matter physics. The PI plans to develop an upper
undergraduate level condensed matter physics course including: (1) a course
content that emphasizes topics at the forefront of modern science and
technology, (2) interactive hands-on computer simulations, (3) student group
projects that involve developing simulation programs. A public web site will
also be created to make newly developed simulation routines available under the
GNU General Public License.

NON-TECHNICAL EXPLANATION: This CAREER award supports theoretical research on
quantum mechanical states of electrons in semiconductors that result from
illumination by light. Recent advances in laser technology have opened a
frontier where the quantum mechanical states of electrons are prepared and
probed by very short pulses of laser light. The PI will develop a theoretical
technique to describe how electrons in semiconductors respond to very short
pulses of laser light. The technique holds promise for a description that at
once includes important materials specific information and is accessible to
current computer technology. The PI plans to apply the technique to investigate
the detailed dynamics of the electrons and how to prepare and control quantum
mechanical states. This work is fundamental research and also contributes to the
intellectual foundations of future technologies. In the education component, the
PI will focus on education in condensed matter physics. The PI plans to develop
an upper undergraduate level condensed matter physics course including: (1) a
course content that emphasizes topics at the forefront of modern science and
technology, (2) interactive hands-on computer simulations, (3) student group
projects that involve developing simulation programs. A public web site will
also be created to make newly developed simulation routines available under the
GNU General Public License.