* 0448885
* CAREER:  Meso and Macro Hydroforming of Complex Shapes - Mechanics and Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Gracious Ngaile, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2011
* USD 406,000.00

The overall objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research
is to understand the fundamental mechanics of hydroforming of tubular components
at different scale levels (meso and macro) and establish fundamentals to enable
manufacturing of complex macro and miniature (meso-scale) tubular components. In
tube hydroforming a tubular preform is placed between two die halves, the
tubular preform is internally pressurized by fluid while the tube ends are fed
or pushed axially towards the center of the die cavity. The approach to achieve
the objectives will be studying the characteristics pertaining to fluid-pressure
loading and feeding of material through analytical modeling, numerical, and
experimentation. As the evolution of tubular surface during deformation and
material formability are critical to the success of the process, non-
conventional loading paths will be investigated, i.e., step-wise feeding of
material, vibration pressure loading conditions, and dual pressure loading.
Schemes for optimizing both meso and macro hydroforming processes will be
developed such that in addition to obtaining a sound hydroformed part, the
tribological conditions are enhanced.

The fundamentals established from this study are expected to open new avenues
for hydroforming of complex thin hollow sections, ultra-thin sections, and
miniature parts with potential impact in automotive and electronic industries.
The knowledge will also be of significant value to U.S. companies interested in
developing effective hydroforming machine systems at a meso scale level which
are non-existent at present, and will raise opportunities for new system designs
of hollow structures. Research findings will be incorporated into university
courses and dissemination through seminars, conferences, and journal articles.
One of the main goals of this project is to promote interinstitutional research
and educational collaboration at the international level. Thus, a partial
interinstitutional manufacturing course linked to two universities from Japan
and Denmark will be introduced. It is expected that this course will provide
opportunities for knowledge enhancement and prepare students to assume
responsibilities in multinational corporations under the global economy.