* 0448838
* CAREER: Computer Simulations of Glassy and Athermal Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Corey O'Hern, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award supports fundamental computational and theoretical research on
granular materials and the infusion of new educational methods in teaching at
Yale. &lt;br/&gt;The research component focuses on developing a deeper
understanding of athermal and glassy particulate systems, such as granular
materials, foams, colloids, and glasses, near the onset of jamming. As density,
temperature, or applied stress are tuned, these systems can transform, often
unpredictably, from flowing to 'jammed' solid-like states. These systems are
out-of-equilibrium, and so the powerful tools used to study equilibrium thermal
systems do not generally apply. The PI will use computer simulation techniques
to address three important questions: (1) How does the distribution of jamming
onsets depend on polydispersity, particle shape, and applied stress? (2) What
physical mechanisms give rise to spatially inhomogeneous flow profiles? (3) Can
a generalized temperature defined from fluctuation-dissipation relations be used
to describe steadily sheared athermal systems? The answers to these questions
will contribute to the development of a theoretical description of materials
near jamming. &lt;br/&gt;The education component contributes to the education
infrastructure at Yale. The PI aims to develop course materials for group
learning experiences that will be incorporated into the ME curriculum. The PI
plans to increase opportunities for students to improve their computational and
numerical skills by designing new courses in numerical methods and simulation
techniques, adding computational modules to existing courses, and setting-up a
Computation and Simulation Laboratory. The PI will also provide educational and
research opportunities for students and faculty at nearby secondary schools and
universities by hosting research open houses, giving public lectures on his
research, and participating in college and career fairs. The PI intends to
actively and personally recruit students from underrepresented groups. He has
made progress in this area by mentoring students from the STARS program at Yale.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports fundamental computational
and theoretical research on granular materials and the infusion of new
educational methods in teaching at Yale. As density, temperature, or applied
stress are tuned, granular materials, like sand, can undergo a curious
transformation, often unpredictably, from flowing to 'jammed' states that are
solid-like. The research component of this proposal focuses on developing a
deeper understanding of granular materials, foams, colloids, and glasses, near
the onset of the jamming transformation. The PI will use computer simulation
techniques to address important conceptual questions in the field will
contribute to developing a theoretical description of materials near jamming.
&lt;br/&gt;The education component contributes to the education infrastructure
at Yale. The PI will develop course materials for group learning experiences
that will be incorporated into the ME curriculum. The PI will increase
opportunities for students to improve their computational and numerical skills
by designing new courses in numerical methods and simulation techniques, adding
computational modules to existing courses, and setting-up a Computation and
Simulation Laboratory. The PI will also provide educational and research
opportunities for students and faculty at nearby secondary schools and
universities by hosting research open houses, giving public lectures on his
research, and participating in college and career fairs. The PI intends to
actively and personally recruit students from underrepresented groups. He has
made progress in this area by mentoring students from the STARS program at Yale.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;