* 0448615
* CAREER: Algorithms for Nonrigid Structure from Motion
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Serge Belongie, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2011
* USD 412,000.00

CAREER: Algorithms for Nonrigid Structure from Motion&lt;br/&gt;PI: Serge
Belongie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal targets the problem of non-rigid
structure from motion (NRSFM). This is a badly ill posed problem, as none of the
usual multiple view geometric constraints hold, and additional constraints are
necessary. The PI presents a research agenda to solve this problem. The first
approach is based on a temporal relaxation of rigidity, and finding the solution
that minimizes the total variation in scene structure over time. The second
approach instead regards a video of a non-rigid object as a sequence of images
of rigid shapes under varying pose, leading to a joint clustering and SFM
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. For the SFM enterprise to
realize its full utility, it must account for important non-rigid cases. Apart
from being an important and challenging open problem, the estimation of NRSFM
has characteristics that place it at the cutting edge of research in computer
vision: (1) it requires a deep understanding of statistical modeling of shape
deformation, and (2) the underlying math is at the intersection of variational
methods, graph theory, optimization, differential geometry, and numerical linear
algebra. Progress in this area will involve technical advances that will benefit
a wide range of problems in computer vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact.
Scientific: Practical applications of NRSFM include nonrigid object recognition,
motion capture of humans and animals, gesture recognition (e.g., for American
Sign Language), and medical imaging (e.g., contraction of a heart ventricle).
Educational: The PI presents plans to provide the supporting educational
infrastructure at the undergraduate and graduate levels in coordination with
UCSD's NSF IGERT training program in Vision &amp; Learning. This consists of new
courses covering image processing, computer vision, and machine learning, and an
outreach effort for underrepresented students through the UCSD Summer Training
Academy for Research in the Sciences (STARS) program.&lt;br/&gt;