* 0448676
* RUI: Regulation of Diverse Bacterial ADP-Glucose Pyrophsophorylases
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2012
* Katherine Kantardjieff, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/29/2012
* USD 851,559.00

There is an increasing demand for the use of the biodegradable and renewable
carbon source starch in a variety of industries. The rate-limiting enzyme in the
bacterial glycogen and plant starch biosynthesis pathways is ADPGlucose
Pyrophosphorylase (ADPG PPase, glgC gene product) which is regulated by the
binding of various allosteric effector molecules depending on the carbon
utilization pathway of the organism. A complete molecular comparison of this
enzyme family will allow us to perform rational engineering. The successful
engineering of ADPG PPase would allow for the overproduction of starch in
transgenic plants. Further, increased starch synthesis in transgenic plants
could increase photosynthesis (and biomass) by decreasing feedback inhibition by
organic phosphates. This project is focused on kinetic, physical, and molecular
studies of the uniquely regulated bacterial ADPG PPases from a variety of
sources including Rhodobacter sphaeroides, Rhodospirillum rubrum, Rhodobacter
capsulatus, Rhodopseudomonas palustris, Deinococcus radiodurans, and Chlamydia
trachomatis. The specific aims of this research project include&lt;br/&gt;I:
Cloning and expression of novel glgC genes and characterization of the
recombinant enzymes; and &lt;br/&gt;II: Protein engineering of the bacterial
ADPG PPases utilizing the techniques of site-directed, truncation, chimera, and
random mutagenesis well as DNA shuffling. &lt;br/&gt;The comprehensive approach
in this project will be guided by alignment studies, a recently solved
structure, molecular modeling and in silico ligand docking. Characterization of
the recombinant ADPG PPases will include the measurement of binding of ligands
using affinity capillary electrophoresis to complement steady-state kinetic
assay data. A longer term goal includes transforming genes coding for highly
active bacterial ADPG PPases into Arabidopsis thaliana leaves to determine the
effects on starch accumulation, photosynthesis, and biomass.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is well suited to training students at a
primarily undergraduate institution in the theory and practice of biochemistry,
analytical chemistry, molecular biology, bioinformatics, and molecular modeling
within the framework of a larger interdisciplinary biotechnology project. Some
of the research experiments and findings will be incorporated into lecture and
lab class activities. Participating students represent three laboratories at two
different California State University campuses as well as summer research
students from both high schools and local community colleges. The background and
experience that is gained by students in this project will open attractive
opportunities in both academic and industrial careers.