* 0448649
* CAREER: Developing a Mathematical Knowledge Base for Teaching and Learning Generalization in Basic Algebra at the Middle-Grades in Urban Contexts
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2005,12/31/2012
* Ferdinand Rivera, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 12/31/2012
* USD 517,497.00

Intellectual Merit

The proposed study develops a mathematical knowledge base for teaching and
learning generalization in basic algebra at the middle school level in an urban
context. It involves analyzing children's generalizing processes based on
individual and social activity. Classroom teaching experiments shall be
developed, implemented, tested, and revised with the goal of articulating models
of generalization in children. The project shall also address relevant
instructional strategies and factors that will enable children to learn about
the generalizing process, including ways the factors can all be coordinated
properly so that teachers are able to provide their students with successful
experiences. The study shall start with a class of 5th graders in a school in
California whose thinking processes will be closely monitored for one semester.
If it is possible, the same group of 5th graders will be investigated
longitudinally for a period of four years.

The overall theoretical framework of the study is drawn from an emergent
perspective in which children's strategies of generalization are viewed as being
constructed from individual and social processes. Further, the instructional
theory of realistic mathematics education (RME), developed at the Freudenthal
Institute, will be used in the design of classroom teaching experiments. The
study has a developmental research focus. Children will perform activities that
will allow them to engage in complex chains of reasoning and signification
leading to the emergence of models for generalization. Also, classroom teaching
experiments are developed using a development cycle. This cycle assumes a
symbiotic relationship between instructional theory and actual practice. Data
sources include video recordings of all classroom and small group discussions,
audiotape recordings of project meetings and debriefing sessions with
participating teachers, copies of student's written work, and individual
clinical interviews. Data analyses of individual and collective learning in a
classroom community shall use a method developed by Cobb, Stephan, McClain, and
Gravemeijer (2001).

Broader Impact The integrated research and education plan involves
developmental research activities. The first activity concerns the development
of structures of generalization among urban middle school children, including
usable instructional theories that middle school teachers in such contexts may
be able to adapt in their own classrooms. The five-year project is school-based
and will be conducted in a collaborative partnership with teachers and their
students who agree to participate in the study. Classroom teaching experiments
will be designed, tested, and revised with a particular emphasis on how
instructional resources and the classroom social context can be coordinated so
that students succeed in algebra-related tasks involving generalization. The
middle school mathematics curriculum provides the important formal foundation in
algebra that needs to be strengthened at least in the area of formulating
generalizations so that students are able to successfully transition to high
school algebra. In the second activity, an ongoing circular process of
describing, analyzing, and testing of strategies that children employ to
generalize will be conducted in order to establish developmental models.
Research-based and classroom-tested instructional materials that contain lessons
and analyses drawn from the two activities shall be prepared and disseminated
for public use by way of: presentations in various research and teachers.
conferences; presentations in faculty in-service programs in urban middle
schools; incorporation of research findings in various mathematics education
courses in the university and in professional in-service programs with the aim
of developing urban teachers whose instructional practices have been drawn from
research; journal articles for teachers and researchers; CDs; and a website that
will include activities, think pieces, and relevant publications in order to
provide all teachers, students, and concerned stakeholders with ways in which to
assist all middle-school students develop effective generalization skills. The
proposed project shall also benefit from a diverse panel of experts whose expert
knowledge has been drawn from having extensively worked with children in local,
statewide, and international contexts.