* 0448721
* CAREER:  Energy Landscape Based Tools for Modeling Materials at the Nanoscale
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Thomas Truskett, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/2010
* USD 400,000.00

(CAREER) Energy Landscape Based Tools for &lt;br/&gt;Modeling Materials at the
Nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Materials confined to
small dimensions often behave differently than in the bulk. In
particular,&lt;br/&gt;they exhibit thermodynamic, kinetic, and mechanical limits
of stability that depend on sample size,&lt;br/&gt;shape, and the physical
characteristics of their interfaces. Property modifications that
feature&lt;br/&gt;prominently in 'nanoconfined' systems include the appearance
of surface-induced phase transitions,&lt;br/&gt;shifts of the bulk glass
transition temperature, and the emergence of interface-mediated modes
of&lt;br/&gt;mechanical failure. The technological relevance of these issues for
solid materials has long been&lt;br/&gt;appreciated in industrial settings
because many applications require micro- or nanoscale components&lt;br/&gt;that
can exhibit mechanical integrity over a broad range of conditions.
Unfortunately, a&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive theoretical approach for predicting
these effects has been slow to develop.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The PI
propose to introduce a new theoretical framework based on exploring
the&lt;br/&gt;effects of confinement on a material's potential energy landscape.
Although energy landscapes have&lt;br/&gt;been primarily used to study
biomolecules, small molecular clusters, and bulk materials, they argue that they
are particularly well suited to provide insights into the implications of
nanoscale confinement for materials. Specifically, the hypothesis is that the
stability of glassy nanostructures (relative to the bulk) can be understood in
terms of how confinement changes their energy landscapes. To test this idea, the
PI's have performed several "proof of concept" studies for our new landscape
based&lt;br/&gt;formalism.&lt;br/&gt;Based on the success of these studies, the
PI'spropose to fully develop and apply this approach in a&lt;br/&gt;two-pronged
research program that will allow us to address systems of experimental
relevance. The&lt;br/&gt;first part calls for using landscape based simulation
methods to probe the molecular-level&lt;br/&gt;processes that control
deformation, yielding, and failure in bulk and nanoconfined
metallic&lt;br/&gt;glasses. This study will help to elucidate how interfaces and
confinement impact the novel mechanical&lt;br/&gt;and structural responses of
metallic glasses to various types of loading. The models are propose
to&lt;br/&gt;investigate and provide guidance into the potential mechanical
behavior of metallic glasses in&lt;br/&gt;nanocomposite materials. The second
proposed effort is the development of a new approach that&lt;br/&gt;combines the
energy landscape framework with classical density functional theory (DFT)
for&lt;br/&gt;inhomogeneous fluids. The resulting landscape based DFT will
provide new predictions for the&lt;br/&gt;behavior of both liquid and glassy
states in nanoconfined environments. The proposed work will&lt;br/&gt;provide a
sound foundation for collaborations to study dynamic fracturing of nanoscale
glasses via&lt;br/&gt;experiments and large-scale simulations. The PI's also
propose an associated education plan that will&lt;br/&gt;engage the public in a
dialogue about the modern roles of computing and nanoscience in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;It does so by introducing new undergraduate and graduate
level courses and a new type of&lt;br/&gt;eductational tool called a theory-
driven learning module. This module can be readily created
with&lt;br/&gt;methods that are routinely used in the PI's research group,
illustrating a practical benefit of integrating&lt;br/&gt;teaching and research.
Finally, a novel outreach program is outlined that will bring leaders of
Austin's&lt;br/&gt;technology sector into the K-12 classrooms of smaller Texas
towns.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The research methods introduced here could
lead to significant improvements&lt;br/&gt;in the understanding of material
stability at the nanoscale. This understanding is urgently
needed&lt;br/&gt;because the current lack of knowledge presents a formidable
barrier to conceiving new nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;processes and designing
nanostructured materials for use in advanced material, biomedical,
and&lt;br/&gt;semiconductor applications. These applications, ranging from
stronger composite materials to smaller&lt;br/&gt;and faster computers, would
substantially impact the economy and the everyday lives of millions.
The&lt;br/&gt;research is integrated with broader initiatives that seek not only
to enhance the educational experience&lt;br/&gt;of students at all levels, but
also to inform the public about science, engineering, and the
career&lt;br/&gt;opportunities in both. The plan recognizes that engineers are
increasingly involved in developing&lt;br/&gt;processes that must perform
robustly on small length scales, and it introduces both courses
and&lt;br/&gt;educational tools that will prepare them for this challenge. The
novel K-12 outreach program that is&lt;br/&gt;proposed will serve as a means for
engaging the public in a meaningful dialogue about the societal&lt;br/&gt;impact
of science and the possibilities of engineering and science "as a
career".&lt;br/&gt;