* 0448614
* CAREER:  Mechanisms of Spatial Pattern Formation and Signal Transduction at Intercellular Junctions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Jay Groves, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 06/30/2010
* USD 547,110.00

The human immune system consists of armies of immune cells, such as the T cells,
that circulate the body patrolling for disease. One of the primary tasks of T
cells is to identify and destroy virally infected cells. It has recently been
discovered that T cells perform their surveillance by forming a specialized
junction with the target cell. Within this so-named immune synapse, the
biochemical reactions of recognition and signal transduction take place. A
critical breakthrough was the realization that proteins and signaling molecules
within these immune synapses become arranged in spatial patterns, and that these
patterns seem to convey information. This observation can be likened to the fact
one must pay attention to the sequence of the letters in this sentence, not just
the number of each type of letter, in order to discern the meaning. Is there a
language of spatial patterns of molecules that cells use to communicate? What
mechanisms control the formation and dissolution of these patterns? Within this
project, these questions will be addressed from a chemical perspective by
creating hybrid junctions between living cells and nanofabricated chip
substrates. This configuration allows imposition of spatial constraints on the
motion of signaling molecules in living T cells from structures fabricated onto
the solid substrate. Experiments will probe the role of geometrical molecular
patterns in the function of the immune system. In more chemical language, the
aims of this project investigate how geometrical constraints can modulate the
chemical outcome of a reaction. Emphasis will be directed towards elucidating
the cooperative roles played by the cell cytoskeleton and membrane to coordinate
assembly of signaling proteins into geometrically distinct patterns. It is
anticipated that new mechanisms of signaling discovered in the immune synapse
may reveal general themes common to many types of cell-cell interactions. This
project will have a broader impact by bridging the physical and biological
sciences. The educational program will introduce interdisciplinary science to
pre-college and college students and foster their interest in the emerging field
at the interface of biology, chemistry and physics. Some high school and
undergraduate students will also be involved in the project through summer
internships, while graduate students will be involved in carrying out the
research aims.