* 0448315
* CAREER: Recovery of Replication Following DNA Damage in E.coli
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Justin Courcelle, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2006
* USD 145,845.00

Inaccurate replication in the presence of DNA damage is responsible for the
majority of cellular rearrangements and mutagenesis that are observed in
abnormally dividing cells. DNA damage, such as that induced by UV irradiation,
severely impairs the ability of replication to copy the genomic template and
leads to the arrest of the replication machinery and gaps in the newly
replicated DNA. The overall objective of this research is to identify the
cellular mechanism(s) by which lesions encountered during replication are
processed and repaired in vivo. This project utilizes two previously established
cellular assays to monitor the molecular events that occur at replication forks
arrested by DNA damage in vivo. This approach will identify the genetic
requirements and conditions that determine when DNA repair or translesion
synthesis functions at arrested replication forks to restore DNA synthesis. A
second approach will characterize the genes and mechanisms that operate to
process and repair lesions in the gapped substrates that are observed to arise
in the newly replicated DNA of UV-irradiated cells. Through an understanding of
how faithful replication is maintained in the presence of DNA damage, the
conditions and events that can lead to mutagenesis, genomic rearrangements, or
cell lethality will be elucidated. In addition, this project will be
accomplished through a process that strengthens the undergraduate curriculum,
creates a new molecular genetics laboratory for students, and increases student
participation in research at this university. This project will significantly
increase the number of potential young scientists that participate in research
and increase the quality of science that students are exposed to in this region
of the country.