* 0448906
* PECASE:  Robust Intelligent Control, Demonstrated for Reconfigurable Flight Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2012
* Silvia Ferrari, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 05/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

Recent advances in a variety of technologies and applications call for improved
performance and&lt;br/&gt;reliability, while exacerbating the complexity and
uncertainty of systems and their surroundings.&lt;br/&gt;Although classical
control theory already allows for a high degree of machine automation,
a&lt;br/&gt;renewed interest in systems that display intelligent behavior is
emerging across disciplines. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed research will develop a
novel adaptive control approach that approximates the
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;control law by a sigmoidal neural network, and optimizes its
performance on line, subject to&lt;br/&gt;actual plant dynamics. By combining
approximate dynamic programming and integral quadratic&lt;br/&gt;constraints, it
can be shown that the neural network controller is characterized by the
same&lt;br/&gt;closed-loop stability and robustness guarantees as classical
H-infinity controllers. Ensuring that&lt;br/&gt;these properties are preserved
during adaptation will make the adaptive design viable
for&lt;br/&gt;applications where safety is a leading concern, such as,
reconfigurable aircraft control.&lt;br/&gt;As part of the proposed research, the
adaptive control approach will be demonstrated not only&lt;br/&gt;through
numerical simulations, but also through experiments. The first testbed will
consist of a&lt;br/&gt;cantilevered beam with piezoelectric devices used as
disturbance and control sources. In the&lt;br/&gt;experiments, the effectiveness
of the adaptive controller for reducing the vibration of the first
two&lt;br/&gt;natural modes will be tested and compared to that of controllers
with parameters held fixed.&lt;br/&gt;After considering this low-dimensional
system, the approach will be implemented to design an&lt;br/&gt;adaptive flight
controller based on the model of an experimental fly-by-wire Raytheon
Bonanza&lt;br/&gt;aircraft. The flight controller will be tested on a piloted
simulator developed by an experienced&lt;br/&gt;research group at Wichita State
University (WSU). Subsequently, the PI will work with the WSU&lt;br/&gt;group
and Raytheon Aircraft Company on interfacing the control software with the on-
board&lt;br/&gt;flight computer, and on testing it on the Bonanza through a set
of experimental flights.&lt;br/&gt;Research and education on control theory and
practice will be integrated by designing a set of&lt;br/&gt;experiments for
undergraduate and TIP high-school students that employ the following testbeds:
a&lt;br/&gt;vibrating cantilevered beam, an acoustic enclosure, and a flapping
micro-aerial vehicle. The&lt;br/&gt;broader impact of this project is the
creation of initiatives that expose students from K12 through&lt;br/&gt;graduate
school to advanced control research and experiments being conducted in the
aerospace&lt;br/&gt;industry and at NASA. By leading undergraduates and TIP
students through these experiments,&lt;br/&gt;the PI's graduate students will
become important role models for a diverse and gifted group
of&lt;br/&gt;youngsters.