* 0448871
* CAREER Development in Geomodeling: Seeing and Creating Connections in Earth Science
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2005,09/30/2011
* Adrian Lenardic, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2011
* USD 692,026.00

Modeling of coupled continental tectonics, mantle dynamics, and surface
processes will be undertaken to explore surface deformation and deeper mantle
flow during continental collision. Surface erosion will be incorporated into the
models to explore the interaction between tectonics and atmospheric processes.
Model predictions will be compared to data from collisional settings to provide
a better understanding of continental collision. The links between continental
growth and the Earth's thermal evolution will also be explored. A combination of
theory, numerical simulations, and lab experiments will be used to provide
insight into coupled planetary cooling and continental growth. Geochemical data
will provide constraints on continental growth. The methodologies developed to
model the interaction between conducting continents and the convecting mantle
will also be used to address hydrothermal convection below insulating cap rock
and the cooling history of magma chambers within host rock. The PI's modeling
across earth science sub-fields will provide unity between his teaching and
research. Lecture demonstrations, i.e., models designed for education, can
convey general foundational ideas that students then link to approach a range of
earth science problems. This will allow students in introductory classes to see
that scientific ideas are not isolated bits of information. The broader impact
is that a portion of the student population that will not go into science will
have a clearer view of what science is. Demonstrations will also be used in a
reverse mode. A workshop will be developed where advanced students will build
demonstrations and simple experiments of their own design to convey key ideas
from their primary earth science field. In presenting their work to each other
they will see how many key concepts do not care about artificial sub-field
boundaries. They will see connections and be better prepared to make new ones.
The space will also house a scientific visualization studio where students will
work on effective visual communication of scientific ideas. The workspace/studio
will be available to K-12 educator colleagues in the Houston area.