* 0448289
* CAREER: A Biophysical Approach to Thermotaxis, a Complex Experience-Dependent Behavior in C. elegans
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2010
* Aravinthan D Samuel, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 01/31/2010
* USD 657,818.00

Understanding how neural systems encode animal behavior is a general goal of
neurobiology. This CAREER research program, an interdisciplinary effort between
neuroscience and physics, will probe the neural representation of the
thermotactic behavior of the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans by developing
techniques at the interface of biology and physics. Examples of technological
innovation will include: 1) the development of new behavioral assays that will
quantify the worm's responses to arbitrary patterns of thermal stimuli; 2)
optical measurements of neural activity applying genetically encoded indicators
of cellular processes; and 3) the application of ultrafast lasers to destroy
sub-micron sized neural structures (neuronanosurgery). Through partnerships with
other labs, these techniques will see broad applications in the biological study
of the nematode and other model organisms. An additional component of the
program is directed toward promoting scientific education through the awarding
of undergraduate research assistantships, development of course curricula, and
outreach programs that encourage high school students towards advanced studies
in the natural sciences. Special emphasis in placed on education at the
interface between biology and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
jointly supported by the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Biological
Sciences and the Division of Integrative Organismal Biology in the Directorate
for Biological Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;