* 0448184
* CAREER: NetTraveler: A Database Middleware System for Ubiquitous Data Access on Wide-Area Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Manuel Rodriguez-Martinez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 06/30/2011
* USD 499,445.00

The next wave of information systems to be deployed over Wide-Area Networks will
feature data sources residing on Internet-enabled handheld devices, mobile
laptops, and other small devices. These hosts will manage important data sets
(e.g., sensor readings, medical information, financial data), and change network
location as their owners move with them across geographical regions. The goal of
this project is the design, implementation, and evaluation of NetTraveler, a
database middleware infrastructure that locates, dynamically federates and
integrates data sources residing on mobile devices and enterprise servers. The
core innovations in NetTraveler are its software abstractions, protocols, and
algorithms that enable NetTraveler to efficiently run queries over sites that
might be mobile hosts. NetTraveler provides a context-aware query processing
framework to schedule query operators based on the nature of hosts, as specified
in a dynamic profile submitted by each host. NetTraveler prevents loss of query
processing effort due to intermittent connectivity by means of algorithms that
either cache query results, or save minimal state information necessary to
resume query execution once a previously disconnected source reconnects again.
Regarding broader impacts, this project combines research and educational
activities to provide Hispanic graduate and undergraduate students at UPRM with
the opportunity to become immerse in database research. New courses will be
developed in middleware systems, and application development for mobile hosts.
Expected outcomes of these activities include the source code for NetTraveler,
course materials, tutorials, seminars, and research papers. All materials for
these activities are freely available from the project Web site
(http://www.ece.uprm.edu/~manuel/nettraveler/).