* 0448046
* CAREER:     Cross-layer Design for Sensor Management in Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Wendi Heinzelman, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Min Song
* 01/31/2011
* USD 419,861.00

It is estimated that by the year 2010 more than 10 billion wireless sensors will
be deployed for use in applications as diverse as environmental monitoring,
surveillance, and medical monitoring. For these sensor networks to last for
years unattended, it is vital to make them energy-efficient while ensuring they
provide the data necessary to meet application needs. While much research has
focused on the design of individual protocols to meet these goals, much less
attention has been paid to the optimization of network operation at the system
level. One such approach is a cross-layer system design that integrates many of
the protocol functions into a high level sensor management protocol that assigns
roles to each sensor; these roles include sensing the environment, routing other
sensors' data, fusing the data locally, and controlling neighboring nodes. This
project develops models that allow for global optimization of sensor management,
and it develops distributed techniques that jointly optimize the use of sensor
and network resources in all possible roles. The optimization models highlight
the potential limitations of existing techniques, the distributed architecture
provides a feasible solution for long lifetime sensor networks, and a sensor
network testbed implementation shows the efficacy of this cross-layer
architecture for real systems. The potential of this research for high societal
impact combined with the innovative techniques being employed provide ample
opportunities for attracting students, from junior high school up through
graduate school, to the field and for training the next generation of engineers
in this exciting area.