* 0448399
* CAREER:  Conformal Geometry Applied to Shape Analysis and Geometric Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Xianfeng Gu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 01/31/2011
* USD 473,468.00

Conformal structure is a natural structure associated with Riemann surfaces
(General surfaces are Riemann surfaces) and plays fundamental roles in geometry
and physics. Conformal structure has proven useful in graphics and vision, for
example, conformal parameterization provides high-quality texture mapping
without local distortion, and it is used in surface matching and morphing with
applications such as brain mapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
explores the potential of conformal geometry in computer graphics and vision and
ultimately makes the interdisciplinary field of computational conformal geometry
accessible and useful to the society. With respect to its direct impacts, the
investigator applies conformal geometry to geometric modeling and shape
analysis. Specifically,&lt;br/&gt; 1.Construct shape spaces based on Teichmuller
space theory, where the space of all surfaces is modeled as a finite dimensional
manifold, each point represents a conformal equivalence class of surfaces (a
Riemann surface), and the metric of the shape space measures the deviation of
conformal structures of the two shapes. An additional related goal is to build a
geometric search engine.&lt;br/&gt; 2. Find a systematic way to generalize
geometric constructions defined on planar domains to manifolds, such as manifold
triangular BSplines and manifold Powell- Sabin surfaces. Design new surface
subdivision schemes by inserting knots into manifold BSpline surfaces. With
aspect to education, the investigator finds an effective way to teach conformal
geometry (Riemann surface theory) to non-math majors by implementing practical
algorithms to visualize the abstract concepts and establish the understanding of
the profound theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conformal geometry theory is fully
developed but very abstract. The investigator builds and disseminates a concrete
set of software tools to compute and visualize the conformal structure of
arbitrary real surfaces, which makes the theory accessible to students and its
practical applications useful to the broader community. Manifold BSpline tools
based on conformal geometry bridge the gap between traditional polygonal meshes
in graphics and spline surfaces in CAGD. The generic geometric search engine is
applied to a geometric database and an Internet search engine. The investigator
complements the software development with a systematic development of the
classic material in a context that permits integration into the curriculum of
non-math majors. The fields of computer graphics, vision, scientific computing,
medical imaging, mathematics and physics all benefit from the research and
education of computational conformal geometry directly. Computational conformal
geometry has already made impacts on the graphics industry and will be more
broadly applied in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;