* 0449183
* CAREER:     A Framework for Directed Genome Evolution
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2005,11/30/2012
* Ryan Gill, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 11/30/2012
* USD 526,185.00

0449183&lt;br/&gt;Gill &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work entails
optimizing protoplast fusion and genome-shuffling approaches in the bacterium,
E. coli. Additionally, gene chips will be used to identify the genes responsible
for antibiotic (aa-hydroxamate) tolerant phenotypes, and small network theory
will be employed to understand how connectivity and clustering may affect
antibiotic tolerance versus fitness. Improving the understanding of genome
evolution and the tradeoffs between the yield from individual metabolic pathways
and organism fitness is expected to make a positive impact on the metabolic
engineering community. The impact follows from more insights being gleaned on
how "global" versus "local" optimization is managed at the molecular level by
cellular systems. Such insights, in turn, will allow for improved quantitative
prediction of the outcome of different metabolic engineering strategies.
Understanding better how genomic evolution can lead to antibiotic resistance and
organism fitness should also positively impact work on contending with the
medical problem of antibiotic resistant bacteria. The plan to integrate research
into education and outreach has two objectives. First, outreach activities will
be pursued via Women in Engineering, Multicultural Engineering, and high school
honors programs. Secondly, undergraduates will be organized into teams that are
charged with developing laboratory demonstration modules. Such teams will
integrate prior coursework and learn collaboration skills while producing useful
courseware.&lt;br/&gt;