* 0449973
* CAREER: Design and Analysis of Restarted Iterative Methods for Linear Systems, Eigenvalue Problems, and Model Reduction
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2011
* Mark Embree, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 439,680.00

Applications throughout computational science require the solution&lt;br/&gt;of
large-scale linear systems and eigenvalue problems, tasks that&lt;br/&gt;are
often accomplished using Krylov subspace projection
methods.&lt;br/&gt;Nonsymmetric matrices pose a particular challenge, with
accurate &lt;br/&gt;solutions often requiring a combination of restarted
iterations &lt;br/&gt;and effective preconditioning. This project seeks to
develop an &lt;br/&gt;improved understanding of the convergence of restarted
Krylov &lt;br/&gt;subspace algorithms for linear systems and eigenvalue
problems. &lt;br/&gt;The behavior of such methods depends not only upon the
eigenvalues &lt;br/&gt;of the matrices involved, but also on nonnormality and
properties &lt;br/&gt;of starting vectors. These latter issues complicate
analysis and &lt;br/&gt;can lead to algorithm failure; new insight into the
mechanisms &lt;br/&gt;that spawn such failure will inform the design of improved
&lt;br/&gt;restarted methods. The project will also consider the important
&lt;br/&gt;role of preconditioners. Projection methods for dimension reduction
&lt;br/&gt;of large-scale problems raise related concerns. Reduced-order models
&lt;br/&gt;may capture salient eigenvalues of the original system, yet miss
&lt;br/&gt;important transient features of the solution that are of physical
&lt;br/&gt;significance, especially if the model derives from a nonlinear
system. &lt;br/&gt;Throughout this project test cases will be drawn from
applications&lt;br/&gt;such as fluid dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale
linear algebra problems play a central role in many areas&lt;br/&gt;of
computational science and engineering, with applications ranging &lt;br/&gt;from
fluid dynamics and circuit simulation to neuroscience and data
&lt;br/&gt;mining. Though the efficient solution of such problems is essential
to &lt;br/&gt;high-fidelity mathematical modeling and the nation's fastest
computers &lt;br/&gt;devote many cycles to this challenge, several of the most
important &lt;br/&gt;algorithms are unreliable and not yet understood. This
project seeks &lt;br/&gt;answers to fundamental questions concerning the
behavior of such methods, &lt;br/&gt;with the goal of gaining insights that will
lead to more rapid and &lt;br/&gt;reliable algorithms. Given the many fields
that rely on these &lt;br/&gt;techniques, such improvements will have broad
application &lt;br/&gt;throughout the scientific computing community. To
complement the &lt;br/&gt;research program, this project includes an important
educational &lt;br/&gt;component comprising the mentorship of graduate and
undergraduate &lt;br/&gt;students, the development of a graduate course, and the
broad public &lt;br/&gt;dissemination of educational material for numerical
analysis, a core &lt;br/&gt;discipline for students preparing for careers in
computational science &lt;br/&gt;and engineering.