* 0449462
* CAREER:  An Integrated Research and Education Plan for the Advancement of Surface Engineering via Thin Polymer Films
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Joerg Lahann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2010
* USD 450,000.00

This project seeks (1) to expand the fundamental knowledge of polymer thin
films, and (2) to broaden the educational awareness of surface engineering
through the development of a cohesive curriculum that will expose students of
various age groups to critical aspects of surface engineering. The proposed
project combines preparative efforts, substrate design, and a thorough
characterization approach in order to generate fundamentally new insights into
poly-p-xylylene thin films and their structure-function relationships. Prior to
the synthesis of functionalized polymer films via chemical vapor deposition
(CVD) polymerization, a diverse library of [2.2]paracyclophanes will be prepared
and the CVD polymerization process of such [2.2]paracyclophanes will be
optimized to yield well-defined polymers. The resulting functionalized poly-p-
xylylene films will be characterized with respect to their chemical, structural,
mechanical, optical and transport properties. The project further includes
fundamentally motivated studies on crystallization, chain mobility, and local
plasticity in poly-p-xylylene films that exploit a range of analytical methods,
such as ellipsometry, impedance spectroscopy, Brillouin light scattering, and
hot stage atomic force microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits:
Based on the CVD polymerization of substituted [2.2]paracyclophanes, a library
of molecularly diverse polymer films will be synthesized. These polymers all
share the same polymer backbone, poly-p-xylylene, but differ in the chemical
nature of their side groups and/or their side group density. Through a
combination of preparative efforts, substrate design, and thorough
characterization, fundamentally new insights into polymer thin films and their
structure-function relationships will be generated. Because poly-p-xylylenes do
not require the use of solvents, initiators, or plasticizers during
polymerization and can be deposited as nanometer thin films in well-controlled
manner, they comprise exceptional model systems for the systematic investigation
of the effects of side group functionality and film structure on critical thin
film properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The integrated research
plan will promote the teaching, training and learning of the graduate and
undergraduate students in the field of surface engineering. The PI has
Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP) and Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) students in his research group actively working on CVD
polymerization. A cohesive educational plan will be developed to enhance the
awareness of surface engineering among students of different age groups.
Finally, the PI will develop a pre-college curriculum to promote students from
underrepresented groups and to ensure diversity in science and engineering. The
educational goals will be assessed through an evaluation design consisting of
undergraduate and graduate course evaluations, faculty peer review, one-year
follow-up via surveys, and periodic follow-up feedback from selected groups of
participants to document long-term impact. &lt;br/&gt;