* 0449969
* CAREER: Probing the Nature of Coupled Ground States in Single Crystals of Magnetoelectric Perovskite Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Prasenjit Guptasarma, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 02/28/2011
* USD 507,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Award supports a project to synthesize and study a new
class of materials called magnetoelectric multiferroics.. These materials may
find future applications in spin-based electronic devices. In addition, with
their nearby electric and magnetic dipole resonances in the frequency domain
magnetoelectrics have the potential for realizing intrinsic far-infrared
negative index materials (NIM). New magnetoelectric materials will be grown from
a floating zone as bulk single crystals and in other forms. Lattice, magnetic,
and, electronic structure as well as magnetic properties will be studied over a
wide temperature range from ultra-low temperatures to above room temperature
using an array of probes, some being accessed through collaborations. These
include x-ray diffractometry, magnetometry, ultrasonic propagation and neutron
diffraction. These studies will lead to the elucidation of detailed electronic
phase diagrams. Additional studies at national synchrotron facilities will be
undertaken to increase our understanding of the existence of magnetism in these
highly insulating compounds. Charge and spin dynamics at femtosecond time scales
will be studied using ultrafast time-resolved MOKE and Raman techniques. A new
integrated curriculum in Solid State Physics will be implemented using an
innovative laboratory, and students from this course will later obtain
internships at local industries. AP Physics teachers from surrounding schools,
along with their students, will participate in research activities. Through a
partnership with the university's College for Kids program middle and high
school students from under-represented groups will be provided stipends to
participate in a High School Scholars summer workshop in the Physical Sciences.
In addition a program will be created for the Science Bag, a highly popular
Friday night magic-show style lecture tradition at the institution, open to the
Milwaukee community.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A ferroelectric material
is generally an electrical insulator that under certain conditions can
spontaneously separate its positive and negative charges and thereby develop
what is call an "electric dipole moment." This is similar to a bar magnet.
However, instead of exhibiting a magnetic field, this "bar" exhibits an electric
field. Ferroelectric materials are not usually magnetic. Independently, both
magnetic materials and ferroelectric materials find extensive use in modern
digital recording media and in memory devices. This Faculty Early Career Award
supports a project to investigate new phases of a class of materials called
magnetoelectric multiferroics. These materials are found to display both
magnetism and ferroelectricity in the same material. Under certain conditions,
the application of a voltage could change - or even reverse - the direction of
spontaneous magnetization (i.e. an electrical voltage could cause a change in
the direction of the magnetic "North pole") in the crystal. The magnetization of
a material depends upon a quantity called "spin." Thus these materials may find
future applications in electronic devices that depend on the "spin" rather than
the electronic charge. New magnetoelectric materials will be grown in bulk
single crystals and other forms. These new materials will be studied by a wide
variety of experimental techniques elucidate their properties. These studies
will deepen the understanding of both magnetism and ferroelectricity. A new
integrated curriculum in Solid State Physics will be implemented using an
innovative laboratory, and students from this course will later obtain
internships at local industries. AP Physics teachers from surrounding schools,
along with their students, will participate in research activities. Through a
partnership with the university's College for Kids program middle and high
school students from under-represented groups will be provided stipends to
participate in a High School Scholars summer workshop in the Physical Sciences.
In addition a program will be created for the Science Bag, a highly popular
Friday night magic-show style lecture tradition at the institution, open to the
Milwaukee community.&lt;br/&gt;