* 0449996
* CAREER: Connections between Stratospheric Perturbations and Climate Change - Research and Teaching Integration
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2012
* Eugene Cordero, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 01/31/2012
* USD 626,830.00

The quasi-biennial oscillation (QBO) is a dramatic shift in atmospheric dynamic
properties in the stratosphere, e.g., winds, on an approximately 2-year cycle.
This Career Development Grant (CDG) addresses two key objectives: (1) to develop
a better understanding of the physical mechanisms responsible for the QBO, and
how variations in the QBO affect current and future climate, and (2) to improve
student understanding of issues related to climate change through the
development and implementation of effective pedagogy. The research component of
the CDG seeks to identify and understand forcing mechanisms responsible for QBO
variability and its influence on climate. The investigation will utilize various
modeling tools including NCAR's Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM)
to identify the relationship between large-scale planetary waves,
stratosphere/troposphere coupling and the QBO. The scientific research includes:
a) a physically based investigation of how various forcing mechanisms affect the
QBO; b) an analysis of how stratospheric climate and stratosphere/troposphere
coupling are affected by perturbations to the QBO as simulated by the WACCM; and
c) estimates of how QBO properties in a doubled carbon dioxide atmosphere will
change, and the feedbacks these changes may have on future climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of the CDP seeks to develop more
effective teaching paradigms for climate change. The first educational activity
aims to identify student misconceptions about climate change through a series of
surveys and interviews. These will guide the subsequent activities that include
the development of a learning module on climate change suitable for a variety of
teaching environments, and the development of a summer institute on climate
change for high school teachers. The development of effective teaching materials
will use an inquiry-based learning environment that utilizes climate model
science and data generated from the research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The expected outcomes of this research
include a greater understanding of the processes responsible for QBO variability
and an improved knowledge of how perturbations to the stratosphere affect both
stratospheric and tropospheric climate. The educational outcomes include
advances in both student and teacher understanding of climate change topics,
improvement in the teaching of climate change in high schools, and an
improvement in the recruitment of underrepresented students to pursue careers in
climate related sciences.