* 0449790
* CAREER: Atomic Structure and Growth of Nano-Particles
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Jian-Min Zuo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 03/31/2010
* USD 616,001.00

This career proposal focuses on the structure of nano-scale atomic aggregates.
The problem is important because embryonic clusters or particles form at the
early stage of phase transformations and the cluster structure affects the phase
transformation and microstructure evolution. Furthermore, metal particles are
important industrial catalyst and nanoparticles are the building blocks for
nanotechnology. This proposal will develop new approaches to structure
characterization and atomic resolution imaging based on the new nano-area
electron diffraction (NED) technique involving a nanometer-sized coherent beam
of parallel electrons. NED allows diffraction patterns to be recorded from
individual particles for 3-D structure determination. The results will
contribute to the understanding of atomic structure in nanoparticles. In-situ
capabilities will be developed using a modified analytical UHV scanning
transmission electron microscope. The analytical capability will be very useful
for studying alloying and phase separation in bimetallic nanoparticles. Insight
about particle structure will be obtained by comparing experiment with molecular
dynamics simulations. A goal of the project is to use the structural knowledge
as a feedback to growth to improve the properties of the nano-particles.
Materials to be studied include the model system of Ag nanoparticles and the
eutectic Ag/Cu system. Later study will focus on magnetic alloys of Ag/Fe and
Fe/Pt, and catalytic Pt/Ru to correlate structure with
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be integrated with education
at several levels. This project will develop novel methods that make use of a
nanometer-sized coherent beam of parallel electrons to determine atomic
arrangements. The technique is general, and in principle, applicable to
individual macromolecules. The in-situ capabilities to be developed will be
available through the Center for Microanalysis of Materials (CMM) to the broader
community. Knowledge gained will be incorporated for teaching nanostructure
characterization and used for outreach activities through workshops and schools.
An important aspect of the project is the creation of research and education
tools in the form of web-based research software and tutorials for educators who
seek to incorporate nanoscience in their own curricula. The teaching materials
to be developed here will also fill a gap in current materials science education
by introducing students to the concept of molecular diffraction. Graduate and
undergraduate researchers will be trained through hands-on workshops,
conferences and collaboration on nanoscience specific projects. &lt;br/&gt;