* 0449634
* CAREER:    From Biomimetic Reaction Platforms to Nanostructured Artificial Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Hongcai Zhou, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 03/31/2009
* USD 525,000.00

This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Hongcai Zhou at Miami University in Ohio to
build coordination networks containing heterobimetallic reaction centers. Using
structure/property relationships of metalloenzymes to guide construction of
metal-centered reaction-platforms inside of nanochannels in porous coordination
polymers will provide new materials for use in catalysis. Biomimetic reaction
platforms with paddlewheel molecular frameworks and nanostructured artificial
enzymes will be constructed with support provided by NSF. The interface between
nanotechnology and bioinorganic reactions will be central to both the research
project and to a new course for undergraduate and graduate students. An
additional outcome of the new academic year course will be a summer workshop
addressing both nanotechnology and bioinspired synthesis, and the workship will
be open to high school students and led by students from Miami University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The capabilities of natural enzymes provide examples of
complex molecular structures designed to selectively catalyze important
biological reactions. This project will use concepts evident in enzymatic
reactions to guide the synthesis of metal-organic materials with properties
resembling those of reaction centers in proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;