* 0449991
* CAREER: Development of Integrated MS Strategies for Probing Peptidergic Signaling
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Lingjun Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2010
* USD 546,000.00

Professor Lingjun Li of the University of Wisconsin at Madison is supported by
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry CAREER Program in the Chemistry Division to
develop an array of novel mass spectrometry-based strategies, specifically, in
situ peptide analysis directly from the stomatogastric nervous system and
neurhemal organs of crustaceans, like the crab and the lobster, using ultra-high
resolution matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) Fourier transform
mass spectrometry (FTMS). In addition, Professor Li will employ multidimensional
separation schemes coupled to both MALDI-FTMS and electrospray ionization (ESI)-
tandem mass spectrometry for de novo peptide sequencing, and use database
homology searching to allow the discovery of a large number of novel
neuropeptides. The goal is to increase understanding of neuropeptidergic
signaling. Professor Li also plans to persue the development of in vivo
monitoring of peptide differential display in response to varied physiological
conditions. Collectively, the analytical tools developed through this research
and the discovery of a large number of novel neuropeptides should have
tremendous impact in both the analytical chemistry and the neuroscience research
communities. The PI recruits entry-level college students, and involves regional
high school teachers in research to allow for better communication of the
cutting-edge research to the greater public community.

A large number of peptides are responsible for signaling in the brain and the
nervous system. Knowledge of the neuropeptide profile at the cellular and
network level is critical for a better understanding of peptidergic signaling in
neuronal circuitry. This research has a high potential impact on brain science.

