* 0449753
* Collaborative Research: Improved Understanding/Prediction of Severe Convective Storms and Attendant Phenomena through Advanced Numerical Simulation
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Robert Wilhelmson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2010
* USD 765,000.00

The objective of this research is to improve understanding of severe convective
storms and attendant phenomena through the use of advanced numerical simulation.
Areas of focus include

1) environmental and model parameters influencing tornado genesis, intensity,
and longevity; 2) tornado representation using improved model physics; 3)
multiple storm interactions influencing the intensity and longevity of low-level
rotation; 4) analysis and simulation of the 30 May 2003 back-building supercell
line; 5) tornadogenesis owing to rapid environmental changes; 6) advances in
storm scale assimilation: ENKF using polarimetric radar data.

There are several themes that connect these areas. One theme centers on low-
level storm rotation and its relationship to tornado genesis, evolution, and
decay, particularly within supercells. Not only are the above foci aimed at
improved understanding through high resolution numerical simulations but also at
explaining the structure and behavior of storms that produce long track
tornadoes. Coupled with these investigations will be a focus on improving the
microphysical representation within severe storms. Advanced microphysics is
needed for more accurate depiction of storm and tornado evolution, associated
surface weather, and proper assimilation of polarimetric radar data. The simple
single moment microphysics parameterizations commonly used today do not properly
represent squall lines and supercells simultaneously, cannot forecast supercell
precipitation reliably, and incompletely represent the microphysics within
simulated supercells as observed by polarimetric radar.

Another theme centers on the interaction of existing storms with themselves or
with the presence of a boundary. Motivated by severe storm behavior on 19 April
1996, one focus extends initial work aimed at understanding mergers of storms in
multicell and supercell environments that result in increased storm strength,
storm rotation, and increased tornadic potential. This investigation will
benefit from new technologies being developed at the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications and with the NSF funded LEAD ITR project for
managing, mining, and visualizing large sets of simulations. Another focus is
aimed at understanding the back-building nature of some lines such as the one
that occurred on 30 May 2003. Observational analysis of this event will be
followed by numerical simulations to study the hypothesis that this occurs
through enhanced convergence located where the prevailing cold front interacts
with a southward moving outflow boundary of the southernmost supercell.

The implementation and testing of expanded microphysics will provide input to
others storm modelers on the important microphysical processes. It will also
provide an indication to short-term forecasters of the impact that sophisticated
physics can have on storm-scale model forecasts. Furthermore, given that the
National Weather Service may soon upgrade the WSR-88D radar network to include
polarimetric measurements, preliminary work is needed to understand how to best
assimilate such measurements into storm-scale forecast models and which
microphysics schemes can best incorporate these new measurements.