* 0449469
* CAREER: Developing SFG into a Powerful Ananlytical Technique to Unerstand Molecular Adhension Mechanisms at Polymer Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Zhan Chen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2010
* USD 520,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0449469&lt;br/&gt;Chen/Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Chen and
his colleagues at the University of Michigan are examining fundamental aspects
of polymer adhesion at interfaces. Using non-linear optical methods such as sum
frequency generation spectroscopy, interfacial structures and interactions
between polymers and model elastomers are evaluated. Correlation between
structural information and adhesion tests determine how segregation, alignment,
ordering and bonding of molecules at the interface affect the adhesion
interface. This information will be useful in the rational design of adhesion
promoters and polymer systems with a wide range of applications. This Career
award serves as an integrated training ground for multi-disciplinary graduate
students and postdocs, and for outreach to middle school and high school science
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vibrational spectroscopy using sum-frequency
generation methods provides high quality structural information about solid
interfaces. When combined with adhesion testing, this structural information
provides a fundamental understanding of adhesion between polymer materials with
wide applicability. Professor Chen and his colleagues at the University of
Michigan are studying this important interfacial process with the support of a
Career Award from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program. This research
area is an ideal interdisciplinary training ground and vehicle for outreach to
young scientists. &lt;br/&gt;