* 0449767
* Dissertation Research:  Support for Jennifer Leigh Smith: The Soviet Farm Complex: Socialist Agriculture in an International Context, 1946-1965
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Deborah Fitzgerald, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 6,640.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant will provide
funding to a Ph.D. thesis level student at MIT to complete research on a
dissertation, entitled .The Soviet Farm Complex: Socialist Agriculture in an
International Context, 1946-1965. The project is a history of agricultural
reform and industrialization in the Soviet Union in the generation after World
War II. NSF funds will support travel to domestic and international archives and
libraries, and allow the student to conduct interviews in Russia and the
Ukraine. The approach to the topic of postwar Soviet agriculture combines four
disciplines: the history of technology, agricultural history, Soviet history and
environmental history. Rather than attributing agricultural change to a single
political or scientific hero or anti-hero, the project assumes that agricultural
reforms were the result of a variety of rural authorities, international
relationships, new technologies, unusual scientific cultures, and stubborn
biological and social realities. The dissertation analyzes the history of Soviet
agriculture by describing the details of six representative historical case
studies that range across the country and around the world from a potato field
in Kharkov Oblast to a kolkhoz of professional hunters in Irkutsk Oblast to a
small dairy in northern Ghana. Throughout the dissertation, these case studies
are related back to three broader themes: first, that when Soviet agricultural
reform failed it was often because the state failed to comprehend the cultural
and environmental context of reform. Reforms that succeeded were those that
adapted over time to meet local circumstances. Second, even at the isolationist
peak of the Cold War, the Soviet state was continuously engaged in a vast
exchange of agricultural ideas and materials with dozens of nations.
Agricultural industrialization is an inherently global pursuit. The third and
last point is that this postwar generation was the crucial era of rural
industrialization for the Soviet Union. During the 1950s, the Soviet state
created a system of socialist industrialized agriculture that worked at least in
the short-term. Although the Soviet Union fell chronically short of its own
optimistic goals, the twenty years following World War II were a time of
substantial change and improvement in the Soviet countryside. The intellectual
merit of the project lies in the fact that the recent history of Soviet
agriculture is not well understood because it has principally been written by
historians seeking to praise or condemn the political system that created it. A
project that critiques but refrains from condemning the recent history of
agriculture in the Soviet Union will fill a significant gap in the current
literature. In terms of a broader impact, this project will contribute to our
understanding of the historical strengths and weaknesses of a system of
industrial agriculture that is still producing food for the people of the former
Soviet Union as well as the world at large.

