* 0449928
* CAREER: Movement of Air-Water Interface Across Fracture Intersections
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Maria Dragila, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2010
* USD 440,069.00

0449928 Dragila

CAREER: Movement of Air-Water Interface Across Fracture Intersections This
project will investigate the governing processes that control fluid movement
across unsaturated fracture intersections using tested experimental and
theoretical methods and determine what parameters are important to incorporate
into large-scale models. Securing a comprehensive understanding of transport
through fractures is a matter of immense national importance in our efforts to
secure both the safety of long-term nuclear waste and to help ensure the quality
of our nation's future water supply. Three project phases will advance our
understanding of this important subject: (1) identify the "effective dynamic
contact angle" as a volume averaging parameter in order to describe net
transport through the fractured system determined by intersection dynamics; (2)
quantify the role of intersection geometry on flow dynamics; and (3) develop
predictions for field-scale plume evolution (e.g., focusing and dispersal) using
the concept of equivalent fibrous media. Expected results are: (a) advance the
understanding of the physics of multi-phase flow by identifying governing
processes that control mode selection at intersections; and (b) resolve a
leading uncertainty in predictive modeling by developing a geologically based
framework for incorporating intersection dynamics into field-scale models. An
educational component that integrates research and education for upper division
undergraduate and PhD students has been designed to attract top qualified
students into research science careers. Top-tier undergraduate science majors
will be recruited to work in cross-disciplinary research-education groups and
participate in all aspects of the research project, culminating with
presentations at a national conference. The pedagogical technique selected,
i.e., integrated research and capacity development, will serve to infuse
learning with the excitement of discovery, greater appreciation of skill-
development, and give invaluable encouragement towards completion of both
undergraduate studies and graduate work. The PhD student-mentor will participate
in the development of all pedagogical materials, which will include a new hands-
on exploratory course in fluid physics, and workshops for in-service K-12
teachers in collaboration with the NSF G-K12 and SMILE programs. The educational
and outreach portion of this project are specifically designed with the vision
to ensure that the nation's supply of scientists are equipped to surmount the
technical challenges of the future.