* 0449625
* CAREER: Empirical Analysis of Auction and Matching Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2012
* Ali Hortacsu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 407,042.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project consists of research and educational
projects centered around the empirical analysis of auction and matching markets.
The development of the Internet and surrounding computing and communication
technologies have led to an explosion in the use of auctions or other mechanisms
to set prices and match buyers and sellers in markets for many diverse goods and
services. Although there have been considerable advances in economic theories of
how such market mechanisms work, empirical work so far has been limited by the
availability of data and the realism of economic models utilized to depict real-
world environments. The research component of the project will conduct in-depth
empirical studies of three distinct but important market settings where data is
available and the gap between theory and empirics is surmountable. The first
research project in the agenda will focus on the ERCOT (Electricity Reliability
Council of Texas) electricity balancing market. This is a market where
electricity generators submit hourly supply bids to increase or decrease
production to meet short-term fluctuations in electricity demand. Utilizing very
detailed data on the bidding behavior of generation firms, along with
engineering estimates of their marginal costs of producing electricity, the
study will test economic theories of strategic behavior by the firms, with a
focus on assessing the extent to which firms utilize market power, and how this
impacts the productive efficiency achieved by a market that serves 20 million
electricity users in Texas. The second research project studies auctions
conducted by the Bank of Canada to sell Government of Canada bills and bonds.
Again utilizing a very detailed bidder-level data set, the study will focus on
analyzing the impact of restricting participation to these auctions to a set of
certified government securities dealers. In particular, the study will
investigate the complex interactions between securities dealers who are allowed
to bid in the auction directly, and non-dealer investors who can only place bids
through securities dealers. The study also aims to quantify the impact of
proposed mergers between securities dealers on the public debt financing costs
of the Government of Canada. The third research project shifts attention to a
somewhat more controversial, but equally interesting market setting, that of
Internet matchmaking. The aim of the project is to develop empirical methods to
infer a diverse group of individuals' preferences over their potential match
partners, based on data on the search and matching behavior of users on an
online dating site. Based on our estimates of these preference patterns, we will
then compare the efficiency of the particular matching protocol utilized on this
site to the efficiency of matches obtained using theoretically motivated
matching protocols, quantifying potential gains to improved market design. The
educational component of the CAREER project aims to teach future generations of
"market designers" how to utilize the rapidly developing toolbox of theoretical
and empirical tools to analyze and formulate policy in many other important
markets. Towards this aim, the PI will develop and teach a new graduate course
on applied market design. To further undergraduate education in this rapidly
advancing field, the PI will undertake an interdisciplinary collaboration with
the University of Chicago computer science department to develop an online
auction environment. Classroom experiments and demonstrations on this online
environment will be integrated into the curriculum of undergraduate
microeconomics and industrial organization courses taught by the PI to allow
students to gain a working knowledge of real-world auction and pricing
mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;