* 0449021
* CAREER:     Characterization and Modeling of Marine Clays for Slope Stability
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2012
* Giovanna Biscontin, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2012
* USD 440,870.00

Increasing attention is being focused on the problem of submarine slope
stability. The global economy requires a better, wider reaching infrastructure,
able to quickly distribute resources, such as oil and gas, from the point of
production to the points of use. An expanding network of telecommunication
cables cross the ocean floors and breakages caused by slope failures would
interrupt or delay the flow of information around the world. Large submarine
slides can cause tsunamis, which can be devastating for the coastal communities
in the wave's path.&lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to the understanding of
failure mechanisms for submarine slopes in soft marine sediments subjected to
dynamic loading. One of the primary goals is to develop an extensive database of
soil behavior in simple shear, specifically targeting offshore clays from the
Gulf of Mexico and off the coast of West Africa. The experimental results are
obtained using a new advanced testing device, which has been specifically
constructed for multidirectional loading at a wide range of frequencies. The
testing is used to characterize the response of the soils subjected to different
initial and drainage conditions, and a variety of loading paths, replicating
more closely the effects of earthquakes or storm waves. The importance of strain
rate on the behavior of soft clays is also investigated. The test results are
essential for the refinement and validation of a constitutive model, able to
replicate the response of the marine clays, and implemented in a finite element
program for the analysis of submarine slope response. The importance of the
different factors contributing to the triggering of failures is investigated
through parametric studies. The predictive tools are validated through the study
of selected case histories. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work include
increasing awareness among students and the general public of how earthquakes
affect soils, and how ground shaking is also changed by the soils. Undergraduate
students are involved in building visualization tools targeting users at
different levels of ability, using the model developed by the graduate students.
The activities also involve development of educational materials integrating
research into the teaching of math and science, and the training of teachers,
through a Research Experience for Teachers Program and in collaboration with the
South Texas Rural Systemic Initiative. The research is introduced in courses at
the undergraduate and graduate level. The PI, in partnership with the Forth
Worth Museum of Science and History, is developing an exhibit on natural
hazards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;