* 0449710
* CAREER: Fundamental Structure-Dielectric Property Relationships of Pyrochlore Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2005,06/30/2013
* Juan Nino, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 680,001.00

This CAREER project investigates fundamental structure-dielectric property
relationships of ceramics with the pyrochlore structure. In particular, the
research focuses on the series of Ln2(M,Nb)2O7 pyrochlore compounds (where Ln =
La3+, Nd3+, Sm3+, Gd3+, Dy3+, Er3+, Yb3+ and M = Zn2+, Mg2+, Fe3+, Al3+).
Acquisition and analysis of experimental data is used to help attain a
fundamental understanding of the nature of the dielectric properties of
pyrochlore ceramics and their correlation with composition and crystal
structure. Specifically this project investigates: (i) the phase stability of
the compounds, (ii) the relationship between cation radii and cation ordering,
(iii) the relationship between cation polarizability and dielectric
permittivity, and (iv) the relationship between cation ordering and high
frequency dielectric properties. This investigation will result in the
development of a paradigm for compositional design of pyrochlores with optimized
dielectric properties tailored for electronic applications such as capacitors,
resonators and filters. In addition, this project focuses on increasing the
participation of Hispanics in the field of science and engineering of ceramic
materials and on providing early exposure to ceramics research experiences for
middle and high school teachers and students, as well as undergraduate
engineering students. To foster Pan-American collaboration in ceramics research
and education, a series of short workshops on electronic ceramics will be
organized at targeted universities in South America.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Dielectric ceramics are present in virtually every
electronic application in the form of passive components such as capacitors,
filters and resonators. This CAREER project focuses on the development of new
and improved dielectrics materials that are required to enable the size
reduction and increased functionality that is expected of the next generation of
handheld electronics and wireless communications devices. At a local and
national level, the project also focuses on increasing the participation of
Hispanics in the field of science and engineering of ceramic materials and on
providing early exposure to ceramics research experiences for middle and high
school teachers and students, as well as undergraduate engineering students.
Internationally, a series of short workshops on electronic ceramics will be
organized at targeted universities in South America to foster Pan-American
collaboration in the field.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;