* 0449429
* CAREER:    Synthesis, Characterization and Modeling of Closed-Cell Nanoporous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Laurent Pilon, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2010
* USD 408,032.00

The proposed research addresses outstanding technical and scientific issues
related to energy conversion and efficiency as well as material synthesis for
emerging technologies. It proposes to tune electrical, thermal, and optical
properties of dense material by introducing nanoscale pores. The new nanoporous
media could be used in various applications including (1) thermoelectric
conversion devices, (2) high temperature fuel cells, (3) thermal barrier
coatings, as well as (4) energy efficiency of integrated circuits and (5)
manufacturing of optoelectronic systems. Novel manufacturing processes and
characterization techniques of nanoporous materials will be developed along with
experimentally validated models for their thermophysical and optical properties.
The research is unique in that it explores integration of recent advances in
nanotechnology and transport phenomena to the synthesis and characterization of
nanoporous materials. It is multidisciplinary in nature and involves multiscale
manufacturing and modeling. Results and expertise developed during the course of
the project will be incorporated into the PI's teaching activities at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. Educational modules related to nanotechnology
and energy will be developed and shared with faculty of a historically Hispanic
and Balck college of Los Angeles. Working academic and industrial collaborations
are already in place and will be expanded.