* 0449913
* CAREER: Forward Physics at RHIC and LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2010
* Michael Murray, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James Joseph Reidy
* 11/30/2010
* USD 453,236.00

Nuclear physicists love to look inside protons and neutrons by
smashing&lt;br/&gt;particles into them. One goal of this is to understand the
force that&lt;br/&gt;holds them together and gives them most of their weight.
Through a&lt;br/&gt;quirk of quantum mechanics, relativity and the uncertainty
principle&lt;br/&gt;what we see (or rather what a particle sees) inside a proton
depends&lt;br/&gt;upon how fast we approach it. At low speeds the particle
typically sees&lt;br/&gt;a lot of empty space a few quarks (which carry the
proton's electric&lt;br/&gt;charge and most of its momentum) and some gluons
(which carry the color&lt;br/&gt;force that holds quarks together). These gluons
don't carry much&lt;br/&gt;momentum and so by the uncertainty principle they
have a large size. If&lt;br/&gt;a particle hits one of the quarks or gluons then
lots of particles will&lt;br/&gt;be made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For collisions at
higher speeds more gluons appear out of the empty&lt;br/&gt;space so that the
proton gets crowded. This makes it harder for a&lt;br/&gt;particle such as an
electron to get through the space between the&lt;br/&gt;gluons. At extremely
high speeds the gluons are so crowded that they&lt;br/&gt;fuse together to form
a glass like state, the Colored Glass Condensate.&lt;br/&gt;Evidence for such a
state was first seen in electron-proton collisions&lt;br/&gt;in Germany. On Long
Island there is a machine called RHIC that collides&lt;br/&gt;gold atoms
together. The nucleus of a gold atom contains many protons&lt;br/&gt;and
neutrons close together. In a nucleus it is easier for the gluons
to&lt;br/&gt;form a glass since gluons from different protons and neutrons
can&lt;br/&gt;overlap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michael Murray is a member of the
BRAHMS colloboration which has seen&lt;br/&gt;evidence for this effect at RHIC.
NSF funding will enable Michael to&lt;br/&gt;study these effects at a higher
energy collidor that is currently being&lt;br/&gt;built near Geneva. This work
may help us understand the color force in a&lt;br/&gt;new way.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michael is also interested in homeland security. He will
be developing a&lt;br/&gt;course on "dirty bombs" for first responders. Such a
bomb could be as&lt;br/&gt;primitive as a stick of dynamite surrounded by
radioactive materials or&lt;br/&gt;a sophisticated device that produces
radioactive aerosols that hang in&lt;br/&gt;the air for days. In either case
proper training of police and&lt;br/&gt;firefighters will help them to alleviate
the damager and panic caused by&lt;br/&gt;such an attack.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- &lt;br/&gt;Bradley D. Keister&lt;br/&gt;National
Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;4201 Wilson Blvd.&lt;br/&gt;Arlington, VA
22230&lt;br/&gt;+1 703 292-7377 (office)&lt;br/&gt;+1 703 292-9078
(fax)&lt;br/&gt;