* 0449529
* Maine Forest Landowner Study
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2005,11/30/2008
* James Acheson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 11/30/2008
* USD 85,000.00

One of the most important questions for resource management is, under what
conditions will users conserve the resources on which their livelihood depends?
This project studies the forest management strategies of different types of
forest landowner groups in Maine. Some owners are doing a far better job of
managing their forests sustainably than are others. The quality of management
practices is a crucial issues at this time, because the rapid depletion of
forests is a world-wide problem. Maine is a particularly good laboratory to
study forest management issues because it is the most heavily forested state in
the country, and a wide variety of management practices are being used. In
Maine, the rate of cutting is not sustainable, according to a number of studies.
As a result, the amount of land covered with brush and scrub trees has increased
greatly, and the amount of acreage in high quality forests has declined greatly.
At the same time, Maine's entire forest industry, one of the state's largest
industries, is undergoing great changes. Paper mills are being closed,
employment is declining sharply, and large tracts of land are changing hands.

This project involves an anthropologist and a forester studying Maine's paper
companies, timber companies, forest contractors and small private forest owners.
Two different, but complementary, kinds of studies will be done. First,
information will be gathered on the forest management practices of a sample of
landowners in each of the landowner categories, with emphasis on the paper
companies and the private landowners. This information will be gathered using a
number of techniques: mail surveys, qualitative in-person interviews, archival
research, and direct observations. This study is designed to understand the
forest management strategies of these landowners, and the social, cultural,
economic and political factors motivating these decisions. Second, the actual
state of the forests of these landowners will be evaluated using both field
visits and the analysis of satellite images. Information from these studies will
be used to test a number of hypotheses which will give us a greater
understanding of the behavior of private forest-owners.

Broader implications: This study will enhance our understanding of the factors
motivating people in various landowner categories to conserve or over-exploit
their forests. Legislators, management agencies, and local communities would be
able to act on this information to frame better resource management policies.