* 0449046
* CAREER: Modified-Methanol Dehydrogenase Enzymatic Catalysts For Fuel Cell Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:CAREER: Modified-Methanol
Dehydrogenase Enzymatic Catalysts for Fuel Cell
Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number:CTS-0449046&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Daniela
Mainardi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Louisiana Tech
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis (rationale for
decision):&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three main components characterize
this CAREER plan: fundamental research on new power sources (fuel cells),
effective integration of research and education, and dissemination of research
and educational outreach. First, fundamental research on "bio-inspired"
catalysts will be performed using state-of-the-art molecular simulations to
understand the behavior of these biological components in fuel cells. Second,
undergraduate and graduate students will conduct competitive research in this
area by designing and implementing a novel course, "Introduction to Nano/Bio
Systems Modeling." This course will be geared toward the application of
molecular modeling techniques to stimulate the student discovery process and to
stimulate inspired teaching and enthusiastic learning. Finally, research and
education will be effectively integrated through a learning kit designed by
students for students, educators, and a general audience as part of a final
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will serve to complement the ongoing
collaborative efforts on nano/bio-technology-related doctoral, master, and
baccalaureate degree programs to enhance teaching and research quality within
the College of Engineering and Science (COES) at Louisiana Tech (Tech).
"Introduction to Nano/Bio Systems Modeling", a technical elective course in
Chemical Engineering, will also serve the multiple degree programs in Tech's
highly interdisciplinary environment. Learning kits and "in vivo" demonstrations
of computational research activities will be distributed to: (a) teachers during
the teacher preparation programs currently administered at Tech, (b) students
during Engineer's Day and K-12 programs at Tech, and (c) a general audience
through a web page specially designed to disseminate the outcomes of
"Introduction to Nano/Bio-Systems Modeling". These educational activities will
have a direct impact on K-12, high school, and prospective students from small
rural and small town schools around Tech's region, contributing to increase
teacher quality, improve classroom instruction, provide additional support for
teachers and students, and ultimately improve student achievement. Moreover, the
proposed project will reach rural high school women, increasing their
opportunities to learn about the excitement of science in engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;