* 0449147
* PECASE: Understanding and Exploiting the Surface Chemistry of Carbon Nanotubes: Optical Methods and Chemical Pathways for Manipulation, Control and Assembly at the Nanoscale
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Michael Strano, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 02/29/2008
* USD 398,834.00

Abstract

Proposal Title: CAREER: Understanding and Exploiting the Surface Chemistry of
Carbon Nanotubes: Optical Methods and Chemical Pathways for Manipulation,
Control and Assembly at the Nanoscale

Proposal Number: CTS-0449147

Principal Investigator: Michael S. Strano

Institution: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Analysis (rationale for decision):

This project addresses key technical challenges in the manipulation and control
of nanostructures to enable new applications. Innovative scalable, chemical
pathways will be developed for separating and sorting single walled carbon
nanotubes by their electronic structure using selective, 4-hydroxybenzene
diazonium chemistry. Electrophoresis will be used to isolate homogeneous samples
for electron transport measurements and to explore applications such as novel
ballistic conducting solids and 1-D thin film semiconductors. The alignment,
placement and contacting of nanoscale objects in a scalable and controlled
manner is of central importance in nanotechnology. This project will use a new
optical technique developed to study electrophoretic and dielectrophoretic
manipulation of carbon nanotubes as a means of controlling placement and
orientation. These efforts will afford researchers new tools for nano-assembly
and novel materials for electronic and optical applications. Interactive
software modules on 1-D chemistry and physics will be developed and shared both
on campus and with a university having a large minority population. An outreach
program has been designed and initiated also: Nanotechnology-based Outreach for
local Area High Schools (NOAH). By partnering with the College of Education at
UIUC and several local area schools, the initiative couples newly developing,
portable instrumentation with nanotechnology laboratory-based modules to bring
enhanced science education to classrooms that are otherwise disadvantaged.

