* 0449232
* CAREER: Theoretical Investigation of Single Photon Detectors for Quantum Technology: A Nano-structure Devices Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* Enrico Bellotti, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique M. Dagenais
* 04/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Broader impact - Single photon detectors are the enabling devices for several
important conventional and quantum technology applications, such as quantum key
distribution, quantum imaging and single molecule spectroscopy. In spite of the
growing importance of these applications, there has been little progress towards
the development of compact solid-state detectors and arrays specifically
designed for single photon counting. Single photon p-n junction detectors do not
provide the necessary performance and their operation has never been optimized
for this application. The PI intends to address this problem by presenting a
novel class of single photon detectors based on semiconductor nano-structures
and by developing a new numerical simulation approach for their design and
optimization. The theory and simulation techniques developed will also be useful
in the study of a broad range of carrier transport and light detection phenomena
in nano-structured materials and devices.

The educational plan includes developments in undergraduate and graduate
programs, support for high school teachers, and an educational program for
developing countries. A key feature is the use of simulation tools to improve
the teaching of semiconductor physics and technologies at all educational
levels.

Intellectual Merit - The PI proposes the use of two novel detector concepts that
work on different physical principles by taking advantage of nano-structure
devices. The proposed device structures are intended to overcome some of the
disadvantages (dark and afterpulse counts, lack of tunability and necessity of
cooling) of the current single photon detector designs and provide additional
functionalities, e.g. tunability. The first device is based on intersubband
optical absorption in a multi-quantum-well or quantum dot layers, followed by a
multiplication region. The second device uses a layer of quantum dots embedded
in a high electron mobility transistor structure. In the proposed work, a new
numerical simulation technique that the PI is developing will be used to design
and optimize a new class of single photon detectors. The new numerical
simulation approach is based on a microscopic model that describes the details
of the detection, multiplication and carrier transport processes and their time
evolution. This technique does not have the drawbacks of the macroscopic models,
provides a better description of the physics and operation of single photon
detectors, and is complementary to analytical methods being developed by other
groups. The simulation technique will also be used to show how the performance
of the current generation of APDs can be improved.