* 0449354
* CAREER: Ferromagnetic Half Metals by Design
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2011
* Ram Seshadri, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 03/31/2011
* USD 481,614.00

Ferromagnetic half metals are materials with completely spin-polarized
conduction bands. Electrons in such materials are able to serve as carriers of
information in electronic devices which manipulate electron spin, rather than
charge. This proposal addresses rational guidelines for half metallic
ferromagnetism based on the relations between chemical synthesis, crystal
structure, magnetic properties, and electronic structure of inorganic materials.
It is anticipated that the research will lead to a better understanding of known
ferromagnetic half metals, as well as to the development of new materials
showing this useful property. The proposal closely links research and education
with efforts aimed at the larger community. Graduate and undergraduate
researchers will be trained in the preparation and characterization of magnetic
materials, and in carrying out and interpreting density functional calculations
of the electronic structure. The notion that advanced materials can be designed
rationally will form the foundation of a comprehensive materials chemistry
curriculum. School students will be linked up with the PI's research through
video mail in a program that has already been initiated.

The electrons that conduct electricity in materials have two important
properties. The first is charge, which enables them to carry a current. The
second is a property called spin which is at the basis of some materials being
magnetic. Increasingly, researchers are trying to use this second property,
namely spin, in a new kind of electronics called spintronics. A spintronic
circuit would be able to store information and compute faster than a normal
electronic circuit. Associated with this completely novel technology is the need
for new and unprecedented materials, including new kinds of magnets called half
metals which would generate and sustain spin information more efficiently. While
half metals have been known for about two decades, rules for making them are
obscure: it is not clear why some magnets are half metals while others are not.
This proposal will address this question by studying known half metals, and will
come up with guidelines for making new ones, not previously known. The proposal
emphasizes training undergraduate and graduate students to use the most current
techniques of materials chemistry to make materials for next generation
electronic devices. New and innovative ways of communicating the results of the
research to school students using video mail have already been initiated.