* 0449933
* CAREER: Nanoscale Composition Control and Characterization of One-Dimensional Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Lincoln Lauhon, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 01/31/2011
* USD 550,000.00

The primary objectives of this CAREER project are: (1) control of electronic and
magnetic properties of compositionally modulated semiconductor nanowires via
electronic and magnetic doping; (2) ability to map the composition of doped
nanowires and nanowire heterostructures with single atom sensitivity and sub-
nanometer resolution using atom-probe microscopy; (3) to explore unique local
electronic and magnetic characteristics of dopants in one-dimensional
semiconductor nanowire hosts using catholuminescence microscopy and scanning
probe techniques; and (4) to combine scanning probe microscopy with electrical
transport measurements to relate local properties and distribution of individual
electronic and magnetic dopant atoms to novel electrical, optical, and magnetic
properties of individual semiconductor nanowires. The approach is to first
establish the physical limits of controlled doping in semiconductor nanowires
through inorganic synthesis; to then demonstrate how novel global electronic and
magnetic properties of a single nanowire arise from local properties of dopant
atoms and heterointerfaces in a one-dimensional host material, examining, for
example, how altered screening lengths in 1-d systems affect electronic
properties of nanowire homojunctions and heterojunctions. Additionally, spin
ordering of magnetic dopant atoms mediated by itinerant carriers with a 1-d
density of states will be explored. Nanomaterials understanding,
characterization, and control achieved are expected to advance the science and
technology of nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
fundamental research issues in electronic/photonic materials science having
technological relevance. The project is interdisciplinary involving chemistry,
physics, engineering and materials science, and has strong potential
technological relevance. The project is also expected to enhance the
infrastructure for research and education. Outreach efforts, including research
experiences for under-represented groups and women from female colleges, are an
integral part of the planned activities. Within the undergraduate curriculum, a
course is being developed that will integrate laboratory research experience
into a course on nanoscale surface characterization to train members of the
future workforce in an area of strategic importance. Additionally, the PI works
with a diverse group of high school teachers that reach a diverse student
population in the Chicago Public School system. It is his goal to create more
opportunities for all students in the greater Chicago area and beyond to benefit
from the broad resources at Northwestern University.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;