* 0449516
* CAREER:  Macroscopic Quantum Phenomena in Nanomagnets and SQUIDs
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Jonathan Friedman, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 06/30/2011
* USD 431,933.00

Where the frontier between the quantum and classical worlds lies and what
defines the border are some of the most fundamental questions in physics. This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project concentrates on low-
temperature studies of single-molecule magnets and SQUIDs. Both of these systems
are known to exhibit quantum properties such as tunneling on the
mesoscopic/macroscopic scale. In this project, new experiments will endeavor to
control these quantum properties and explore how environmental degrees of
freedom lead to decoherence of the quantum state. Experiments on single-molecule
magnets will focus on controlling the tunneling process using an applied
transverse field or uniaxial stress. In SQUIDs, experiments will look for the
Aharonov-Casher effect, in which tunneling can be modulated with an induced
charge, a uniquely quantum effect. In addition, how the SQUID's quantum state
decoheres will be studied by using a controlled ohmic environment. A new
mechanism of decoherence due to angular momentum conservation will be
investigated. All of these projects will be performed at Amherst College with
undergraduate student participation. Research will also involve collaborations
with faculty and students at the University of Massachusetts - Amherst. The
educational aspect of this project involves the revamping of the physics
curriculum at Amherst College. To this end, a new intermediate laboratory course
emphasizing hands-on experience in modern physics experiments will be developed.
Furthermore, an advanced laboratory elective course will be introduced to give
students experience in a research-style environment.

Where the frontier between the quantum and classical worlds lies and what
defines the border are some of the most fundamental questions in physics and are
of utmost importance to the development of practical quantum computers. This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project concentrates on low-
temperature studies of single-molecule magnets and superconducting devices to
understand how these systems lose their "quantumness" through interactions with
their respective environments. Experiments will focus on controlling how these
systems change their quantum states and by engineering the environment with
which they interact. How their quantum behavior is altered by a controlled
environment will shed light on the nature of the quantum-classical frontier. All
of these projects will be performed at Amherst College with undergraduate
student participation. Research will also involve collaborations with faculty
and students at the University of Massachusetts - Amherst. The educational
aspect of this project involves the revamping of the physics curriculum at
Amherst College. To this end, a new intermediate laboratory course emphasizing
hands-on experience in modern physics experiments will be developed.
Furthermore, an advanced laboratory elective course will be introduced to give
students experience in a research-style environment.