* 0449742
* CAREER:   An Integrated Program of Research Focused on Understanding Chiral Recognition of Branched Amino Acid Based Molecular Micelles, Mentorship, Outreach, &amp; Faculty Develop
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Eugene Billiot, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 05/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Professor Eugene Billiot of Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi is supported
by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division to
investigate and elucidate the factors responsible for chiral recognition with
media specifically designed for use as chiral pseudostationary phases in
capillary electrophoresis. The focus is to develop and characterize chiral amino
acid-based surfactants (molecular micelles) for use in enantiomeric
separarations. To expedite the discovery process, molecular modeling is used to
develop quantitative structure-property relationships that can be used to
evaluate the effectiveness of the new materials as chiral selectors and to gain
a better understanding of where and how chiral discrimination takes place on
these materials. The overall objectives of the educational components are, (1)
to increase the number of underrepresented and economically challenged students
pursuing careers in science through early involvement of undergraduates in
scientific research, (2) to increase the participation of undergraduate students
in community outreach to the local K-12 schools, and (3) to facilitate faculty
development by conducting a series of seminars and workshops designed to help
"new" faculty become more effective teachers, researchers, and
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large number of important pharmaceuticals are
chiral, and in many cases the two stereoisomers are known to have different
biological activity. There is thus considerable interest in developing improved
methods for chiral separations. &lt;br/&gt;