* 0449898
* Coll. Res.:  A Geophysical Transect Across the Arctic Ocean:  Multi-Channel Seismic Reflection and Seismic Refraction data Acquisition on the USCG Icebreaker Healy, Summer 2005
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Bernard Coakley, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2008
* USD 415,291.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is a collaborative proposal from Principal
Investigators at the University of Alaska-Fairbanks, Texas A &amp; M, and
University of Bergen. The Division of Ocean Sciences will contribute funding for
future site selection surveys in the Arctic Ocean. Over the past few years, the
Arctic Ocean has been revealed through the acquisition of new data by airplanes,
icebreakers, and submarines. These data have been compiled into publicly
available grids of bathymetry, gravity, and magnetic data that provide a basic
regional description. This enormous international investment stems from the wide
recognition that fundamental problems in the Earth Sciences, from paleoclimate
and paleoceanographic issues to basic plate tectonics can be answered there. To
unravel the region's history and gain a deeper understanding of the Arctic
Ocean's evolution, it is necessary to image ridge structures and the accumulated
Mesozoic and Cenozoic sediments with multi-channel seismic reflection data (MCS)
and the deeper crust with seismic refraction data. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
- This project presents a program of high resolution MCS and seismic refraction
data acquisition to be conducted along a transect across the Arctic basin during
the summer of 2005 on the Healy with an Arctic adapted MCS system (200-300 meter
streamer) and sonobuoys starting from Point Barrow, Alaska and ending near
Svalbard, Norway. The transect will cross the Chukchi Borderland, the Nautilus
Basin, the Mendeleev Ridge, the Alpha Ridge, the Makarov Basin, the Lomonosov
Ridge, and the Gakkel Ridge. These new data will determine the internal
structure of the ridges and plateaus that subdivide the basin, and will
establish for the first time the stratigraphy of the intervening basins.
Knowledge of this structure is required to test hypotheses regarding the of the
basin and ridge history and the type and location of plate boundaries in the
Amerasian Basin. The objectives go beyond a local understanding of the Arctic
and bear directly on understanding the global plate tectonic circuit for the
Mesozoic.&lt;br/&gt;National and International Cooperation - A group of U.S,
Swedish, and Norwegian investigators will make major a cross-Arctic basin
expedition in the summer, 2005. The Swedish icebreaker Oden will transit the
basin, reproducing an oceanographic section collected in 1994. The USCG Healy
will support solid earth and coring applications and will operate autonomously
for about half of the expedition, meeting with Oden on the flanks of the Alpha
Ridge to transit in tandem out of the basin. The project will receive
substantial funding from the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate. During the
combined programs, Healy will collect an unprecedented, integrated geophysical
data set consisting of multi-beam swath bathymetry and sidescan, sub-bottom
profiler, multi-channel seismic reflection and seismic refraction
data.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - The focus of this research will be on the
structure and stratigraphy of the Arctic Ocean, but the data will have uses
beyond the work because an integrated data set collected from Healy will be the
beginning of a site survey database for the Arctic Ocean. Thus, the first
dedicated scientific drilling in the Arctic will take place on the Lomonosov
Ridge during the summer of 2004. Collection of these new data will build on the
efforts planned next summer, prepare for future scientific drilling operations
in the Arctic Ocean and substantially increase international cooperation in
Arctic Research. A number of students from both the US and Europe will
participate in this cruise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;