* 0449433
* CAREER:Analysis and Design of Silicon-Based Performance-Optimized Distributed Integrated Circuits for High-Frequency Wideband Wireless Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2005,08/31/2011
* Payam Heydari, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 08/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

0449433&lt;br/&gt;HEYDARI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to design novel silicon-based integrated circuits that will be widely employed
in the front-end of high-performance ultra wideband (UWB) and broadband wireless
communication systems. Originally based on distributed topology, the proposed
circuit topologies will exhibit far superior performance (lower noise-figure and
higher gain-bandwidth-product) than conventional distributed circuits, while
accounting for non-ideal losses of the circuit elements. The core concept of
non-uniform downsized distributed circuits can be employed in a broad range of
applications, including the design of broadband amplifiers and output drivers
for high-speed broadband wireline systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
integrated research and education activities will address new research
challenges incurred in the design and development of silicon-based high-
frequency wideband integrated circuits used in a wide variety of high-frequency
systems. It will present circuit topologies whose performance is far superior to
that of conventional silicon-based circuits, while accounting for non-ideal
losses of the circuit elements. Interdisciplinary research and education, as
well as government and industry, will benefit from the proposed work. The PI's
close collaboration with local industry will facilitate the dissemination of
research results to U.S. high-tech companies to contribute to the development of
new communication products. Integrating the proposed circuit topologies into
next-generation high data-rate wireless communication systems will have a
significant impact on law enforcement, rescue operations, and personal area
networks. The proposed educational plan will emphasize the participation of
underrepresented groups at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels
in the integrated research and training programs in UWB integrated circuit
design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;