* 0449962
* Astrophysical Plasmas:    Observations, Detector Development and Student Training with an Emphasis on Underrepresented Minority Inclusion
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2007
* Hakeem Oluseyi, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 07/31/2007
* USD 268,808.00

Astrophysical Plasmas: Observations, Detector Development and Student Training
with an Emphasis on Underrepresented Minority
Inclusion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;AST 0449962
Oluseyi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Hakeem Oluseyi, at the University of Alabama,
Huntsville, will undertake a program related to the development of astronomical
instrumentation. The University of Alabama in Huntsville is establishing a
detector characterization laboratory. The primary objective of this effort is to
realize the full potential of CCD technology that may offer superior soft X-ray,
EUV, UV, blue and near-IR sensitivity, as well as superior radiation tolerance
and point spread function control compared to traditional astronomical CCDs. Dr.
Oluseyi will work to address the under-representation of women and minorities in
astronomy and physics, connecting students with appropriate mentors, preparing
students for key transition points in their careers, keeping students motivated
and inspired, and providing students with appropriate scientific challenges.
These efforts will be in partnership with Alabama A&amp;M University (a
Historically Black University), the Department of Energy's Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, and NASA's National Space Science Technology Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;