* 0449670
* CAREER:    Nanomechanics in the Quantum Regime
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Pritiraj Mohanty, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 03/31/2010
* USD 425,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project focuses on the
realization of quantum motion in macroscopic nanomechanical oscillators at
millikelvin temperatures. Detection of quantum mechanical displacement of a
macroscopic system is fundamentally important to the foundations of quantum
mechanics, quantum information processing, and condensed matter physics. To
realize the textbook quantum-"mechanical" harmonic oscillator, this project will
use novel approaches to design structures with gigahertz-range resonance
frequencies and novel microwave measurement techniques with unprecedented levels
of displacement detection sensitivity. With the measurements of quantum motion
in nanomechanical oscillators, this project will explore quantum mechanics in
the macroscopic realm through energy quantization, macroscopic superposition of
Schrodinger cat states, and decoherence in the quantum-to-classical crossover
regime. Education of students towards their eventual placement in the emerging
field of nanotechnology is an essential component of this project. Students will
be trained on cutting-edge technologies of nanofabrication and ultra-sensitive
measurements, and fundamental concepts of quantum physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observation of quantum effects in macroscopic objects is
paramount to defining the limits of quantum mechanics. Towards this end, the
central emphasis has been on the realization of the so-called Schrodinger's Cat
States with "Macroscopic Realism". This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) project at Boston University focuses on the realization of macroscopic
quantum states with nanomechanical oscillators at millikelvin temperatures. In
order to access the quantum regime of mechanical motion, innovative multi-
element structure design approaches and ultra-sensitive microwave measurement
techniques will be employed. Using the novel antenna design of nanomechanical
structures with gigahertz-range resonance frequencies, developed recently at
Boston University, this research will investigate energy quantization, quantum
superposition and quantum-to-classical crossover effects in macroscopic
nanomechanical oscillators. This project will train postdoctoral, graduate and
undergraduate students, who will benefit from their education in the cutting-
edge technologies in nanoscience and the exposure to the foundations of quantum
mechanics and quantum information science.&lt;br/&gt;