* 0449014
* CAREER:     Effects of Particle Aggregation/Disaggregation and Precipitation on Sediment and Contaminant Transport in River Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2012
* Jianhong Ren, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Continuing Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 02/29/2012
* USD 471,438.00

0449014&lt;br/&gt;Ren&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed will involve the
assessment of contaminated rivers and effective remediation of streams affected
by acid mine drainage require a thorough understanding of the dominant
mechanisms controlling particle and contaminant dynamics. Studies of the fate
and transport of these reactive substances are generally complicated due to the
complex coupling of hydrologic and geochemical processes, which vary spatially
and temporally. The importance of hyporheic exchange has becoming increasingly
recognized because of its important role in regulating the transport of
particles, contaminants, and ecologically relevant substances.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the only female faculty in the Department of
Environmental and Civil Engineering at Texas A&amp;M University Kingsville
(TAMUK), a Hispanic-serving university, and a senior investigator of the NSF
funded Center for Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST)-Research
on Environmental Sustainability of Semi-Arid Coastal Areas (RESSACA), the PI
will focus her teaching career on recruitment of more students from
underrepresented groups (especially Hispanic women) to participate in the
proposed research activities, development of a curricular and research program
designed to develop interdisciplinary skills in future researchers and
practicing engineers in South Texas, and enhancement of current engineering
curriculum at TAMUK through integration with the proposed research. In addition,
the collaborations with several international recognized scientists from
Tsinghua University in China, Texas A&amp;M International University (TAMIU),
Laredo, TX, and Instituto Tecnologico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey
(ITESM) in Mexico will provide TAMUK students with excellent interdisciplinary
environmental research and education opportunities. This program development
plan will provide the Hispanic student population in South Texas with the state-
of-the-art interdisciplinary training to be better prepared to meet the future
sustainable environmental needs of the US-Mexico border region. Finally, the PI
will work closely with stakeholder groups and government agencies such as US EPA
(Region 6) and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) to ensure
timely transfer of science findings to decision-makers. &lt;br/&gt;