* 0449708
* CAREER:   Efficient Ray-Based Methods for Modeling Wave Propagation
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Miguel Alonso, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Houghton Pratt
* 06/30/2010
* USD 411,850.00

Wave phenomena are central to physics and engineering. Modeling the propagation
of waves, however, can be an analytical or computational challenge when the
system, medium, or potential in which they propagate is complex. In these cases,
the ray model is often used to obtain approximate solutions. For quantum
mechanical wave functions, the "rays" correspond to classical particle
trajectories. When ray information is used properly, it can give a very accurate
description of wave propagation phenomena. While several ray-based methods for
modeling the propagation of waves have been proposed, they often have problems
and do not incorporate measures of their own accuracy The scientific goals of
the work proposed here are to achieve a profound understanding of the validity
of the ray model within wave theory, and to generate all-purpose ray-based
methods that describe the propagation of waves in complex media with
unprecedented accuracy and computational efficiency. This work will rely on two
different and complementary frameworks. The first one, particularly suited for
problems of wave propagation through inhomogeneous media for the case of small
wavelengths, is based on assigning flexible, interconnected field contributions
to the rays, such that their sum gives accurate field estimates that are
asymptotically independent of the contributions' width. In preliminary studies,
this framework has been shown to be free of the problems that plague other
techniques, and to give estimates of great accuracy. Furthermore, a simple
measure of the estimates' error is accessible. So far, this formalism has been
applied only to test cases involving propagation of scalar waves in two-
dimensional inhomogeneous media. In this project, the framework will be extended
to describe realistic situations involving three (and higher) dimensional fields
in complicated media presenting, for example, absorption, gain, and
anisotropies. The application of the method to the solution of differential
equations not related to wave phenomena will also be explored. The second
framework relates to wave propagation in piecewise homogeneous media, and is
particularly suited to the study of partially coherent fields. It is based on
representations of wave fields that behave exactly as ray weights, obeying the
free radiative transfer equation. These representations can reduce significantly
the computation times needed for estimating the intensity, flux, or polarization
of partially coherent fields in regions away from their sources. Analogous
representations can be defined to describe waves in anisotropic, optically
active, absorptive or gain media. These representations can also be used in the
description of systems involving refraction and reflection at interfaces and of
propagation through scattering media, although this might require some
assumptions about the coherence properties of the field. The understanding of
such assumptions will give insight into the applicability of the ray-based
radiative transfer model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator and
graduate students will participate in technical conferences organized by
minority societies, as well as in outreach events for the promotion of science
to the general public, particularly to underrepresented groups. Collaboration
with national and foreign researchers in several different areas will be
instrumental in the achievement of the goals of this project. These links will
be strengthened not only through joint projects but also through participation
in the organization of crossdisciplinary workshops and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;