* 0449927
* Neural Basis of Processing Temporal Structure in Music
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Daniel Levitin, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 07/31/2010
* USD 450,000.00

Dr. Vinod Menon, with funding from the National Science Foundation, and with his
collaborator at McGill University, Dr. Daniel Levitin, is studying how the
temporal structure in music is processed in the human brain. His work extends to
investigating the neural underpinnings of pattern perception in general. His
project is designed to extend earlier promising work on important theoretical
issues related to music processing. The research methods include behavioral
measures and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The project takes
into account that simply knowing where an operation occurs in the brain is not
necessarily useful. The present series of investigations, however, is designed
in such a way that knowing where processing occurs in the brain may elucidate
the more interesting questions of what is being processed in the brain, and how
this processing occurs. Evidence from neuroanatomical studies can inform and
constrain theories of cognition. Dr. Menon's project builds on his previous
observation that Brodmann Area 47 in the Inferior Frontal Cortex (IFC) is
responsible for processing structure in music, as well as spoken and sign
language. This raises the intriguing possibility that this region instantiates a
general purpose "temporal organization module." Accordingly, the specific aims
of the proposed research are to: (1) extend his previous musical structure study
with a new group of subjects so as to (a) obtain a more precise localization of
temporal processing functions and (b) investigate similarities and differences
in IFC and temporal lobe response and connectivity for familiar and unfamiliar
music; (2) Manipulate the level of expectation present in the musical stimuli,
in an effort to provide additional evidence for the syntactic operations
subserved by the IFC; and (3) Examine the differential effects of variation in
pitch and rhythm structure on brain responses in, and connectivity of, the IFC
and the auditory cortex. Findings will be relevant to theories of modularity of
mental function, temporal coherence, pattern perception, music cognition, and
brain organization. This research will contribute to understanding the neural
architecture supporting music and auditory perception and cognition in
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include strong involvement of
students, including undergraduates, doctoral, and postdoctoral scholars. The
project is multidisciplinary, bringing together two different groups of
researchers, one trained in classical cognitive psychology, and the other
trained in cognitive neuroscience and brain imaging.. Findings can help to
better understand prefrontal and temporal cortex dysfunction in neurological and
psychiatric disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;