* 0449755
* CAREER:     Synthetically Tuned Luminophoric Materials:   3D Displays, Solar Energy Conversion and Beyond
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2005,10/31/2009
* Stefan Bernhard, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 10/31/2009
* USD 566,000.00

This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Stefan Bernhard at Princeton University to
construct luminophoric transition metal based materials. Parallel synthetic
techniques and parallel screening techniques for photochemical and
electrochemical properties will target photoconversion efficiency and stability
of photoactive materials. Rigid cage structures will be utilized to inhibit non-
radiative decay processes. Combinatorial techniques will be employed to screen
the excited state properties of new coordination based materials for both light
emitting diode and solar energy conversion applications. Ionic transition metal
luminophores will be investigated for light emitting diode development, chiral
metal complexes with mesogenic tails will be employed to generate dissymmetric
emission (circularly polarized luminescence). Materials with long lived excited
states will be identified and examined for electron transfer quenching with
redox mediating reagents to explore photolytic cleavage of water using high
throughput analysis of gaseous products. An outreach program at Princeton High
School that exposes students to optoelectronics will be extended to additional
schools, and visits to elementary schools will be expanded to urban New Jersey
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved organic light emitting diodes have found
increasingly sophisticated application in electronic display technologies.
Tuning excited state properties of metal centered chromophores in order to
modify emission wavelength, charge transport behavior, and absorption profile is
central to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;