* 0449264
* CAREER:    Ferrohydrodynamic Pumping in Traveling Magnetic Fields:   Theory and Fluidic Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2010
* Hur Koser, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This proposal presents a closed-loop magnetic fluid (ferrofluid) pumping scheme
using traveling magnetic fields. Pumping ferrofluids with external magnetic
fields alone opens the door to a wide range of applications at the macro, micro
and nano-scales, resulting in reliable, scalable, simpler, cheaper, compact and
energy efficient fluid actuation concepts. The insights and experience gained as
part of this proposed work will inspire and lead to investigations of a wider
range of applications for ferrofluids, including cooling, biomedical and
manufacturing industries, both within the PI's research laboratory and
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The proposed work involves
a multi-disciplinary research program that incorporates colloidal chemistry,
magnetism and fluid mechanics, combining fundamental modeling and analysis with
a simple and effective testing methodology. The proposal offers to advance the
physical understanding of fluid mechanics at multiple size scales, coupled with
nano-scale magnetic phenomena and magnetization dynamics. The study will
integrate physical, mathematical and numerical modeling with both macro- and
micro-scale experiments. This approach results in testable theoretical
predictions and develops a fundamental understanding of ferrohydrodynamics that
allows effective device designs, enabling practical and useful
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results of this study
will provide valuable opportunities for the interdisciplinary training of both
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as ample prospects for outreach
activities in the greater New Haven area around Yale University. One of the
research tools that will be used as part of this project involves low cost
microfluidic devices which lend themselves naturally to the creation of a
design-based, hands-on bioengineering teaching laboratory for both undergraduate
and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A teaching module already being
developed by the PI includes an online, interactive tutorial software, a
diffusion simulation package, cheap yet powerful laboratory components designed
around microfluidic devices, and associated real-time analysis software. The
goal of the teaching module is to help students understand key concepts of
microfluidics via a hypothesis and testing-based methodology. The PI is
currently working on adapting the module for use at Yale University and other
institutions. This coursework development is aimed at ensuring an
interdisciplinary approach to Engineering education, both at the graduate and
undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has chosen the Connecticut
Pre-Engineering Program (CPEP) as his main collaborator for his planned outreach
activities around the New Haven area, which has a significant population of
socially and economically "at-risk" children, as well as a high concentration of
traditionally underrepresented minority students. He has already volunteered to
participate in their teacher development program and classroom enrichment
activities. The PI will share the beautiful and magical world of ferrofluids
with young students, bringing in demonstration kits (comprised of various oil
and water based ferrofluids, small permanent magnets and videos detailing
experiments they can conduct in the classroom) and artistic pictures and movies
taken using ferrofluids. He is also getting ready to host open-house days in his
laboratory for visits by secondary school students, as well as invite qualified
high school minority students for summer internship programs. Finally, the PI
has volunteered to act as a faculty judge in the upcoming New Haven Science
Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;