* 0449449
* CAREER:     Asymmetric 1,4-Dioxygenation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2010
* Dean Toste, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2010
* USD 475,000.00

This proposal describes the development of new catalytic methods for the
enantioselective formation of stereochemically and structurally diverse
1,4-oxygenation patterns. The application of these new methodologies to the
asymmetric synthesis of complex natural products is also detailed. Four distinct
projects are proposed: (a) development of a method for the enantioselective
desymmetrization of symmetrical 1,3-dienes to produce gamma-hydroxyenones, (b)
development of an enantioselective addition of organometallic nucleophiles to
endoperoxides and 1,2-dioxins for the synthesis of differentially substituted
1,4-oxygenated products, (c) application of these methods to the synthesis of
illudin C, a member of a family of cytotoxic natural products, and (d) the
utilization of the methods developed for the asymmetric 1,4- dioxygenation of
dienes to the synthesis of the actinobolin antitumor antibiotics. In addition to
the research training directly associated with the proposed program, the
development of an advanced organic chemistry class and the ongoing development
of a general chemistry class for undergraduates are planned. In the former, the
use of the chemical literature as a means to create a student derived advanced
organic "text-book" is presented.

With the support of this CAREER award from the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program, Professor Dean Toste, of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of California at Berkeley, is developing novel methods to convert
simple molecules into functionally and structurally complex products. In
addition, the synthesis of several new catalysts that may prove broadly
applicable is targeted. A key component of the project is the application of new
reaction methodology to the construction of complex natural products, including
antitumor antibiotics, in a highly expeditious manner, allowing for access to
these molecules and related analogues in large quantities. The proposed research
will not only provide access to these biologically active molecules, but will
also provide synthetic chemists with new selective methods for the construction
of carbon-oxygen bonds. In addition to the research training directly associated
with the proposed program, development of new courses and course materials is
targeted, including the use of the chemical literature as a means to create a
student derived advanced organic "text-book."