* 0449422
* CAREER: Understanding Morphology-Property Correlations in Conjugated Polymer Blends with Nanoscale Optoelectronic Probes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2010
* USD 798,465.00

The scientific goal of this CAREER project is to understand how local phase-
separated morphology impacts charge transport, separation, recombination and
injection in conjugated polymer blends. The approach involves novel combinations
of electrical scanning-probe microscopy with optical excitation and single-
molecule optical spectroscopy. Kinetic and thermodynamic phenomena governing
phase separation in solution-processed conjugated polymer thin films will be
addressed. Immediate attention will be given to processing, characterization,
and device performance in blends of semiconducting polymers. Several themes will
be initiated including: 1)deconvoluting charge generation and charge transport
in nanostructured, photoconductive donor/acceptor blends by making spatially,
spectrally, and time resolved charge generation and collection maps with
scanning probes; 2)understanding local variations in charge recombination,
emission, photochemistry, and exciton-carrier coupling by studying the
electroluminescence from both single dopant molecules and nanoscale domains in
polymer blends; 3)making high resolution lateral and vertical maps of charge
injection and electric field distribution in multi-phase systems as a function
of phase composition and polymer conformation at interfaces; 4)mapping the
kinetic and thermodynamic governing phase separation in conjugated polymer
blends in order to optimize processing into desired morphologies using
nanopatterned surface chemistry. Microscopic models will be developed relevant
to observed electronic properties as a function of local film structure to
assist prediction of which morphologies will meet desired materials performance
goals. Predictions will be tested against actual device measurements on films
processed to yield the chosen morphology. These studies will be enhanced by
close collaboration with both synthetic polymer chemists, and with theorists
specializing in electronic structure in complex con-densed-phase systems.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues in
electronic/photonic materials science having technological relevance. The
project is interdisciplinary involving the intersection of chemistry, physics,
and materials science, and has direct technological applications in
photovoltaics and electroluminescent displays--areas readily appreciated by
students and the general public. The project will be leveraged to advance major
educational goals: to improve undergraduate education through the development
and incorporation of computer-based, context-rich problems into the physical
chemistry curriculum at the University of Washington; and, to improve graduate
education through the establishment of a formal graduate program that will teach
verbal commu-nication skills while simultaneously serving outreach efforts
targeting underrepresented K-12 groups. The integrated research and teaching
activities will lay the foundation for a long-term integrated scientific and
educational program that will last beyond the award period.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;