* 0449488
* Context-Dependent Mode of Selfing and Inbreeding Depression: Consequences for the Evolution of Dioecy
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2011
* Tia-Lynn Ashman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 01/31/2011
* USD 559,998.00

This project explores the role of resource environment in determining plant
mating system (i.e., the degree that plants self versus outcross pollinate) and
pollen export by altering flowering traits, vegetative growth and interactions
with insect pollinators. These factors, in turn, are instrumental in shaping the
optimal plant breeding system for a given environment. This work will use
replicated populations of plants and genetic markers to estimate the effects of
resources on pollinator behavior, pollen movement and mating system. This work
will significantly advance our understanding of why plants with separate genders
are favored over those with combined genders in dry, resource poor
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will inform broadly on how
environmental change can impact plant breeding systems via plant growth and
pollinator interactions. Thus, this work will contribute to our understanding of
how climate change and global pollinator declines may impact plant reproduction.
It will promote student training in molecular techniques and field experimental
design. By participating in the research endeavor these students will act as
informal ambassadors for the field of science regardless of their final
professional goals. Results of this work will contribute to society by expanding
our knowledge of the mating patterns and consequently the genetic diversity of
an important wild relative of the cultivated strawberry.&lt;br/&gt;