* 0449830
* CAREER: Representation Theory on Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2011
* David Ben-Zvi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

The geometric Langlands program proposes an extraordinary analog of harmonic
analysis in the algebraic geometry of bundles on curves, inspired by the
Langlands philosophy which binds harmonic analysis and Galois theory over number
fields. In this geometric harmonic analysis, function spaces are replaced with
categories of sheaves, and the spectral theory of operators on these sheaves is
analyzed using geometric Fourier transforms. The investigator is developing
applications of these cutting edge ideas to classical questions in
representation theory. In particular, in collaboration with D. Nadler, he
proposes an enhancement of the geometric Langlands program which performs a
spectral decomposition of the categories of representations of real Lie groups.
This significantly enhances the Langlands classification of irreducible
representations (part of the classical Langlands program) and binds it to the
geometric (Borel-Weil) realizations of representations. The investigator also
spearheads efforts to make this material available to a far broader audience, in
particular through the organization of GRASP (Geometry Representations and Some
Physics), electronically distributed expository lecture series on the
fundamental ideas and underlying currents in this rapidly developing
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental theme of modern mathematics is the
exploitation of symmetry as an organizing principle, linking diverse and
potentially baffling phenomena in an elegant overarching framework. Perhaps the
prime example of this trend is the Langlands program, which identifies a general
pattern in the appearance of symmetry in algebra and number theory, and counts
among its successes the solution of Fermat's Last Theorem. In recent years, a
new geometric setting for the application&lt;br/&gt;of the Langlands philosophy
has emerged, which makes contact with new symmetry principles, in particular
those underlying the exciting developments of string theory in physics. My
CAREER proposal is aimed at advancing this geometric Langlands program in two
ways. First, the GRASP (Geometry Representations And Some Physics) program will
provide an electronic resource center for students interested in this exciting
and varied but potentially intimidating and inaccessible area. At the center of
GRASP is a series of expository lectures introducing the fundamental concepts
underlying and relating to the Langlands program to a wide audience, via the
web. In parallel, the research component of the proposal develops a novel
program to apply the cutting edge geometric Langlands technology to more
classical problems in algebra. In particular I expect these ideas to have a
significant impact on the classification of symmetries arising in linear algebra
with real numbers, a question with a distinguished history and origins in
quantum mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;