* 0449606
* CAREER: Massively Parallel Simulation of Multiscale Dynamics and Plasma Heating in Alfvenic Turbulence
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Zhihong Lin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 09/30/2010
* USD 498,619.00

Random magnetic fluctuations are ubiquitous in laboratory, space, and
astrophysical plasmas. The nonlinear, dynamical evolution of Alfvenic turbulence
involving disparate spatial-temporal scales plays an important role in plasma
heating, particle acceleration, and transport of mass, momentum, and energy in
the interplanetary and interstellar medium. Understanding the basic plasma
physics principles of Alfvenic turbulence has recently been identified by the
National Research Council (NRC) as one of the key challenges in the next decade
of research in solar and space physics. In this project, large scale kinetic
simulations of Alfvenic turbulence enabled by recent advances in physics models,
numerical algorithms, and the dramatically increased speed and capacity of
parallel computers, will be utilized to study the physical processes underlying
the spectral cascade from large to small scales and the associated energy
dissipation leading to plasma heating. This study will also address many
important subjects in basic plasma physics, e.g., the effects of wave-particle
resonances, finite Larmor radius effects, and compressibility on the cascade and
dissipation of Alfvenic turbulence. The wave-particle nonlinearity and wave-wave
nonlinearity will be treated on an equal footing and be delineated. The
possibility of stochastic ion heating by sub-cyclotron frequency Alfven waves
will also be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
leverage cross-cutting research interests between space plasma physics, magnetic
fusion science, and computational sciences. Advanced computational tools
developed in magnetic fusion research, such as massively parallel gyrokinetic
particle-in-cell simulations, will be introduced to space plasma research. Close
collaboration will be undertaken with researchers in the Department of Energy's
Scientific Discovery through Advanced Computing (SciDAC) Initiative. The
proposed budget will support a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student
working on a Ph.D. thesis, and will help establish an advanced plasma simulation
program at the University of California, Irvine. The Principal Investigator of
this proposal will provide a training and education program that will
incorporate state-of-the-art scientific computing in the physics curriculum. The
students will learn massively parallel computation for solving real-world
problems. Hands-on training will be provided through participation in the
proposed plasma turbulence simulation. The course will be open to students from
all science and engineering departments where parallel computing becomes an
indispensable research tool. A parallel computing lab will be constructed using
the PI's existing startup fund to develop innovative algorithms for parallel
computing, data analysis, and advanced visualization in both instruction and
research. Both the education and research aspects of the project will be
integrated into an Interdisciplinary Center for Computational Science recently
proposed at the University of California, Irvine.