* 0449757
* Dissertation Research:  A Study of Diverging Morphology:  Native and Loan Verb Formation in Modern Maltese
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* Adam Ussishkin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2006
* USD 11,952.00

Under the direction of Dr. Adam Ussishkin, Ms. Alina Twist will conduct research
on verb formation processes in Maltese for her doctoral dissertation. Maltese is
a dialect of Arabic that has been influenced extensively by contact with English
and other Indo-European languages. Maltese speakers appear to make use of two
separate systems of word formation. Non-linear word formation, as illustrated by
Maltese kiser 'he broke' and kisser ' he smashed', is typical of Arabic
dialects. In this type of system, segmental material is added or changed in the
middle of the word to alter the meaning. Linear word formation, in which
segmental material is added to the edges of words, also occurs in Maltese, which
is not typically found in core word formation in other Arabic dialects. Ms.
Twist's research project will collect psycholinguistic evidence about how
speakers use each of these strategies. This evidence will be analyzed to
determine how the two word formation systems interact. A masked priming
experiment will ask Maltese speakers to judge whether or not test items are
words of their language. The test items will include real verbs of both Semitic
and English origin. Filler items will be nonsense verbs constructed to mirror
the properties of the test items. Accuracy rates and reaction time will be
recorded and reaction times of correct responses compared across speakers. An
elicitation experiment will ask native speakers of Maltese to provide a verb
form that corresponds to a given noun or adjective, as illustrated by the
English pair destruction ~ destroy. The test items will be nouns and adjectives
of Semitic and English origin. Responses will be broadly transcribed and
analyzed for their similarity to the expected
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on past studies on word
formation in languages that exhibit only one type of core word formation
strategy, like English or Hebrew. In the past it has been difficult to compare
research between these languages, because the writing systems of the two types
of languages are so different. Non-linear languages like Hebrew and most
dialects of Arabic are written without many vowels. Maltese, on the other hand,
is written in Roman letters, including all vowels. This difference will allow
direct comparison between this study and previous work in the field of word
formation. &lt;br/&gt;