* 0449743
* CAREER: Model-Based fMRI of Human Object Recognition
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Maximilian Riesenhuber, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 06/30/2011
* USD 742,316.00

Object recognition is a fundamental cognitive task that is performed
effortlessly countless times every day, such as when gauging a conversation
partner's facial expression, looking for a friend's face in a crowd, or reading
the words of this abstract. All these tasks depend on the visual system's
ability to recognize specific objects, despite significant variations in their
appearance due to changes in lighting, position, viewpoint, or the simultaneous
presence of other objects. Importantly, the visual system is not hard-wired but
can be trained for specific tasks, e.g., detecting terrorist camps in satellite
images or tumors in X-ray films. Despite the apparent ease with which we see,
visual recognition is widely acknowledged to be a very difficult computational
problem. From a biological systems perspective, visual recognition involves
several levels of understanding, from the computational level, to the levels of
cellular and biophysical mechanisms and the level of neuronal circuits, up to
the level of behavior. Computational approaches to visual recognition are
becoming increasingly important to integrate data from different experiments and
levels of description (such as electrophysiology, brain imaging, and behavior)
into one coherent, quantitative framework that can then be used to provide
rigorous hypotheses for further experiments. With a CAREER award from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Maximilian Riesenhuber is continuing his work
on a computational model of object recognition in cortex. He is applying this
model to study how visual experience and training on specific tasks shape the
brain's representation of the external world and its object recognition
capabilities, and how the visual system can successfully recognize objects, even
in the presence of interfering stimuli. In particular, the model is being used
to provide detailed hypotheses on how training on specific object recognition
tasks (ranging from the discrimination of novel stimuli to categorization and
object recognition in visual clutter) can modify processing at different levels
of the visual system, and how these changes are related to improvements in
behavioral performance. This leads to a set of hypotheses that are to be tested
with human volunteers in a series of behavioral and brain imaging experiment,
using the same stimuli and tasks as in the simulations. Importantly, simulations
and experiments are tightly integrated so that experimental results from simpler
tasks can be used to refine the model, which can then be used to provide more
specific hypotheses for more complex tasks.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research will be relevant for the design of machine vision systems in artificial
intelligence that better mimic how humans see, for the development of human-
machine interfaces that optimally leverage the brain's ability to process visual
information, and for applications involving human training on object recognition
tasks ranging from baggage screening to satellite image analysis. Understanding
the neural circuitry involved in object recognition in the typical brain is also
important for understanding and ultimately treating object recognition deficits
in neural disorders such as autism, schizophrenia, and dyslexia. A key element
of the CAREER award is Dr. Riesenhuber's plan to use the same computational
model that forms the basis of the research effort as an educational tool by
developing a model-based curriculum in integrative cognitive neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;