* 0449578
* CAREER:  Hydrothermal Vent Flow and Temperature Fluctuations:  Exploring Long-Term Variability through an Integrated Research and Education Program
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Daniela Di Iorio, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2011
* USD 552,076.00

0449578&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This integrated research and
education CAREER proposal will focus on long term dynamics of hydrothermal vent
flow at the Main Endeavour vent field and will attract students and teachers to
participate in a physical science and engineering discipline. Measurements will
be made of the vertical flow, the horizontal (advective) flow, together with
temperature fluctuations. Until recently, there has been no method available
that could provide these measurements simultaneously over an extended period of
time (&gt; months) and that could provide spatially averaged data without
requiring placement of sensors within the flow field. This will be accomplished
by deploying a newly developed acoustic scintillation system (built through
collaborations with industry) at the Main Endeavour vent field. The extended
measurements (7 months per year) will monitor changes in flow and heat flux that
can then be compared with independent seismic data collected by NOAA/PMEL thus
testing the hypothesis that vent flow is affected by geological processes. The
Endeavour site lies within the US Navy's SOund SUrveillance System (SOSUS)
hydrophone array, which is capable of detecting weak seismic events associated
with earthquakes along the Juan de Fuca Ridge. The SOSUS data will provide the
opportunity to compare vent dynamics to seismic events for understanding the
short- or long-term changes in the hydrothermal flow. Monitoring hydrothermal
flow and seismicity can yield clues about the subsurface recharge mechanisms,
and biological and chemical changes due to changing vent flow, thus we need to
know more about it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component will be
integrated at all stages of this research targeting high school Ocean Science
Bowl team members, undergraduate and graduate students as well as high school
science teachers. Integration will include student and high school teacher
participation in instrument development, field experiments, and data analysis. A
graduate student thesis will focus on the long-term variability in vent
dynamics. Data and results will be included in revised upper level physical
oceanography, and marine sciences for teachers courses introducing quantitative
and critical thinking strategies. Since the proposed research focuses on the
dynamics of fluid flow and turbulence, a flow tank will be used to demonstrate
and visualize the complexity of fluid flow to all students as lab
exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The broader impacts for this
research project include collaborations with industry to support the development
of a new instrument that can be used in seafloor observatory initiatives like
NEPTUNE. This observatory goal is to link scientists, educators, and decision
makers to Juan de Fuca Ridge discoveries via the Internet by laying cables near
the hydrothermal black smokers, which are so abundant on the Juan de Fuca Ridge.
The lifespan for this cabled network will be intended for 30 years and future
scintillation systems can be developed to monitor the buoyancy driven flows in
real time using this network. Collaborations with other investigators, for
example, NSF RIDGE 2000 funded research at the Main Endeavour vent field, could
potentially include other data to corroborate results and find correlation of
events. These collaborations will enhance the early career of Di Iorio's
hydrothermal vent research. The broader impacts for the educational component is
to actively encourage high school, undergraduate (women and minorities) and
graduate students to pursue physical oceanography or ocean engineering careers,
and to broaden their knowledge so that students can become more informed
citizens on physical oceanographic issues. Partnerships with high school science
teachers will lead to incorporating research into education curriculum that can
be disseminated to others by CD media. The development of a small flow tank will
enhance the educational infrastructure for actively learning the dynamics of
fluid flow. The skills the students, teachers (and the principal investigator)
will develop through this integrated research and educational plan will prepare
them for academic excellence in these fields (or other disciplines of marine
sciences) at all stages of their careers. This proposal will provide the
principal investigator with a firm foundation for making a lifetime of
integrated contributions to teaching (at all levels) and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;