* 0449367
* Invertebrate Rhodopsin Function
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Steven Britt, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 12/31/2008
* USD 150,000.00

Award Abstract

The overall aim of this project is to better understand color vision in insects
and other invertebrate animals. Insects use color as an important cue in
navigation, avoiding predators and identifying food sources. Dr. Britt will
study how different forms of the visual pigment rhodopsin are tuned to different
colors of light. Using the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster as a model system,
Dr. Britt's laboratory will identify specific amino acids within the rhodopsin
protein that are responsible for differences in color sensitivity and that play
a role in activating the protein when light is absorbed. Drosophila melanogaster
utilizes forms of rhodopsin that have unique color properties, and these visual
pigments can be studied using well-developed molecular biological, genetic and
physiological methods. In addition, this experimental system provides the
opportunity to examine diverse invertebrate visual pigments, such as those from
the butterfly Papilio glaucus. Dr Britt will conduct comparative experiments
between fruit flies and butterflies with the aim of identifying fundamental
principles underlying the similarities and differences in how these animals
distinguish between different colors of light. Dr. Britt's work may ultimately
provide important insight into how light influences insect behavior, and thus a
means to manipulate insect behavior. Dr. Britt is also an active mentor for
students of underrepresented minorities and involves them in his research.

