* 0449128
* CAREER:    Model-Based Simulation of Wind Turbine Inflow Turbulence and Design Loads: An Integrative Plan for Research and Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2011
* Lance Manuel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2011
* USD 407,246.00

Abstract for: &lt;br/&gt;Model-Based Simulation of Wind Turbine Inflow
Turbulence and Design Loads: An Integrative Plan&lt;br/&gt;for Research and
Learning, CMS 0449128&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lance Manuel, University of
Texas, Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of the spatial structure of
the three-dimensional inflow wind velocity field is important&lt;br/&gt;for the
safe design of wind turbines. Current attempts at characterizing this inflow
turbulence in design&lt;br/&gt;guidelines are overly conservative and have not
been developed following field studies of turbine&lt;br/&gt;performance and
simultaneous recording of associated wind conditions (because such tests are
expensive).&lt;br/&gt;Also, today's guidelines recommend design loads based on
inflow coherence spectral models that have&lt;br/&gt;been shown to be
inconsistent with measurements, especially for spatial separations on the order
of rotor&lt;br/&gt;diameters and smaller. Moreover, the design guidelines do not
employ turbine aerodynamic and structural&lt;br/&gt;dynamic response simulations
of sufficiently long durations to match the desired return periods (on
the&lt;br/&gt;order of 20 years) typical for ultimate and fatigue limit states.
Clearly, there is a need for more field test&lt;br/&gt;programs and efficient
modeling procedures to accurately describe the inflow and turbine response so as
to&lt;br/&gt;arrive at more accurate design loads.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed career development plan addresses each of the
issues raised. First, it offers a novel untried&lt;br/&gt;approach to
characterizing the inflow turbulence random field by extracting spatially
preferred "modes"&lt;br/&gt;that describe the inflow using empirical orthogonal
decomposition of wind velocity statistics and spectra&lt;br/&gt;derived directly
from newly available field measurements. Second, it offers an efficient
procedure to make&lt;br/&gt;more realistic the possibility of carrying out long-
duration aerodynamic simulations for turbine response&lt;br/&gt;while utilizing
the decomposition of the inflow structure. Finally, it proposes a framework,
based on&lt;br/&gt;structural reliability and response surface concepts, for
deriving design loads by combining inflow&lt;br/&gt;characterization with
turbine response statistics conditional on inflow.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed plan
blends the use of extensive field data with simulation studies in addressing
an&lt;br/&gt;important problem that could lead to more economical wind turbine
designs and sustain the continued&lt;br/&gt;harvesting of wind as a renewable
energy source.&lt;br/&gt;To summarize, at the heart of the proposed research
plan are, in order, the following tasks:&lt;br/&gt;(i) development of efficient
modeling techniques for characterizing the random spatial structure
of&lt;br/&gt;wind inflow using field data - this will yield principal orthogonal
preferred spatial "modes" that&lt;br/&gt;optimally describe the wind
field;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) characterizing turbine response for the preferred spatial
turbulence modes identified in (i) using&lt;br/&gt;turbine aerodynamic
simulations; and&lt;br/&gt;(iii) establishing a probabilistic (structural
reliability-based) framework that integrates (i) and (ii) to&lt;br/&gt;permit
derivation of design ultimate and fatigue loads using simulations long enough
to&lt;br/&gt;realistically reflect return periods on the order of 20
years.&lt;br/&gt;Research, education, and outreach activities that relate to
this plan are outlined in this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;An
important point that needs to be made is that despite the tremendous growth in
wind energy in the U.S.,&lt;br/&gt;our nation is seriously short of trained
engineers in this field and routinely has to seek
technical/consulting&lt;br/&gt;assistance from Western Europe. This needs to
change, and this career development plan will present some&lt;br/&gt;ideas the
PI has to provide such training opportunities to our undergraduate and graduate
students including&lt;br/&gt;internship opportunities that will be facilitated
by this plan, K-12 involvement, and curriculum&lt;br/&gt;enhancements that the
PI has planned. This research study will, it is expected, offer a learning
experience&lt;br/&gt;as well for individuals of various backgrounds: graduate
and undergraduate research assistants, middle/high&lt;br/&gt;students and
teachers, and university students in the PI's undergraduate engineering
statistics course and in&lt;br/&gt;a planned graduate wind engineering course.
Details related to these activities are outlined in this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;Two
significant entities that have expressed their support for the success of this
plan include&lt;br/&gt;(a) Sandia National Laboratories, who will provide the
field data for the efforts outlined and will also&lt;br/&gt;provide summer
research internship positions to five undergraduate minority students;
and&lt;br/&gt;(b) the PI's institution's Equal Opportunity in Engineering (EOE)
program, who will facilitate the&lt;br/&gt;involvement of an
underrepresented/minority student in this research.&lt;br/&gt;Letters of
commitment from both these organizations are included in the "Supplementary
Documents"&lt;br/&gt;section of this proposal outlining their
support.&lt;br/&gt;