* 0449417
* CAREER:    Multijunction Organic:    Inorganic Composite Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2010
* Peter Peumans, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 01/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

In this career development plan, the PI outlines his initiatives to attract and
retain students into the sciences and engineering and to improve teaching at the
K-12, undergraduate and graduate level. These initiatives are closely tied to
the PI's research efforts in organic photovoltaics, the broader socio-economical
impact of which attracts a wider range of students and more likely inspires
students who would otherwise shy away from engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI has committed to mentoring high school students and will hire a local full-
time high school teacher every summer, aiming at transplanting some of the
excitement of laboratory research to the high school classroom. He also proposes
to offer extracurricular project and summer research opportunities to
undergraduate students. These activities may stimulate students to pursue
careers in science and engineering and the hands-on learning will result in
better material assimilation and retention. The PI is engaged in curriculum
revisions that are currently taking place in his department. He is committed to
designing two fun, hands-on courses to attract students to electrical
engineering and to offer creative design opportunities to senior students.
Finally, the PI is co-writing a textbook on organic
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the second part, the PI describes a
research proposal that concentrates on developing a next generation of organic
solar cells that can be produced at low-cost in a roll-to-roll fashion while
exhibiting efficiencies approaching or exceeding those of crystalline silicon
cells. This is in contrast with efficiencies of up to ~5% that characterize the
state-of-the-art of the current generation of organic solar cells. To achieve
the substantially higher efficiencies, the PI proposes to integrate several
material systems into multifunction solar cell stacks by exploiting a major
technological advantage of organic materials. In this approach, cells with
different absorption characteristics are stacked and connected in series via
ohmic contacts between adjacent cells. Using realistic assumptions, the
achievable efficiency of a six-cell multijunction cell is estimated
at&lt;br/&gt;21.4%, a two-fold improvement over the maximum efficiency of a
single junction solar cell of 11.4% under the same
assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program relies on core
technologies that were recently developed such as cell stacking using metal
nanoclusters and organic vapor phase deposition to realize the objective of
demonstrating a multijunction solar cell with a power conversion efficiency
exceeding 10%. To address the challenge of wide spectral coverage, organic / low
bandgap inorganic semiconductor nanocrystal composite solar cells will be
investigated. In addition, the complex optimization of multijunction cells will
be addressed by experimentally calibrated, predictive computer models. Finally,
a new deposition tool that is based on the organic vapor phase deposition method
will be developed. This tool will be used for the deposition of composite
organic/inorganic nanoparticle structures without disturbing the underlying
layers. This unique capability will allow for the realization of the proposed
multijunction structures. Firmly establishing the proposed research effort with
the help of NSF funding over the next five years will put the PI's research
group on the forefront of the organic electronics
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The PI's career
development plan includes innovative initiatives to attract and retain students
in science and engineering that are reflections of the PI's personal
experiences. The proposed research plan makes a clear case for a new generation
of organic solar cells and a novel fabrication method. The plan is unique,
innovative and timely and addresses an important scientific challenge. The PI's
prior research accomplishments in organic photovoltaics form a strong foundation
for the execution of the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The successful demonstration of the proposed efficient organic
/ inorganic multijunction solar cells would represent a true breakthrough in the
field of photovoltaics. These solar cells will be cheap, will exhibit high
efficiencies, and will be manufactured without significant pollution. The socio-
economical payoffs to society of such a renewable technology would be enormous
in terms of reducing the emission of greenhouse gas and pollutants, reducing our
dependence on oil reserves, creating new jobs and improving the image of science
and engineering. This research effort is furthermore likely to attract a wider
spectrum of students to science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;