* 0449658
* SGER: Hydrological Cycles in the Tropics
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* Robert Curran, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/2006
* USD 25,000.00

The PIs and their Post-doc, Hailan Wang, will analyze and compare with available
observations, the late 19th - 20th century simulations carried out by the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Community Climate System Model
(CCSM3), Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) ModelE and the Geophysical
Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) coupled General Circulation Models (GCM)s. The
goal is to document and understand the changes in the hydrological cycle of the
atmosphere in the tropics simulated by the three coupled
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aspect of the research is on the trends
and variability of precipitation and atmospheric temperature over the tropical
land and oceans. In the second half of the 20th century, while the trends in
surface-air temperature over the tropical land and oceans are all upward, the
trend in precipitation over the land is opposite to that over the oceans.
Precipitation over the tropical land has been decreasing in the past 50 years.
The PIs will analyze the trends and variability of tropical precipitation,
surface-air temperature, sea-surface temperature, soil moisture, 200-hPa
geopotential height and large-scale overturning circulation simulated by the
GCMs for the entire 140-year simulations in all three models. Observations in
the past 50 years or so will be utilized to validate the GCM simulations.
Discrepancies between GCM simulations and observations will be identified and
the causes will be explored. The second aspect of the research is on the warm
rain processes over the tropical ocean. Satellite observations indicate that
there is a substantial increase in precipitation efficiency (ratio of
precipitation to cloud liquid water) of light warm rain as sea surface
temperatures (SST)s increases, but precipitation efficiency of heavy rain
associated with deep convection is not sensitive to SST changes. The PIs will
analyze cloudiness, precipitation, and water vapor residence time (ratio of
water vapor to precipitation) to document the recycling of water vapor, warm and
cold rainfall efficiency, and their dependence on SSTs simulated by the three
coupled models. Results from the 140-year simulations of the three models will
be inter-compared to discern the commonality and discrepancy among the models.
Recent observations, especially those from the satellite era will be used to
validate and comprehend the GCM results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
If successful, this research will have a positive impact on the quality of
future climate and water resources information provided to environmental
managers, policy-makers and societal activities.