* 0449391
* University Research & Technology-Led Economic Development Track at SSTI's 8th Annual Conference
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Daniel Berglund, State Science & Technology Institute
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 02/28/2005
* USD 24,874.00

The State Science and Technology Institute (SSTI) has held a series of
conferences with the goal of strengthening the partnership among higher
education and state, regional and local technology-based economic development
(TBED) efforts. The 8th conference entitled "Building Tech-based Economies:
Preparing for Tomorrow's Challenges" will be held in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
on October 13-15, 2004. A track for the Experimental Program To Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) participants will address issues important to
technology based economic development (TBED) in these jurisdictions.

The conference goals envisioned for all participants are: (1) to increase among
technology-based economic development professionals recognition of and support
of the important roles universities play in building technology-based economies;
(2) to attract more university leadership and research administrators to
participate in the gathering, allowing the opportunity to foster stronger
working relationships with their state, local and regional economic development
partners; (3) to provide a forum for universities to discuss shared challenges
and issues in and examples of effective tools and techniques for increasing
commercialization of university technology, building the research enterprise,
encouraging faculty entrepreneurship, and preparing tomorrow's workers and
leaders; and (4) to promote interstate and intrastate cooperation toward common
goals for research and economic development.