* 0449352
* CAREER: A Biomimetic Microsystems Technology towards a Novel Retinal Prosthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Laxman Saggere, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 02/28/2011
* USD 438,239.00

0449352&lt;br/&gt;Saggere&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The applicant proposes research
in the area of retinal prosthesis to assist people affected by degenerative
photoreceptor diseases. In contrast to most other retinal prosthesis developed
so far, the PI proposes a biomimetic approach using a chemical-based interface
instead of an electrical interface to stimulate neurons. He proposes to develop
a microsystem, which can locally dispense stored neurotransmitters to stimulate
the neurons, with the microsystem being fully powered by the light naturally
entering the eye. The proposed approach circumvents power issues in retina
prosthesis with electrical stimulation and problems with electrochemical
reactions in these devices, dissolving interconnect structures and wires.
Compared to the large consortia working on implants with electrical stimulation
(e.g. in the US and in Germany), only two groups, according to the PI, are
considering currently the chemical stimulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed prosthesis comprises an array of light activated microfluidic
dispensers incorporating solar cells for power generation, piezoelectric
actuators for fluid dispensing, fluid chambers for the neurotransmitter and the
ports for their local dispensing. The PI has performed preliminary work,
indicating that the solar cells can generate sufficient power to drive the
actuators, showing the feasibility of the dispensing process, and studying
suitable actuation and detection mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;