* 0449958
* CAREER: Controlled Positioning of Nanoparticles and the Parallel Fabrication of Single Electron Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Seong Jin Koh, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop new techniques which can reliably
fabricate single electron devices within the framework of CMOS technology. The
approach is to fabricate single electron devices through 1) controlled
positioning of nanoparticles on Self-Assembled Monolayers (SAMs) of organic
molecules, 2) nanoscale positioning of electrodes through the combination of
deposition, oxidation, and spacer formation, and 3) systematic study of single
electron tunneling through nanoparticles and tunneling barriers. The new
fabrication techniques are based on current CMOS technology so that reliable,
parallel, and practical fabrication of single electron devices, connected among
themselves and also to the outside macroscopic world, will be
realized.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this program are educational and
technological. Students will receive extensive training directly by
participating in the research, and an interdisciplinary course, "Current topics
in nanotechnology," will provide "hands-on" laboratories, benefiting students
from various disciplines. This program will also provide "hands-on" science
camps in which K-12 students and teachers will have direct exposure to cutting-
edge equipment and clean room facilities. Along with the educational benefits,
the technological benefits to our society and our economy would be enormous. The
new technology will produce ultra-sensitive sensors to detect biological and
chemical materials at the molecular level, which can help protect our nation
from terrorism as well as provide better diagnostic tools for diseases. Also,
this new technology will produce next generation devices that operate with
ultra-low power consumption with great potential for commercial, military, and
space applications.&lt;br/&gt;