* 0449899
* CAREER: Origin and Applications of the Infrared Anomalous Hall Effect in Strongly Correlated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* John Cerne, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 04/30/2011
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Award funds a project that will use polarized light to
study novel magnetic materials and to enhance undergraduate education at the
University at Buffalo. Ruthenate perovskites (RP) and diluted magnetic
semiconductors (DMS) are revolutionizing fundamental concepts in condensed
matter physics and show great potential for technological applications that will
exploit their rich collective behavior. Although the infrared energy range
(100-250 meV) is critical to understanding these materials, exploration of the
magneto-optical properties of these materials in this range has been extremely
limited. By studying the magnetization-induced polarization changes in infrared
radiation probing RP and DMS materials, this project will provide valuable
constraints to guide and filter theoretical models. The technique used in this
project avoids artifacts such as impurity scattering that can dominate dc
magneto-transport measurements. The educational component of this project will
provide educational opportunities and develop new educational/research
resources. This component includes the development of web-based interactive
graphical demonstrations to explain the polarization of light. Undergraduate
students will be involved in building, testing, and using a magneto-optical
polarization probe system, which will be part of a new teaching laboratory as
well as a characterization tool for research at the University at Buffalo.

This Faculty Early Career Award funds a project that will use polarized light to
study novel magnetic materials and to enhance undergraduate education at the
University at Buffalo. Ruthenate perovskites (RP) and diluted magnetic
semiconductors (DMS) are revolutionizing fundamental concepts in physics and
show great potential for technological applications that will exploit their rich
collective behavior. The infrared wavelength range (ten to twenty times the
wavelength of visible light) is critical to understanding these materials. By
studying how magnetic fields change the polarization of infrared light as it
passes through or reflects off RP and DMS materials, this project will provide
valuable information that will help to develop multifunctional materials which
could combine optical, electronic, and magnetic properties in dramatically new
ways. The educational component of this project will provide educational
opportunities and develop new educational/research resources. This component
includes the development of web-based interactive graphical demonstrations to
explain the polarization of light. Undergraduate students will be involved in
building, testing, and using a magneto-optical polarization probe system, which
will be part of a new teaching laboratory as well as a characterization tool for
research at the University at Buffalo.