* 0449688
* CAREER:     Nanostructural Control of Optical Properties in Polymers with Electroactive Subunits
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2012
* Padma Gopalan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 04/30/2012
* USD 465,213.00

This proposal describes a five-year plan of integrated research, education, and
outreach on nanostructured polymer composites with electroactive molecular
subunits. The PI brings her expertise in block copolymer synthesis/
morphological characterization and in the design of electro-optic materials to
this research. These two areas of expertise are combined in the proposed
research, allowing the PI to develop an integrated research program which will
further her career in the field of nanostructured materials. Nanostructured
materials such as self-assembled block copolymers or dendrimers constitute a
unique class of materials with wide ranging applications in drug delivery
systems, nanoelectronics, electro-optics, and photonic band-gap materials. The
basic principle in all these applications is confining a biologically active or
electroactive component within specific size and shape. For example, the area of
electro-optic (EO) polymers has experienced unprecedented growth in the last
five years with the development of next generation higher EO coefficient
chromophores and prototype devices such as broad-band modulators and photonic
phase shifters. Factors such as chromophore, polymer host and cladding material
design have been independently optimized to achieve chromophores with EO
coefficient > 100pm/V and polymer hosts with less than 0.1db/cm losses. However,
a fundamental understanding of the interface between the chromophore and polymer
host remains elusive. Exploiting the chromophore/polymer interface therefore
represents an additional, largely unexplored degree of freedom in controlling
the nanomorphology and ultimately the macroscopic EO activity. The intellectual
impact of the proposed research program is controlling the size and shape of
domains with active molecular subunits by chemical and physical means. These
strategies will be demonstrated for the specific case of rational design of
nanostructured EO materials and can be easily adapted for other materials
containing conjugated units. The primary objectives in the proposed work
involve: a) Design chemical means of tailoring the nanodomains by altering the
normally incompatible chromophore and polymer host via designed interfaces; b)
Design strategies to exploit phase separation of block copolymers to generate
polarized EO domains; c) Morphological characterization and optical measurements
to develop a model for the structure-property relationship of the functional
nanostructures. The first two objectives achieve the purpose of controlling the
size and shape of active nano-domains by chemical means and directly feed into
the third overall objective of correlating the morphology to the observed
activity. Experimental investigation of the resulting morphology will be carried
out by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and in situ X-ray diffraction
studies under applied DC field. The research career plan is closely integrated
with an equally motivated education and outreach program incorporating both
conventional courses and extensive mentoring. The PI will develop the first
polymer course Polymeric Materials in the Materials Science and Engineering
department at University of Wisconsin, Madison with a major emphasis on
nanostructured electronic polymers. This course will fill the needs of a
traditionally hard-materials department by educating materials engineers on the
chemical design aspects of a polymeric material and the correlation between
structure and observed properties. In addition to lectures, the PI will develop
a lab manual, in consultation with an academic staff member, for a lab section
to the proposed course. The lab manual will focus on simple and elegant
experiments to observe the electronic and optical properties of polymers. The
online archive of these experiments will be a unique resource for students and
teachers of polymeric materials. Finally, an extended outreach program aimed at
high school female students, minority colleges, and industry, will be developed
to benefit a broader community. The broader impact of the proposal will be: (1)
Education of materials engineers on the chemistry of polymeric materials. (2)
Broader dissemination of research on nanostructured materials. (3) Better
materials science training of high school students and teachers. (4) Mentoring
of female graduate and undergraduate students.