* 0449235
* CAREER: Theory of attosecond pulse generation
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Mette Gaarde, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Houghton Pratt
* 05/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

This proposal focuses on two different aspects of modern atomic and optical
physics. The research part is directed toward studying the exciting phenomena
resulting from the interaction of a macroscopic number of quantum systems
(atoms) with an ultra short and ultraintense laser pulse, in particular the
extremely non-linear processes that lead to the generation of attosecond pulses.
This will be accomplished through the development of an ab-initio, non-
adiabatic&lt;br/&gt;theoretical model for the interaction of atoms in the gas
phase with ultrashort laser pulses. This "numerical non-linear medium" (NNLM)
will allow for the complete simulation of the most advanced short pulse laser
experiments from first principles. This will involve the simultaneous solution
of both the time-dependent Schroedinger equation (TDSE) and the Maxwell wave
equation in real time, and will require large scale computations. All of the
calculations envisioned are directly relevant to ongoing collaborations between
the PI and three experimental groups at the forefront of strong field
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education part is directed at the enhancement
of secondary education teacher preparation via the development of a concept and
inquiry based course on atomic and optical physics specifically directed toward
physics majors with a secondary education concentration, which will meet
objectives correlated with the National Science Education Standards. The course
delivery will be based on emerging research in learning and model the type of
standards-based teaching and learning that is currently expected of classroom
teachers. At Louisiana State University there is currently an urgent need to
develop rigorous, content-based physics courses for secondary education teachers
to better qualify them for teaching physics in grades 6-12. The proposed course
will thus directly aid the physics teacher preparation and qualification in the
state of Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt;