* 0449663
* CAREER: Programming Molecules for Helix Formation and Self-Assembly into Helical Bundles
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Gregory Tew, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Tyrone D. Mitchell
* 01/31/2010
* USD 515,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Gregory N. Tew of the University of Massachusetts- Amherst, whose
previous work demonstrated the ability to design amphiphilic sheet-like
structures from meta PEs that self-assembled with bilayer order, will now extend
these designs to helical structures and their self-assembly into helical
bundles. Specifically, he will design, synthesize, and characterize new ortho
phenylene ethynylene (PE) oligomers with patterned amphiphilic helical
structures programmed for self-directed self-assembly into higher order helical
bundles. Proteins use a collection of weak non-covalent forces to build strong
and complex structures. These forces include hydrophobic-hydrophilic patterning,
hydrogen bonding, pi-pi stacking, electrostatics, and dipole-dipole interactions
to name a few. The specific and precise placement of these forces marks one of
the biggest differences between native biopolymers and synthetic macromolecules.
The self-assembly of these amphiphilic hetero-sequences into helical bundles by
burying the hydrophobic domains away from polar environments will be studied.
This approach to programming molecules for directed self-assembly beyond
secondary structural elements into helical bundles would establish the rules for
this assembly leading to novel structures and properties. For example, abiotic,
de novo designed, artificial metallo-enzyme-like catalysts are envisaged, and,
at the helix, or secondary structure level, the contribution of dipole-dipole
interactions toward folding stability will be determined. The Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports Professor Gregory N. Tew of the
University of Massachusetts- Amherst whose research will synergistically combine
computational and experimental methods to provide unique insight on the use of
computation in abiotic structural design. The educational program will develop a
multi-tiered infrastructure to formalize mentoring relationships for
underrepresented minority and socio-economically disadvantaged students.
Leadership and scientific management programs targeting underrepresented
minority as well as socio-economically disadvantaged undergraduate and graduate
students will be developed through a strong mentoring program, class lectures,
and interactive workshops. Such activities will enable greater participation and
strengthen leadership roles. The interdisciplinary nature of the work will train
students in important scientific areas including organic and macromolecular
synthesis, supramolecular organic chemistry, and biophysics.