* 0449900
* CAREER: Roles of Transition Metals in Dioxygen Activation and Superoxide Scavenging
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Justine Roth, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 03/31/2010
* USD 525,000.00

This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Justine Roth at Johns Hopkins University to
probe the interaction of O2 with transition metals via the determination of
oxygen isotope effects. Measurements of the variation in O-16 and O-18 ratios
from natural abundance will reveal thermodynamic and kinetic factors that play a
role in the interaction of dioxygen with transition metal reagents. Changes in
oxygen bonding during redox processes are important in industrial oxidations and
in biological utilzation of O2 as an energy source. The properties of metal-O2
adducts will be investigated, and electrochemical data will be gathered to
address the ability of these species to carry out C-H and O-H oxidations.
Correlations between driving-force and rate will be explored for electron,
proton and hydrogen atom transfer reactions. An intensive mentoring program for
middle school aged females in Baltimore will build on summer workshops
associated with the Maryland Science Center. After two years of centering the
workshops on demonstrations, the third year will focus on crafting a
biotechnology display for the science center.

Oxidation processes are important in biological systems and in industrial
settings. The mechanism of elemental dioxygen interacting with transition metal
complexes is relevant to large scale chemistry and biochemistry. Comparing
kinetic and equilibrium distributions of oxygen isotopes will provide insight
into the bonding changes that accompany activation and incorporation of oxygen
into metal complexes and organic substrates.