* 0449622
* CAREER:  Molecular Architecture in Peptide-Functionalized Biomaterials from NMR Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Charles Rice, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 04/30/2010
* USD 555,628.00

Charles Rice of the University of Oklahoma is supported by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program to use high-resolution magic angle spinning and
multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy techniques to
examine the structure and dynamics of specific peptides involved in cell
adhesion and growth on two-dimensional surfaces. Peptide coatings on silica will
be studied as a model of hard-tissue implants, and bioactive hydrogels formed by
acrylamide polymers that have been modified with peptides will be studied to
simulate tissue-scaffold materials. Peptides that contain the arginine-glycine-
aspartate (RGD) are known to reduce inflammation, pain, immune response, and
rejection when used as a biomaterial coating. A variety of RGD-coated silica and
RGD-hydrogel samples will be characterized, first with the aim of understanding
the rules of RGD presentation, with the ultimate goal of creating new silica-
based and hydrogel biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials science and
biological chemistry have converged with significant impacts, particularly with
respect to advances in tissue implants and devices. Chemical analysis and NMR
spectroscopy can enable new understanding of biomolecular structure, information
that may lead to new biomaterial paradigms. This project includes an education
plan that aims to expose high school, undergraduate, and graduate students to
cutting edge research. This effort will include an outreach program to high
school students and their teachers, involving the synthesis and evaluation of
biomaterials. As well, the PI will develop new curricula at the undergraduate
and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;