* 0449151
* CAREER: New Directions in the Variational Multiscale Formulation of Large Eddy Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Assad Oberai, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 06/30/2007
* USD 400,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0449151 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: ASSAD OBERAI INSTITUTION:
BOSTON UNIVERSITY

CAREER: NEW DIRECTIONS IN THE VARIATIONAL MULTISCALE FORMULATION OF LARGE EDDY
SIMULATION

Over the last three decades, Large Eddy Simulation (LES) has emerged as an
important technique in simulating turbulent flows, with applications in
environmental, aerospace, automotive, marine, and material processing research
and industry. The growth in the use of LES has been spurred by applications
where the resolution of large scale eddies is necessary, and by the advent of
massively parallel computers and affordable workstation clusters. This has
resulted in the development of several new promising LES formulations, including
the variational multiscale (VMS) method. The research funded by this grant will
advance the state-of-the-art in LES in general, and the VMS formulation of LES
in particular. New, robust and accurate VMS models will be derived, algorithms
for their application to flows in complex geometries will be developed, the VMS
concept will be extended to turbulent mixing and compressible flows, and
systematic studies will be performed to evaluate the proposed models and
methods. The development of dynamic VMS could have a beneficial impact on LES
simulations, especially if their use in practical applications is demonstrated.
The educational program includes activities at the high school level, course
improvement at the undergraduate level, and course development at the graduate
level. Educational emphasis is proposed in the form of development and use of
computational modules for students to "experiment" with simple flows. Science
and engineering will be made more accessible and "fun" to high-school students
by utilizing computer simulations to visualize hidden physical phenomena and to
perform stimulating virtual experiments. High school teachers and students will
be trained in topics on wave propagation and fluid mechanics. At undergraduate
and graduate levels, students will be rigorously trained in fluid mechanics,
numerical simulations and turbulence modeling. At all levels, efforts will be
made to hire students from underrepresented groups in science and engineering.