* 0449642
* Organoiron Complexes in Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2008
* Anthony Pearson, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2008
* USD 426,000.00

The focus of this research will be to explore the chemistry of
cyclopentadienones as a new approach to biaryl synthesis. The concept will be
tested by applying it to the synthesis of the alkaloid hippadine, and the
related compound kalbretorine. The conjugate addition chemistry of
cyclopentadienones will be explored by application to the synthesis of
guanacastepene A, a hydroazulene based terpenoid. Further, a new oxidative
cyclization of N-hydroxyethylpyrrolidines, in which the substrate is converted
stereospecifically to an oxazoline by treatment with trimethylamine-N-oxide in
the presence of an iron carbonyl catalyst, will be examined.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Dr. Anthony J. Pearson in the Department of Chemistry at Case
Western Reserve University. Professor Pearson will focus his work on the use of
cyclopentadienones in the context of the total synthesis of important natural
products. Oxidative cyclization reactions will also be developed for the
synthesis of heterocycles. The work has potential for broader impact in the
pharmaceutical industry and the project serves as an excellent venue for the
training of undergraduates and graduate students and postdoctorals in the area
organometallic chemistry applied to organic synthesis.