* 0449080
* CAREER: Biomolecular Engineering of Complex Protein Machinery in Living Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Matthew DeLisa, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Theresa Good
* 04/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

0449080&lt;br/&gt;DeLisa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Directed
evolution has become a widely used tool for protein and nucleic acid design.
Both establishing structure-function relationships and creating improved enzyme
catalysts or ligand-binding proteins are enabled. In the majority of published
reports, the target of directed evolution experiments is typically a single
protein. But while virtually all major enzyme functions have been successfully
targeted, there is almost a complete lack of studies that target multi-protein
cellular machinery. In this proposal, techniques for analyzing and engineering a
model complex protein machine, namely the bacterial twin-arginine translocation
(Tat) machinery, will be developed. The proposed studies will utilize a strategy
termed directed co-evolution to: (i) elucidate how the Tat machinery first
recognizes it substrates and how it is able to discriminate between folded and
misfolded proteins; and (ii) "reprogram" the Tat machinery towards new
functions. This research will shed light on a poorly understood biological
mechanism and will lead to the harnessing of this machinery for both the
expression of commercially important proteins and the identification of
correctly folded protein sequences. The research plan will be closely integrated
with an equally motivated education and outreach program focused on the
enrichment of conventional courses and the mentoring of young scientists in the
area of biomolecular engineering. In parallel, an extended outreach program will
be developed for disadvantaged students from New York City. The aim is to expose
students to laboratory advances and breaking classroom subject matter.
&lt;br/&gt;