* 0449269
* CAREER: Investigation of bubble dynamics in microscale geometries, with applications in bioengineering and microfluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2005,04/30/2006
* Daniel Attinger, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 04/30/2006
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT 0449269&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigation of bubble dynamics in
microscale geometries, with applications in bioengineering and
microfluidics&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dynamics phenomena involving microbubbles
are aesthetic, complex, and important in industrial applications such as bubble-
jet printing. If the dynamics of a bubble in an unbounded liquid is well
understood, a lot a basic scientific work needs to be done to understand the
dynamics of a bubble in contact with a solid surface, in a bounded microscale
geometry. This problem of fundamental and practical interest will be addressed
through two research initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first initiative
concerns the dynamic motion of a bubble in a microchannel. The channel geometry,
and the dynamic wetting at the gas-liquid-wall interface, control the pressure
needed to move the bubble in the channel. This issue is critical in
microfluidics devices, where bubbles can clog microchannels with narrow
restrictions. This problem will be studied theoretically and experimentally with
a MEMS-based setup and high-speed visualization. The second initiative studies
how a microbubble attached to a solid surface reacts to ultrasound. Recent
investigations have shown that ultrasound drives bubbles oscillations, which
produce a tiny, donut-shape vortex in the vicinity of the bubble, a phenomenon
called microstreaming. Our theoretical and experimental research will involve
simulations of microstreaming in the presence of solid boundaries and Particle-
Image-Velocimetry (PIV). This microstreaming field and the associated shear
stress will be used to deform biological cells and bring drugs through their
membranes, as well as to build a microengine. A general-purpose micro- PIV
system will be acquired for this research, with a camera that also allows high-
speed imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is the development
of a science base for the dynamic behavior of microbubbles in contact with a
solid geometry. This first study on the motion of a bubble in a microchannel
will be supported on the theoretical side by a collaboration with Henrik Bruus.s
research group in Denmark, and on the experimental side (nanocoatings) with Oleg
Gang, from the Center for Functional Nanomaterials at Brookhaven National
Laboratory. Significant advances are expected on the understanding of the motion
of the wetting angle, its hysteresis and relaxation time scale. Our second study
will investigate how microstreaming depends on the bubble wetting angle and the
nearby solid surfaces. Theoretical and experimental investigations will be
performed, involving (for the theoretical side) coupled solid-fluid interactions
acoustic calculations, simulations of acoustic microstreaming in the presence of
solid boundaries, and (for the experimental side) high-speed visualization
together with micro Particle Image Velocimetry. This second study involve
collaboration with Dr. Citovski.s biology group at Stony Brook, as well as Dr.
Moraga from the Center for Multiphase Research at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact will be the development in
collaborations with Seyonic SA and Micronics Inc- of more reliable microfluidic
devices, solving the issue of undesired bubbles through self-cleaning channel
geometries or bubble traps. Also, novel ways to interact with biological cells
through microstreaming will be investigated, with the development of a novel
sonoporation device to control drug transfection through cell membranes and
manipulate them. The microstreaming flow field will also be used to power a
novel type of microengine that fits in a human hair, to be developed in
collaboration with Oleg Gang, from the Center for Functional Nanomaterials at
Brookhaven National Laboratory. Finally, we are convinced that visualization of
bubble-related phenomena provide an attractive path from everyday experience to
current scientific challenges involving micro- and nanoscale phenomena. This
will be used to interest local high school and elementary school students from
the Bronx to engineering, and to generate interest for research in the Stony
Brook student community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;