* 0449959
* CAREER:  Chemical Control of Plant-Microbe Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Helen Blackwell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2010
* USD 615,000.00

This research program targets the development of new chemical methodology that
will be of wide utility to the synthetic and combinatorial chemistry community
and the generation of chemical tools for the dissection of bacterial
communication pathways. The molecular level features that are essential for
quorum sensing activation or inactivation in plant-associated bacteria will be
revealed by these studies, and the chemical tools that are developed will
provide new insights into our evolving understanding of plant-microbe
interactions. A chemistry teaching internship program will be developed to serve
as a prototype for others nationwide, with the objective of developing a general
strategy to engage and train future faculty in the chemical sciences.
Infrastructure, support, and publicity made available through the NSF-funded
Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning (CIRTL) and the
Delta Program on the UW-Madison campus will provide a strong foundation on which
to build this internship program.

This CAREER award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports
the research of Professor Helen E. Blackwell, of the Department of Chemistry at
the University of Wisconsin. The broad goal of this research plan is the design,
synthesis, and evaluation of new chemical inducers that modulate communication
mechanisms in plant-associated bacteria. The 'language' that bacteria use for
communication is diffusible small molecules (or 'autoinducers') and this
language is perceived by their cognate protein receptors. Bacteria use this
chemical language to assess local population densities in a process known as
'quorum sensing'. Plant-associated bacteria use quorum sensing to regulate
critical processes both harmful and beneficial to their plant host. It is now
evident that certain plant hosts, in turn, 'listen' to these bacterial signals
and can respond with their own chemical signals. The elucidation of this complex
prokaryotic/eukaryotic communication network would represent a fundamental
scientific advance. The reliance of both bacteria and plants on a language of
small molecules places organic chemists in a unique position to uncover the
fundamental principles underlying this communication network and design new
tools to modulate it at the molecular level. Methods to control bacterial quorum
sensing in plant-associated bacteria would have a major impact on agricultural
science, because >50% of crop disease worldwide is caused by quorum sensing
regulated behaviors in bacteria. Further, molecules that inhibit bacterial
quorum sensing represent an entirely new class of anti-infectives that could
have immediate impact on human health. Professor Blackwell is also pursuing a
strategy to integrate training in effective teaching practices into the graduate
and postgraduate experience, driven by the concept of teaching-as-research and
combining substantive teaching internships with the development of new 'active
learning' instructional materials for undergraduate organic chemistry.