* 0449639
* CAREER: RUI: Development and Investigations of Transition-Metal-Doped Ferromagnetic SnO2 Thin Films and Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2011
* Alex Punnoose, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Magneto-electronics, commonly known as spintronics, employs the spins of
quantum-mechanical particles to carry signals and process information, in
contrast to conventional electronics, which relies on their charges. It has been
proposed as a much-needed future technology as the conventional semiconductor
based electronic technology quickly approaches the limits of miniaturization.
For the realization of practical spintronic devices, it is imperative to develop
semiconductors that are ferromagnetic at room temperature. This CAREER project
proposes to develop high-quality tin-dioxide-based magnetic semiconductor thin
films. These materials are also very attractive in gas-sensing applications due
to the strong dependence of their magnetic properties on oxygen stoichiometry -
a new gas-sensing method developed and reported for the first time by the PI.
These magnetic semiconductor films will be prepared by doping semiconducting tin
dioxide with magnetic elements such as iron and cobalt using sputter deposition
- the most commonly used fabrication technique in industry. This work will be
carried out involving at least two undergraduate students and a materials
science graduate student every year, thus providing unprecedented research and
training opportunities in for as many as 15 students over the 5-year period.
They will collaborate with scientists at the Pacific Northwest National Lab,
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, Micron Technology Labs (Boise), the University
of Idaho, and Argonne National Lab. The proposed research activities will be
further integrated into the physics and materials science undergraduate/graduate
programs through development of course materials for new and existing courses,
and will also strengthen the new interdisciplinary Ph.D. program in Materials
Science at Boise State University that is proposed for
2008.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal focuses on the development of
high-quality ferromagnetic semiconductor thin films that are crucial for the
development of magnetic/magneto-electronic devices and for novel magnetic gas-
sensing devices. Magneto-electronics (spintronics) has been proposed as a much-
needed future technology as the conventional semiconductor based electronic
technology rapidly approaches the limits of miniaturization, data processing,
and storage. The tin-dioxide-based magnetic semiconductors that will be
developed in this project are also attractive for gas-sensing applications using
the dependence of their magnetic properties on the oxygen stoichiometry - a new
gas-sensing method developed and reported for the first time by the PI. As many
as 15 undergraduate/graduate students will have the opportunity to collaborate
with scientists at various national labs and industry over the five-year period.
The project will significantly improve the quality of research and teaching
activities in the physics and materials science undergraduate/graduate programs
and will strengthen the new interdisciplinary Ph.D. program in Materials Science
at Boise State University that has been proposed for 2008.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;