* 0449815
* CAREER: Aerosol Properties and Effects through Organic Aerosol Characterization, Integrated Analysis of Multi-Instrument Data, and Aerosol-Cloud Nucleation Closure
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2011
* Jose Jimenez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 01/31/2011
* USD 721,333.00

Aerosols have important effects on climate, visibility, human health, and acid,
toxic, and nutrient deposition. The research objectives of this CAREER project
address the need for a better understanding of aerosol processes, chemistry, and
microphysics. The organic aerosol component will be better characterized and
quantified by further developing the organic aerosol separation and
quantification procedure recently developed by the PI's group for analyzing
Aerodyne Aerosol Mass Spectrometer (AMS) data. This method will be
systematically applied to worldwide AMS measurements obtained by many groups,
and the types and origins of organic aerosols observed will be analyzed. In
addition, a more complete characterization of the aerosol properties will be
obtained by further extending a recently developed software system for
integrated analysis of multi-instrument data. Furthermore, prediction of cloud
condensation nuclei (CCN) from the aerosol properties ("closure") will be
attempted by augmenting ongoing field campaigns with CCN measurements; using
modified Kohler theories and measurement results to predict CCN, and
systematically analyzing the degree of closure achieved between predicted and
measured CCN. This project will leverage resources from other programs that will
support the basic field measurements and analysis, and allow the PI to perform
CCN measurements and a much deeper level of analysis than possible with the
limited resources obtainable for individual field campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this scientific program lie in furnishing
critically needed information on organic aerosols and submicron aerosol climatic
effects that can inform scientific assessments and, through them, policy
decisions; and an improved characterization of the AMS and its organic data,
which will benefit the many other research groups currently using
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education objectives of this CAREER program are:
outreach to K-12 teachers by participation in a teaching training program;
participation of minority undergraduate students in research; development of an
interactive undergraduate environmental chemistry course; development of an
experimental component for an atmospheric chemistry course; graduate student
training in research with opportunities for mentoring and involvement in
fieldwork, international, and industrial activities.