* 0449478
* CAREER: Towards Space- and Time- resolved Generation of p-Benzyne Diradical: Development of Photoswitchable Analogs of Natural Enediyne Antibiotics
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2006
* Vladimir Popik, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2006
* USD 281,500.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Vladimir Popik of Bowling Green State University will develop methods
for the efficient photochemical generation of reactive ten- and nine-membered
ring cyclic enediyne compounds. Several types of precursors that are stable in
the dark but produce a high yield of reactive enediynes upon irradiation with
light have been designed. The resulting enediyne then undergoes a rapid thermal
cycloaromatization producing p-benzyne diradical. The photochemical generation
of highly strained cyclic enediyne compounds, which cyclize very rapidly, will
be employed to study the p-benzyne diradical using flash photolytic techniques.
The two-photon activation of enediyne photoprecursors will be explored. Several
structurally different cyclic enediyne precursors, which incorporate one of
three photoreactive groups: a-diazodicarbonyl, cyclopropenone, or a-diketone,
will be prepared. These compounds will be studied to determine thermal and
hydrolytic stability, as well as quantum and chemical yield of the enediyne
generation. The kinetics and mechanism of the Bergman cyclization of enediyne
photoproducts will be investigated using conventional and time-resolved
techniques. Three of the photoswitchable enediynes have been already synthesized
and their photochemistry is currently under investigation. &lt;br/&gt;The
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports Professor Vladimir Popik
of Bowling Green State University whose research will provide methods for the
time- and spatially-resolved generation of reactive enediynes. These methods
will supply new tools for exploring the mechanism of Bergman cyclization and for
the direct observation of p-benzyne diradicals. Photoswitchable enediynes could
also serve as a basis for the development of new photoactivatable enediyne
antibiotics and 3-D selective photonucleases. Spatial control of the enediyne
cycloaromatization reaction might lead to the development of new approaches to
photolithography and information recording. This project provides undergraduate
and graduate students with an interdisciplinary training at the interface of
synthetic and physical organic chemistry, as well as training in photochemistry
and biochemistry. The interdisciplinary nature of the project will require and
result in extensive collaboration with other research groups both locally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;