* 0449312
* Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry with Massive Projectiles
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Emile Schweikert, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 01/31/2009
* USD 596,500.00

Professors Emile Schweikert and Stanislav Verkhotrov of Texas A&amp;M University
are supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program to investigate the
use of gold clusters as projectiles for the detection of attomol amounts of
analyte and for identifying molecules colocated on surfaces within submicron
distances. The experimental procedure is secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS),
with two key differences: the nature of the projectile and the mode of
bombardment with individual projectiles resolved in time and space. In previous
NSF-supported work, this lab worked with a liquid metal ion source which
produces a wide range of gold clusters, e.g. 200 gold atoms with a +4 charge.
This work will investigate the fundamental issues related to the efficiency of
massive gold projectiles to generate secondary ions. The PI's will also develop
negative ion mass spectrometry using the gold particles to assess spatial
resolution. A sequence of individual projectiles spaced one millisecond apart is
focused on a small surface area. The impacts which occur are each recorded
individually via the emitted electrons and correlated with the time-of-flight
data of the secondary ions detected from the same event. These data should allow
compilation of a chemical map giving a 2D or 3D distribution of molecules with
an anticipated spatial resolution of &lt;25 nm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of mass spectrometry as a chemical microscopy is very important for
achieving the goal of chemically mapping biological structures such as the
single cell. These images will lead to a greater understanding of how the cell
works and interacts with other cells. Chemical imaging with nanoscale resolution
will also be very useful in characterizing nanoparticles.