* 0449813
* CAREER:    Physics of Non-Neutral and Electron-Positron Plasmas Confined in the CNT Stellarator
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2011
* Thomas Pedersen, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 07/31/2011
* USD 966,499.00

This CAREER project is focuses on creating and studying confined non-neutral and
electron-positron plasmas in the Columbia Non-neutral Torus (CNT), and to use
this research program to interact with and educate graduate students,
undergraduate students, high school teachers and students, and the general
public. CNT is a unique and simple toroidal magnetic confinement device that is
specifically designed for the studies proposed here. It will, for the first
time, allow a systematic study of plasmas with arbitrary degree of neutrality,
from pure electron to quasi-neutral, a systematic study of toroidal magnetic
confinement in the presence of extreme electric fields and strong flows, and the
creation of the first ever laboratory electron-positron plasma. Electron-
positron plasmas are unique in that the mass ratio between the two species is
one and the charge ratio is one. Hence, these plasmas are highly symmetric and
very different from regular ion-electron plasmas. As a result, electron-positron
plasmas have unique properties, such as not supporting acoustic waves and
electrostatic drift waves. At the same time, they can be analyzed numerically
and analytically more easily than ion-electron plasmas, because both species
evolve on the same spatial and temporal scales. Electron-positron plasmas may be
considered the hydrogen atom of plasma physics, the simplest possible plasmas.
CNT is a state of the art University experiment, with a large degree of
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students. It is an ideal training
ground for future experimental scientists. It also facilitates interaction and
collaboration with high school science teachers and students, a collaboration
that will be further expanded in the future.