* 0449717
* CAREER:     Stochastic Dynamical Models in Microbiology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2005,08/31/2011
* Peter Kramer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2011
* USD 412,138.00

The research aspect of this CAREER project concerns the application of
stochastic modeling and asymptotic techniques toward two problems in
microbiology which can be cast within the framework of stochastic motion in
random environments. First, a stochastic model will be developed to represent
how water molecules interact with the surface of a protein. Water plays a
crucial role in the functioning of proteins, and must be accounted for in
molecular dynamics simulations which attempt to predict the dynamics of a
protein molecule. The detailed inclusion of water molecules in such simulations
is however very costly and limits the practical scope of these simulations. The
stochastic model for the water-protein interaction to be developed in the
research is intended to provide a more efficient representation of the effects
of water and thereby accelerate protein dynamics calculations. It will consist
of a lattice model parameterization of the chemistry and geometry of the protein
surface and a generalized diffusion process for the water molecules moving in a
potential induced by the surface lattice model. A second component of the
proposed research is an extension of the analytical and computational
methodology for modeling molecular motors to include more physical realism.
Asymptotic and stochastic techniques will be employed to characterize molecular
motors operating in multiple dimensions and/or with multiple degrees of freedom,
and to incorporate random modulations in the force potentials. The Immersed
Boundary computational method, recently extended to include thermal
fluctuations, will be used to simulate molecular motor processes in a way which
incorporates in a natural way osmotic effects and the dynamics of the fluid
medium.

More broadly, this CAREER project comprises a research program and course
developments at the undergraduate and graduate levels which will apply the
principal investigator's prior experience in turbulence modeling to new problems
in microbiology, and provide more systematic opportunities to communicate
knowledge and problem-solving approaches to undergraduate and graduate students.
The research objective pertaining to the interaction between protein and water
molecules has the potential for providing a significant speedup in simulations
of protein dynamics by reducing the cost of modeling the effects of the water.
Accelerated protein dynamic simulations would expedite both our basic
understanding of protein dynamics and the technological development of drugs and
devices designed to interact with proteins. Analytical and computational
research on molecular motors will aim to improve the physical understanding of
how biological cells move and transport material within themselves. The broader
impacts of the project include the interdisciplinary training of graduate
students in mathematical and computational modeling in microbiology, the
introduction of new graduate courses on stochastic modeling, the renovation of
an undergraduate course on probability theory to incorporate modern research
efforts and issues as contexts for the learning of mathematical techniques,
material to be posted on the World Wide Web to disseminate these pedagogical
applications, and broader opportunities for undergraduate students to gain
experience in mathematical modeling.