* 0449052
* CAREER: A Modular Approach to Proteomimetics
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Anna Mapp, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2010
* USD 565,000.00

A primary challenge in the field of proteomimetics is the identification of
building blocks that mimic key protein structural motifs while projecting
functional groups in three-dimensional space for specific binding interactions
with other proteomimetics, small molecules, or endogenous biopolymer targets.
This project targets the use of readily accessible synthetic building blocks -
di- and triisoxazolidines - to assemble molecules that will be screened for the
ability to form higher order structures such as helical bundles and helix-turn-
helices. As part of a broader partnership with primarily minority-serving
institutions, women's colleges, and the chemical industry, a course on "Critical
Thinking and Communication Skills for Scientists" will be developed and taught
to entering B.S./M.S. students, focusing on the building blocks of good
scientific writing, critical thinking, and critical reading and including peer
review as an important component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of this
CAREER award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
Anna Mapp, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Michigan, is
exploring the synthesis and properties of molecules that mimic the structure and
function of proteins. Proteins play a key role in the functions of life by
acting as catalysts, structural components, signal transducers, and molecular
receptors, and the function of each protein is dictated by its unique three-
dimensional structure. Since the constituents of proteins became known, there
has been great interest in reconstituting the structure and function of proteins
with non-natural counterparts through either minor alterations of the natural
components or wholesale replacement strategies. Professor Mapp is synthesizing
novel non-amino acid-based scaffolds and exploring their self-assembly into more
complex structures mimicking those formed by proteins, thereby gaining insight
into the function and mechanism of natural enzymes and developing artificial
proteins (proteomimetics) with improved function and properties relative to
natural systems. In addition, the undergraduate, B.S./M.S., graduate, and
postdoctoral researchers that participate in this interdisciplinary effort will
be well-trained in both chemistry and biology and be prepared to make major
contributions to our nation's biotechnology research effort. Professor Mapp is
also playing an integral role in a B.S./M.S. program currently under development
at the University of Michigan that is built upon partnerships with primarily
minority-serving institutions, women's colleges, and chemical industry.