* 0449615
* SGER: Electronic Voting Technology
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Mark Frankel, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/2005
* USD 54,149.00

Abstract In the 2000 presidential election, the inherent weaknesses of our
states' systems of voting were revealed in dramatic fashion. Due to an
unprecedented occurrence, it was impossible to determine for many weeks the
outcome of the presidential voting in the State of Florida and, therefore, to
declare a winner in the election of a new President of the United States.
Recounts were undertaken not only of votes but also of "intended votes," and
terminology such as "butterfly" ballots and "hanging chads" became routine
vocabulary of discussions in the daily news. The certification process,
eventually decided by a narrow margin in the U.S. Supreme Court, came
breathlessly close to creating a constitutional crisis. The almost surreal
events of that election led to reconsideration of the ways in which balloting is
done, and also to requests for new funding to modernize the voting processes in
states and localities. As a result, efforts have emerged to explore and assess
new technological options in voting, including the Internet, and to undertake
research that can improve understanding of the limits of existing voting systems
as well as the potential gains and limits associated with various voting system
alternatives. Since the 2000 election, alternative voting systems have been
proposed and/or attempted, most recently in the Spring 2004 primaries. Earlier
this year, the Pentagon rejected the idea of Internet voting by military
personnel overseas because of concerns about reliability and security. In
November 2003, Fairfax County, VA, experienced major "glitches" with machines
that did not register certain votes. The American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) will organize and convene a workshop that brings
together 25-30 technical and cyber-security experts, election officials, social
and behavioral scientists, and public interest representatives to develop a
research agenda. The workshop will employ both plenary and breakout sessions in
order to produce a statement of priority research needs representing the best
assessment of the expert group. This research agenda is intended to direct
researchers to work that could be done about these important questions. To
ensure that the research agenda receives widespread attention, project staff
will prepare and disseminate: (a) a rapid summary of the meeting that highlights
key agenda items; and (b) a succinct and accessible report detailing the
priority research areas and their rationale. Press releases will accompany the
distribution of both products and a webcast of a brief segment of the workshop's
wrap-up session will be posted the Monday after the workshop. The research
agenda will make an important intellectual contribution to the study of
electronic voting technology by highlighting issues that would benefit from
additional focused research and, in doing so, point researchers (and funders) to
potential avenues of interdisciplinary research and collaboration across fields.
The research agenda will have broader impacts as well. It will create
opportunities for greater public involvement in deciding how to allocate support
for such studies. Ultimately, the findings that emerge from work done based on
this research agenda could contribute to two important areas: (1) future
deliberations about the advantages and disadvantages of various voting systems,
and (2) critical individual and policy decisions about voting in the U.S.

