* 0449633
* CAREER:    Towards Fundamental Understanding and Rational Control of Crystal Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Tonglei Li, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 02/28/2010
* USD 496,399.00

The project focuses on understanding the role played by solvents and additives
in affecting growth morphology and polymorphism of organic crystals with density
functional theory (DFT) based concepts and Pearson's HSAB (hard and soft acids
and bases) Principle. Solvent molecules should match crystal surfaces of a
particular polymorph or morphology with respect to their electronic properties.
As the sea of electrons on various faces of a crystal couples with or responds
to electronic perturbations due to contact of a solvent/additive, the difference
in responding sensitivities of the faces may be described by DFT-based softness
and hardness. Applying these concepts to establish HSAB type matching principles
between solvents/additives and crystals, we will create a new paradigm to
clarify the influence of solvents and additives at the electronic level,
advancing the rational design of novel crystal materials for chemical,
pharmaceutical and biomedical applications. To carry out the research,
undergraduate and graduate students will be recruited and trained in crystal
engineering and high-performance computation. In addition, middle- and high-
school students will be hosted and involved in the cutting-edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of polymorphs (i.e., different ways of
internal packing by the same molecules) as well as external shape or morphology
of organic crystals can be produced in different solvents with and without
additives. Therefore, solvent molecules should match crystal surfaces of a
particular polymorph or morphology with respect to their electronic properties.
To understand the role played by solvents and additives, we plan to carry out
high-performance calculations of the electronic structures of model crystals and
solvents/additives, and analyze their electronic properties to establish
matching principles. Because the control of polymorphs and growth morphology of
organic crystals is an essential task in chemical and pharmaceutical engineering
and manufacturing, by uncovering fundamental mechanisms of solvent-crystal and
additive-crystal interactions and their impact on crystal growth, this study
will allow the rational design of novel solvent systems and additives for
improving crystal properties and producing novel materials. The research is
relevant to areas such as surface science, nanotechnology, biomineralization and
computational chemistry, each of which is crucial to advancing materials science
and the understanding of crystal growth.