* 0449098
* CAREER: Functionalized Diamond Surfaces for Neuro-Sensing and Stimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Heidi Martin, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 02/28/2010
* USD 401,613.00

ABSTRACT

Diamond-based electrodes are an exciting, recent development that promises major
advantages over present electrode sensor technologies used in biomedical
research. The main research objective of this project is to develop conductive,
surface-functionalized at the nano-scale, diamond-based materials as superior
electrodes for neurological sensing and stimulation. The novelty is that diamond
provides a unique opportunity to integrate stimulation and sensing in the same
device. This research is the basis of the PI's long-term efforts in engineering
of bio-electrochemical materials. It will also be one of several focus areas
incorporated into the proposed educational program: a research-oriented CENTER
(Chemical ENgineering of Tomorrow - Experience Research) program benefiting both
undergraduate and graduate students. Through the CENTER program, undergraduates
will be exposed to a set of research-oriented courses and lab modules; select
graduate students will teach the course blocks as mentored teaching experiences,
providing them with professional development.

Intellectual Merit of Proposed Activities. (1) Diamond-based electrodes will
provide real-time neurological sensing capability, with greatly improved
sensitivity, selectivity and stability, as well as an expanded potential range
of operation over present materials. These advantages will be demonstrated
through in vitro sensing of dopamine and adenosine. (2) The well-defined surface
chemistry of diamond permits functionalization to likely provide specific
chemical interactions that can discriminate between bioanalytes. (3) The highly
stable response of diamond should also provide advantage for measurement of
action potentials. (4) Diamond electrodes may expand neural stimulation
capabilities by avoiding water hydrolysis that leads to tissue damage and by
providing long-term stability. These capabilities, if achieved, will be
applicable to a broad variety of neurological systems. (5) Through use of
diamond-based sensors, much may be learned of the role of dopamine as a
modulatory neurotransmitter in the neural circuitry that controls feeding
behaviors in the Aplysia Californica (sea slug). Lastly, (6) the ability to
detect adenosine in vitro in real-time is novel and will help elucidate its role
in modulating the neurons responsible for the initiation of respiratory rhythm.

Broader Impacts of Proposed Activities. Research impacts: (1) The proposed
project should provide the basis of a whole class of robust, diamond-based
devices for neurological applications, which could be extended into broader
areas of biomedical research. (2) Nano-Functionalized diamond surfaces may
provide application in a variety of areas including catalysis. (3) Diamond's
higher sensitivity may provide researchers with a tool to monitor natural
neurodynamic behaviors instead of those amplified by electrical stimulation. (4)
Diamond's capability for long-term continuous monitoring of dopamine could
eventually lead to development of implantable dopamine sensors for patients with
these illnesses. (5) Novel, realtime measurement of adenosine levels in vitro
could provide many future directions in understanding adenosine modulatory
mechanisms. (6) The ability to simultaneously measure dopamine and adenosine
could provide insight into their coupled roles in Parkinson's disease. (7)
Superior, stable diamond-based neural stimulation devices may lead to
development of robust neural prostheses. Lastly, (8) Diamond in an integrated
sensing and stimulation device would be capable of both manipulating specific
neural activity and monitoring the effects on other neurons in space and in
real-time, providing a versatile, implantable neural control device. Educational
Impacts: (1) The CENTER program will strengthen the integration of research and
teaching in the PI's laboratory and the chemical engineering department. (2)
This mentored teaching experience could provide a cornerstone for a graduate
professional development program at Case, to use as a model at other
universities. (3) The program will generate a stronger pool of future new
faculty who will be better teachers and better oriented about faculty life.
Finally, (4) through the CENTER program, undergraduates should be better
prepared for research or industrial careers.

