* 0449459
* CAREER:    Interconversion of Metal-Ligand Multiple Bonds.  Carbenes, Carbynes, and Carbides for Metathesis and Fischer-Tropsch Modeling
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Marc Johnson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 03/31/2010
* USD 525,000.00

This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Marc Johnson at the University of Michigan to
prepare late metal complexes with triple bonds to carbon or nitrogen. This
project will explore the synthesis, bonding, and reactivity of late metal LnMCR
and LnMN moieties. Calorimetric and computational methods will be employed to
understand the energetics of species relevant to alkyne and nitrile metathesis
reactions. Ruthenium carbyne, carbide, and nitrido complexes will provide access
to the chemistry of late metal ligand triple bonds. A computational laboratory
companion to an advanced inorganic lecture course at Michigan will be developed.
Students involved with a GAANN program entitled Chemical Sciences at the
Interface will collaborate with science education personnel to assess student
learning outcomes in this setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Olefin metathesis has
developed into a particularly powerful tool for reconstructing complex organic
molecules. In both natural product strategies and macromolecular reaction
mechanisms, the impact of olefin cross reactions for new carbon-carbon bond
formation is enormous. This project is designed to move toward an understanding
of the principles involved in metathesis of triple bonds involving both carbon
and nitrogen with transition metal complexes serving the role of
mediators.&lt;br/&gt;