* 0449125
* CAREER: Integrated Interdisciplinary Nanotechnology Research and Education on Fundamentals and Applications of Cell Entrapment for Water Pollution Control
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Eakalak Khan, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

0449125&lt;br/&gt;Khan&lt;br/&gt;Entrapped bacteria have been used in several
applications including wastewater treatment. Effects of entrapment on the
bacterial physiology, such as growth rate, metabolic activity, and cell
morphology, are known in food technology, biomedical, and pharmaceutical
applications while in wastewater treatment applications very little is known on
the topic. One of several goals of this research is to advance fundamental
understanding on the use of cell entrapment in wastewater treatment. To achieve
this goal, the principal investigator (PI) proposes to investigate the effects
of entrapment on growth rate, metabolic activity, cell morphology, cell surface
properties, genetic material quantity, and stress of three pure cultures
typically encountered in activated sludge. Several techniques in molecular
biology and nanotechnology will be used to elucidate what lies beneath the
performance of entrapped cells. Knowledge and techniques from different
disciplines, molecular biology and nanotechnology, will be used to solve the
research problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will benefit several
parties: researchers, practitioners, and students at different levels.
Underrepresented American Indians are the target group for activities for pre-
college students. This project will have a broad impact because storm water
pollution is not a problem only in the U.S. but throughout the world. This
progran will promote research partnerships between the PI and faculty in his
department and other departments at his university, and a graduate program
overseas.