* 0449439
* Discovery of Novel Cis-Elements and Transcription Factors Controlling the Plant Defense Transcriptome
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Thomas Eulgem, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2008
* USD 338,613.00

Plant diseases are the cause for dramatic losses in crop production. To defend
themselves against microbial attack, plants have evolved an effective defense
system that is inducible upon pathogen recognition. Key steps of plant defenses
are coordinated activity changes of large numbers of genes. Such transcriptional
re-programming alters the rate of transcription, the synthesis of mRNA copies of
these genes. However, details of regulatory processes controlling these defense
genes are largely unknown. Previous studies mainly focused on the regulation of
individual defense genes. The recently established micro-array technology allows
parallel monitoring of mRNA levels of large numbers of genes. Using this
technology several groups of genes showing highly coordinated up-regulation in
response to pathogen recognition were identified. Genes of each group are likely
controlled by common regulatory mechanisms. Typically expression levels of genes
are regulated by transcription factors, proteins that interact with short
sequences (cis-elements) localized in the respective gene's promoter (DNA
sequences upstream of its coding region).The main goal of this project is to
systematically identify defense-related cis-elements and their cognate
transcription factors by functional genomics in Arabidopsis thaliana. Using
microarrays several groups of genes showing highly coordinated responses to
pathogen recognition were identified. Sequence motifs found to be strongly
conserved in their promoters are likely to constitute cis-elements responsible
for their coordinated expression. Such conserved motifs will be tested to
determine if they interact with nuclear protein factors and if they can activate
reporter genes upon pathogen recognition. Functional cis-elements identified by
these experiments will be used to identify their cognate transcription factors
by DNA-interactor screening methods, such as the yeast one-hybrid system. The
roles of such transcription factors in plant immune responses will be examined
by mutational analyses, gene silencing and over-expression. The model
Arabidopsis provides all tools required for such a systematic approach, such as
a fully sequenced genome, microarrays covering the whole genome and large
collections of mutants with insertion mutations in nearly all of its genes. The
proposed approach is unbiased and likely to lead to the discovery of novel types
of cis-elements and transcription factors. Mechanisms controlling defense genes
in Arabidopsis uncovered in this study are likely to apply to other plant
species and will facilitate designing new strategies to improve disease
resistance in crops. An important component of the proposed project is strong
involvement of undergrad students, mainly from minority groups. UC-Riverside is
a "Minority Postsecondary Institute" with &gt; 30 % minority students in its
total enrolled student population. The project will be linked to the ongoing
NSF-REU Plant Cell Biology program within the Center for Plant Cell Biology at
UC-Riverside. In addition, the proposed project will provide a platform for
training of postdoctoral scholars and graduate students in plant molecular
biology, plant pathology and functional genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;