* 0449886
* CAREER:     Correlating the Microstructure with the Physical Properties of Perovskite and Related Oxide Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2011
* Edwin Walker, Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2011
* USD 535,000.00

This CAREER project focuses on understanding the mechanisms that govern ion
transport in perovskites and related oxides (PRO) with interesting and useful
ionic transport properties. Specifically, this project will investigate the
correlation of microstructure of PRO's with their physical properties to
elucidate the structural and compositional factors that influence the ionic
conductivity. The project involves the low temperature synthesis of
nanocrystalline PRO's such as La0.6Sr0.4MnO3 with varying compositions and
crystallite sizes using the novel 3,3',3"-nitrilotripropionic acid precursor gel
method and the characterization of the nanocrystalline PRO's using X-ray
diffraction (XRD) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM)
in conjunction with impedance spectroscopy to investigate the relationship
between structure, composition, and physical properties (ion transport in
particular). Structural and conductivity data will be analyzed and correlated to
determine the relationship between grain size, grain boundaries, defects and
vacancies on bulk ion diffusion. Undergraduate students will participate
significantly in the synthesis, characterization, and physical analysis of these
oxide-conducting materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will yield
new insights into the mechanisms that govern ion transport in PRO's. Since the
possible composition of perovskites and their electronic and ionic transport
properties remain relatively unexplained, the successful investigation of the
structural and compositional factors that influence the ionic conductivity in
nanocrystalline PRO ion conductors in this study will represent a relatively
significant contribution to the area of solid-state PRO conductors. A better
understanding of ionic transport in PRO's will have a significant impact on the
economic and commercial barriers in a multitude of applications ranging from
portable devices to homes and vehicles. Additionally, this project will also
have a significant impact on under-represented minority students at Southern
University, a Historically Black College and University and a Primarily
Undergraduate Institution, by exposing them to materials science-related
research, a field where the numbers of minority students are very scarce.
Students will be given the opportunity for hands-on experience that results in a
more meaningful undergraduate research experience.