* 0449022
* CAREER:  The Synthesis and Characterization of Transition Metal and Lanthanide Intermetallic Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* David Young, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 05/31/2011
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to
investigate the electronic and magnetic ground states of a variety of novel
intermetallic systems. These will include rare earth, alkaline earth, and
transition metal intermetallics. By varying the chemical doping of the
materials, outstanding questions in the field of strongly correlated electron
systems including the interplay between superconductivity and magnetism, high
temperature ferromagnetism in Kondo insulators, and unconventional
superconductivity will be explored. The project includes the synthesis of the
materials followed by their structural characterization and measurement of their
physical properties. The project will involve collaborators at LSU, the National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory and at Southern University. Aside from training
graduate and undergraduate students in synthesis, characterization, and analysis
skills that will enable them to find employment in academe, industry, or
government laboratories, the education component of this CAREER project includes
K-12 outreach to minority students. In addition the PI will implement curricula
reform in physics courses for non-majors. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;When the
electrons in a material interact strongly with each other, new phenomena can
occur. It is possible to tune the behavior of such materials in ways different
from conventional metals and insulators. As an example by changing the chemical
doping of a material, it is possible to make an insulator into an unconventional
superconductor. The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project is to provide insight into the physics of the family of strongly
correlated materials known as intermetallics. In the process technologically
useful materials may be discovered. The project includes the synthesis of the
materials followed by their structural characterization and measurement of their
physical properties. The project will involve collaborators at LSU, the National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory and at Southern University. Aside from training
graduate and undergraduate students in the synthesis of materials, as well as
characterization and analysis, the education component of this CAREER project
includes K-12 outreach to minority students. . In addition the PI will implement
curricula reform in physics courses for non-majors. &lt;br/&gt;