* 0449580
* CAREER: Synthesis, Self-Assembly and Characterization of Mn-doped III-V DMS QDs for Spintronic Importance
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2005,07/31/2007
* Jiye Fang, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 288,800.00

The objective of this work is to develop monodisperse III-V diluted magnetic
semiconductor quantum dots (DMS QDs) as ideal domains for potential applications
of spintronics especially for quantum computing (QC). The scope of the proposed
project covers a broad range of fundamental education components, including
Solid State Inorganic Chemistry, Physical Chemistry, Materials Chemistry,
Organometallic Chemistry, Solid State Physics, Structural and Magnetic
Characterization. The significance of this research endeavor lies in the
following three aspects: (1) creating a novel exploration avenue to chemically
develop promising DMS QDs by extending the DMS system from II-VI or IV-VI to
III-V compounds and doping them with manganese (Mn2+ ); (2) providing conclusive
spin information and the viability of the proposed materials by evaluating the
spin behaviors of one (or a few) quantum-confined electron(s) trapped in a QD;
(3) proving some spintronic concepts in nanophase based on the experimental
observation on real QDs. The broad impacts of this project are three-fold: (1)
to attract, train and position students in various levels (high-school,
undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral) to this promising interdisciplinary
field; (2) to enhance the research and education capability of the State of
Louisiana in Materials Chemistry and NanoScience; (3) to closely link academia
to industry and to enhance the students' ability in solving industrial problems
through these cutting-edge research techniques.

The objective of this work is to explore the further development of high-quality
diluted magnetic semiconductor quantum dots (DMS QDs) as ideal materials for
application in spin electronics (spintronics) with a particular use for quantum
computing. The idea of using the electron spin of an atom as an additional
degree of freedom in microelectronics materials related to information storage
devices is feasible, and has received strong support from experiments. Such a
spintronic effect may lead to a revolution in the next generation of electronic
devices for memory storage and quantum computing. Our work focuses on (1) the
preparation and the manipulation of various DMS QDs (mainly for III-V Group
elements) with size-control and (2) the development of systematic analytical
methods to characterize the spin behavior and the collective properties of these
novel QDs for possible use in quantum computing design. State of the art quantum
computing designs are theoretically based on DMS QDs by trapping a spin of one
(or a few) electron(s) inside a dimension-restricted, isolated semiconductor
unit. To experimentally achieve this objective, the fabrication of the promising
DMS QDs is the first challenge, followed by the characterization of the spin
behavior of these QDs. The proposed research program will speed up exploration
in this promising direction, and will also enhance various activities of high-
tech K12 education in the State of Louisiana. Throughout the course of this
project, the PI/PD will continuously participate in a high school student
outreach program, high school teacher summer training program and REU summer
research program already established at the University of New Orleans.