* 0449204
* CAREER: Stochastic Modeling and Inference in Biophysics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Samuel Kou, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,001.00

Prop ID: DMS-0449204 &lt;br/&gt;P I: Kou, Samuel &lt;br/&gt;Organization:
Harvard University &lt;br/&gt;Program: Career 2005&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER:
Stochastic Modeling and Inference in Biophysics
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Advances of
experimental and computing technology have profoundly &lt;br/&gt;changed the
field of biophysics. On the experimental side, recent developments &lt;br/&gt;in
nanotechnology have allowed scientists to follow biological processes on
&lt;br/&gt;single-molecule basis, providing scientists with powerful means of
studying many &lt;br/&gt;biophysical processes that were inaccessible just a
decade ago. This new &lt;br/&gt;frontier also raises significant statistical
challenges. It calls upon an &lt;br/&gt;urgent need for stochastic modeling,
because many classical models derived &lt;br/&gt;from oversimplified assumption
are no longer valid for single-molecule &lt;br/&gt;experiments. Parallel to the
experimental progress, the rapid advance of &lt;br/&gt;computing resources and
Monte Carlo methods also offers great potential &lt;br/&gt;for biophysical
studies, because in most biophysical experiments inference&lt;br/&gt;on the
underlying stochastic dynamics is complicated by latent processes,
&lt;br/&gt;and many biophysical problems are computing intensive. The proposal
&lt;br/&gt;consists of three projects: (A) Constructing stochastic models that
account &lt;br/&gt;for the subdiffusion phenomenon in single-molecule
biophysics, where the &lt;br/&gt;goal is to provide models that are not only
physically meaningful, but&lt;br/&gt;also capable of explaining the subdiffusion
phenomenon that eludes classical &lt;br/&gt;diffusion models. (B) Developing
data augmentation tools to handle latent &lt;br/&gt;processes in biophysical
experiments, where the goal is to use the data &lt;br/&gt;augmentation
techniques to augment the hidden processes so as to &lt;br/&gt;efficiently infer
from the experimental data the biophysical properties &lt;br/&gt;of interest.
(C) Developing more efficient Monte Carlo method for
computing&lt;br/&gt;intensive biophysics problems, where the goal is to
construct new Monte &lt;br/&gt;Carlo methods capable of sampling complicated
distributions, and apply the &lt;br/&gt;new method to study the HP protein
folding problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Technology advances have
profoundly changed the society and science&lt;br/&gt;in the recent decades. The
field of biophysics benefits from these &lt;br/&gt;advances in particular, as
the technology advances have allowed scientists &lt;br/&gt;to study many
biological processes that were inaccessible just a decade &lt;br/&gt;ago. These
advances also raise significant challenges for statistics, &lt;br/&gt;because
the unprecedented amount of data brought by the new technology
&lt;br/&gt;requires critical statistical analysis. While the United States leads
the &lt;br/&gt;world in both statistics and biophysics research, future
prominence depends&lt;br/&gt;on innovations in both fields and the
interdisciplinary collaborations &lt;br/&gt;between them. The research in this
proposal aims at developing new &lt;br/&gt;statistical models and inference
tools that can be directly applied to &lt;br/&gt;biophysics studies and will
lead to new insight about the physics of complex&lt;br/&gt;biological processes.
The development of statistics and biophysics not only&lt;br/&gt;presents many
interdisciplinary research opportunities, but also attracts &lt;br/&gt;many
bright students in mathematical, biological and physical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is integrated with the principal investigator's
&lt;br/&gt;educational activities at both the graduate and undergraduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;It seeks to meet high academic standards, while providing
graduate &lt;br/&gt;training that will prepare students for interdisciplinary
research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;