* 0449102
* CAREER:  Discrete Structures in Continuous Contexts
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Ezra Miller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2010
* USD 400,860.00

The unifying idea behind the investigator's research&lt;br/&gt; is to isolate
combinatorial structures that govern or&lt;br/&gt; arise from continuous data.
Projects based on this&lt;br/&gt; idea range from computational geometry of
polyhedra to&lt;br/&gt; equivariant algebraic geometry. First
examples&lt;br/&gt; include a variety of open problems concerning the&lt;br/&gt;
computational complexity of shortest paths on convex&lt;br/&gt; polyhedral
spheres, as well as the deeper geometry&lt;br/&gt; controlling this complexity.
The polyhedral methods&lt;br/&gt; underlying the metric combinatorics that
arises in&lt;br/&gt; this context have potential applications to&lt;br/&gt;
graph-coloring questions, to the construction of&lt;br/&gt; cycles representing
characteristic classes on&lt;br/&gt; piecewise linear manifolds, and to
algorithmic&lt;br/&gt; questions in computational biology. The
central&lt;br/&gt; issues shed fundamental light on the nature of&lt;br/&gt;
convexity and polyhedrality in combinatorics and&lt;br/&gt; topology. In other
projects under the umbrella of&lt;br/&gt; extracting discrete phenomena from
continuous objects,&lt;br/&gt; the investigator and his colleagues study
the&lt;br/&gt; combinatorics of degenerations of algebraic varieties,&lt;br/&gt;
often in the presence of Lie group actions. The&lt;br/&gt; irreducible
components in such degenerations can index&lt;br/&gt; summands in formulas from
combinatorics and&lt;br/&gt; representation theory, thereby giving
geometric&lt;br/&gt; explanations for the formulas' positivity. The&lt;br/&gt;
degenerations themselves are defined using techniques&lt;br/&gt; from symbolic
computational algebra.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Many systems in nature and
throughout mathematics&lt;br/&gt; involve continuously varying quantities, such
as&lt;br/&gt; volume or temperature. Surprisingly, finding order in&lt;br/&gt;
such systems is sometimes equivalent to isolating&lt;br/&gt; finite or discrete
pieces of information---analogous&lt;br/&gt; to identifying the solid, liquid,
and gas phases of a&lt;br/&gt; material---from the underlying continuous
framework.&lt;br/&gt; In the investigator's research, the revealed
discrete&lt;br/&gt; structures produce abstract mathematical rewards
of&lt;br/&gt; deep aesthetic and theoretical significance. However,&lt;br/&gt;
concrete applications, especially in the form of exact&lt;br/&gt; algorithmic
calculations by computer, often arise as&lt;br/&gt; byproducts of characterizing
continuous systems by way&lt;br/&gt; of discrete data. The investigator uses his
research&lt;br/&gt; as a context in which to foster a vertically&lt;br/&gt;
integrated mentoring environment, modeled on&lt;br/&gt; interactive advising
programs more common in&lt;br/&gt; laboratory sciences, aimed at involving
undergraduate,&lt;br/&gt; graduate, and postdoctoral students in
their&lt;br/&gt; development as teachers as well as
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;