* 0449194
* CAREER:    A Systems Approach to Networked Decision Making in Uncertain Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2012
* Venkatesh Saligrama, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: A Systems Approach to Networked Decision Making in&lt;br/&gt;Uncertain
Environments&lt;br/&gt;This proposal concerns the development of tools for a
fundamental system-level framework for&lt;br/&gt;networked decision making in
uncertain environments. While significant effort over the last
decade&lt;br/&gt;in sensor development, physical layer transmission and
networking has laid the initial groundwork&lt;br/&gt;for practical deployment,
the full potential for networked sensing systems can only be
realized&lt;br/&gt;through a fundamental understanding of decision-making in
networked and uncertain environments.&lt;br/&gt;In keeping with this view, the
proposed research will represent communications and networking&lt;br/&gt;aspects
as mathematical constraints and develop methods for a distributed group of
decision agents&lt;br/&gt;to reliably detect, localize, and track relevant
dynamic and uncertain events under these constraints.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: We organize our proposed research into four thrusts based on two
funda-&lt;br/&gt;mentally different types of problems that arise in many
(environmental) applications: (a) where&lt;br/&gt;each networked sensor/decision
agent observes part of a global phenomena; (b)a local
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;observable only by a small number of sensors. While the
former case requires sensor collabora-&lt;br/&gt;tion across space, the latter
requires rapidly searching for sensors with desired information in
a&lt;br/&gt;decentralized manner. The four major thrusts are:&lt;br/&gt;
Consensus Based Approach for Networked Decision Making: This thrust is concerned
with&lt;br/&gt;distributed inference when observations of global phenomena are
involved. The approach&lt;br/&gt;amounts to local information refinement
followed by local message passing. This is both&lt;br/&gt;efficient and
practically appealing. The solution techniques rely on properties of
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems whose dynamics are characterized by network
connectivity.&lt;br/&gt; Adaptive Decentralized Sampling: Here we address the
localized information case. We pro-&lt;br/&gt;pose a feedback perspective that
is inspired by recent developments in testing large number&lt;br/&gt;of
hypothesis in the statistics literature.&lt;br/&gt; Estimation under
communication constraints: Here motivated by applications we
develop&lt;br/&gt;mixed stochastic/deterministic methods for communicating non-
ergodic, non-random param-&lt;br/&gt;eters observed in stochastic
noise.&lt;br/&gt; Dynamical Scenarios: In this thrust control theoretic methods
for networked decision making&lt;br/&gt;in highly dynamic scenarios is
developed.&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: The proposed research has the potential to
broadly impact existing knowledge in&lt;br/&gt;the fields of networking,
information theory, estimation, control, and signal processing as well
as&lt;br/&gt;the broader engineering community. In addition to disseminating our
results through publications&lt;br/&gt;in scholarly journals, conference
presentations and on-line we envision the following
outcomes:&lt;br/&gt;Societal: Successful completion of the program will shed
light on the way sensor networks are&lt;br/&gt;configured and operated for
reliable, seamless and prolonged operation. The program is
therefore&lt;br/&gt;expected to have societal impacts through the diverse
applications such as emergency relief services,&lt;br/&gt;security/surveillance
and other applications that closely relate to public welfare. Education:
We&lt;br/&gt;plan on introducing a first-year graduate level course that will
seek an integrated viewpoint of&lt;br/&gt;control, networks and
information.&lt;br/&gt;1