* 0449849
* CAREER: Multicomponent Core-Shell Nanoparticles as Precursors to Ordered Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Hong Yang, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 02/28/2011
* USD 524,856.00

This proposal focuses on the design, synthesis, and solid-state reaction of
multicomponent core-shell nanoparticles and their applications as precursors for
making ordered nanocomposites. The products are expected to have superior
electronic, magnetic, and catalytic properties over their single-phase
counterparts. A specific goal is to create ordered exchange-coupled magnetic
nanocomposites from self-assembly of monodisperse core-shell nanoparticles. Such
magnetic nanocomposites can have higher energy product than the single-phase
materials. A series of multi-component nanoparticles containing materials of
high magnetocrystalline anisotropy such as alloys of iron and platinum (FePt),
cobalt and platinum (CoPt), and samarium and cobalt (SmCo5 ) will be synthesized
through the sequential synthetic method. Polymeric coating on the surface of
nanoparticles will be generated as an additional modulating layer using atom
transfer radical polymerization (ATRP). The chemical stability of these
nanoparticles can be improved upon the carbonization of polymeric layers, which
can affect the properties of nanocomposites. This project will make
contributions to the area of ultra-hard permanent magnets useful in high-power
density and lightweight electric drives, efficient motors for aerospace and
automobile applications, and ultrahigh density data storage media in
microelectronic industry. Students will be trained on this project to use
various cutting-edge research techniques. The principle investigator will work
with the University administrations and local organizations, such as American
Chemical Society, to recruit and prepare high school students, minorities, women
and economically disadvantaged students in particular, to become a skilled work
force in the interdisciplinary fields of nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advancement of nanotechnology relies heavily on our
ability to create multifunctional and complex nanomaterials. To this end,
precise control of element distribution in an ordered nanostructure is crucial.
This research program focuses on the development of new approaches to the
production of core-shell nanoparticles and nanocomposites with multiple
components that interact with each other and subsequently lead to new properties
which do not exist in single-component materials. These magnetically active
novel nanomaterials can be expected to have potential applications in high-power
density and lightweight electric drives, efficient motors for aerospace and
automobile industries, ultrahigh density data-storage media in microelectronics,
and biomedical imaging and hyperthermia cancer therapy in the health industry.
The platinum-alloy nanomaterials developed in this program are potentially
excellent electro-catalysts for hydrogen fuel cells, which hold promises for the
generation of clean energy. Through this program, graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained to become the future skilled work force equipped with
the cutting-edge techniques and knowledge in nanotechnology. The outreach effort
will focus on the establishment of a research site that will attract and prepare
high school students in the Western New York area, and in particular minority,
women and economically disadvantaged groups, to enter these highly competitive
science and technology fields. &lt;br/&gt;