* 0449442
* CAREER: A MEMS-based Electronic Prosthesis Mimicking the Dynamic Vestibular Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Andrei Shkel, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0449442 (Andriei Shkel, Univ
California/Irvine)&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal describes a Research Plan
devoted to the development of a totally implantable electrostimulatory
prosthesis capable of restoring damaged vestibular function, and a Teaching Plan
devoted to the incorporation of Problem-Based Learning into the engineering
curriculum. The research objective is to develop a totally implantable
vestibular prosthesis including a 6 DOF measuring unit on a single silicon chip,
a control unit accurately mimicking the dynamic vestibular function, and a
stimulator unit producing the pulse train transmitting the sensorial information
to vestibular nerves. The project will also include biocompatibility analysis of
the prosthesis, including histological study, long-term accelerated test of
degradation of glass-silicon packages, integrity studies and positional
stability of implanted devices. The main objective of the Teaching Plan is the
incorporation of Problem-Based Learning techniques into the undergraduate and
graduate engineering curriculum. Completion of the teaching Plan will introduce
a new method of teaching engineering concepts that in the long term will produce
more creative and effective engineering. Through working with the UCI
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP), California Alliance for
Minority Participation (CAMP), and UCI Center for Opportunities and Diversity in
Engineering (CODE), the participation of underrepresented groups will be
broadened and learning experience of the community outside campus enhanced.
&lt;br/&gt;