* 0449736
* CAREER:  Polymer Absorption and Transport in Nanopores
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2011
* Chang Ryu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2011
* USD 449,375.00

The goal of this CAREER proposal is to understand and control polymer adsorption
and transport in nanopores at a molecular level and to elucidate how these
processes differ from those on flat surfaces. These studies are particularly
relevant to applications involving polymer separation in high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC), nanoporous support design in polyolefin and hydrogenation
catalysis, and manipulation of macromolecules in nanofluidic channels. This
proposal aims to bridge the existing knowledge gap between polymer adsorption
and separation in HPLC analysis. In particular, the critical role of transport
limitations associated with the chain transfer from a bulk solution to the
nanopore opening, and the subsequent transport and adsorption in nanopores
remains poorly understood. To achieve a better understanding of these phenomena,
polymer adsorption will be studied in nanoporous silica particles containing
well-defined tortuous pores of high specific surface areas and the results will
be compared with polymer transport inside well-controlled nanopore channel
architectures present in anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) membranes. In addition,
electron microscopy will be applied to directly study the morphology of polymers
in such nanoporous substrates. Our preliminary results motivate us to focus the
proposed research into four specific objectives: (1) Studying the role of
nanopore size on the chromatographic [i.e., continuous] and batch conditions for
polymer adsorption; (2) Examining "steric crowding" effects at the pore mouth
for adsorption in nanoporous silica; (3) Understanding chain "frustration"
effects of terminally-adsorbed polymers confined in nanopores using end-
functional polymers and highly asymmetric block copolymers; and (4)
Investigating polymer chain transport through AAO nanochannel membranes using
TEM and membrane osmometry. The proposed research will enable investigation of
surface-bound polymers in nanopores and will help to understand how polymer
chains diffuse into the pores from the mouth, especially in pores that are small
compared to the size of the chains. The proposed research will have a broad
impact on the development of novel polymer HPLC techniques, which can complement
existing size exclusion chromatography techniques. An educational website called
"Virtual Polymer Laboratory" (VPL) will be developed to provide multimedia
educational resources related to polymers and general chemistry. To impact
education at all levels, the VPL website will be further improved by
establishing partnerships with (a) the Troy Junior Museum; (b) local high
schools and (c) undergraduate-only colleges using the following avenues: (i)
Developing a "Hands-on Science Family Program on Macromolecules" for the Troy
Junior Museum, particularly targeted towards K-6 kids and their parents (ii)
Improving "Bringing Nanotechnology to the Classroom", an existing program in the
NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center at RPI (iii) Designing guest
lectures on polymer HPLC, specifically for undergraduates. To attract students
beyond my contact-based activities, the educational program will be further
evolved into web-based educational materials containing multimedia clips of pre-
recorded "virtual" program demonstrations. The research results will be employed
to improve polymer education, by exposing both undergraduate and graduate
students to cross-disciplinary research involving polymer adsorption, HPLC and
microscopy.