* 0449309
* CAREER:    Collaborative Signal and Information Processing in Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2012
* Hairong Qi, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2012
* USD 435,133.00

This proposal presents a career development plan for integrating research and
education. The research component of this program focuses on the study of
collaborative signal and information processing (CSIP) algorithms as well as the
supporting computing models and protocols in sensor networks. The educational
component is aimed at enhancing the newly created computer engineering program
of the department through innovative curriculum development, active student
mentoring, and by incorporating research findings into classroom teaching. The
project consolidates research and educational efforts, responds to the unique
challenges presented by sensor networks, and contributes significantly to the
PI's career development. A sensor network forms a loosely-coupled distributed
environment where collaborative processing among multiple sensor nodes is
essential in order to compensate for each other's limited capability in sensing,
processing, power supply, and to tolerate faults. The extremely constraint
resources of sensor networks have presented unique challenges to CSIP, the
biggest of which is the contradictory requirements between energy efficiency and
fault tolerance. While energy-efficient approaches try to limit the redundancy
such that minimum amount of energy is required for fulfilling a certain task,
redundancy is needed for providing fault tolerance since sensors might be
faulty, malfunctioning, or even malicious. A balance has to be struck between
these two objectives. Intellectual Merit: An integrated research plan is
proposed that tackles the unique challenges presented by sensor networks. This
plan concerns not only the development of effective processing algorithms, it
also studies the design of supporting computing paradigms and protocols which
play an important role in facilitating the collaborative processing. In
particular, the research plan focusses on three themes: First, the design,
evaluation and implementation of a new paradigm, the mobile-agent-based
paradigm, for realizing collaborative processing in sensor networks. In this
model, instead of each sensor node sending local information to a processing
center for integration, as is typical in a client/server-based computing, the
integration code is moved to the sensor nodes through mobile agents. We discuss
the potential of mobileagent- based collaborative processing in providing
progressive accuracy while maintaining certain degree of fault tolerance.
Second, the development and evaluation of a decentralized reactive clustering
protocol to help adapt to the changing environment. Due to the sheer amount of
nodes deployed, collaboration is usually carried out among nodes within the same
cluster. We propose a decentralized reactive clustering (DRC) protocol in which
the clustering procedure is initiated only when events are detected. Performance
gain in terms of energy consumption and network lifetime is analyzed. Third, the
study of distributed optimization for in-network data processing. We tackle the
challenging CSIP problems including multiple target/event detection and unknown
target/event identification and develop decentralized algorithms that achieve
both energy-efficiency and bandwidth-efficiency advantages, as well as detection
performance gain compared to its centralized counterpart. Broader Impact: The PI
is dedicated to excellence in teaching and enthusiastic student mentoring. CSIP
in sensor networks, as one of the areas that integrate multidisciplinary
characteristics, will be used as an experimental concentration area to initiate
innovative curriculum design, which helps bring in unique features to increase
the quality and visibility of the newly established computer engineering program
of the department. Although sensor networks have revealed great potential in
CSIP, the extremely constraint resources have largely limited their practical
deployment. The performance evaluation of computing models, protocols, and
processing algorithms for CSIP would help understand the capability of sensor
networks as well as provide theoretical guide in the design of CSIP algorithms.
Both the research and educational results will be made available through the
Twiki collaboration platform on the Internet. 1