* 0449295
* CAREER:    Fiber-based Optical Frequency Standards Characterized With Optical Frequency Combs
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Kristan Corwin, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/28/2011
* USD 417,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Stable optical frequency combs based on ultrafast
lasers have revolutionized measurements of optical frequencies. These combs,
when stabilized to the world's best microwave and optical standards, have been
used for many elegant investigations of fundamental constants. In addition, they
have been employed for the more practical applications of determining readily
accessible wavelength standards. Ultimately, everyone may have a comb-based
optical frequency synthesizer in his or her laboratory or factory. Indeed, this
research will contribute to making that dream a reality. Portable combs will
require low-cost, portable optical frequency references for many applications.
Such references are also needed to calibrate other optical frequency measurement
devices currently employed in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to
develop novel gas cells based on a hollow, low loss optical fiber, called
photonic bandgap (PBG) fiber. PBG fiber cells will be much more robust than
their glass vapor cell counter-parts. In addition, narrower absorption features
can be observed in these cells, because light can be confined at high
intensities with very low losses in the core of these fibers, facilitating
saturated absorption spectroscopy on the molecules confined within. Narrower
line widths will lead to higher accuracy. These portable, fiber-based standards
have the potential for accuracies of 10 - 100 kHz. By stabilizing a comb to
these references, we may potentially create radio frequencies more stable than
those of a quartz oscillator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The telecommunications industry currently relies on vapor
cells with absorption features ~ 1 GHz wide to calibrate wavelength measuring
devices. The robust nature of the PBG fiber cells proposed here will increase
the range of devices into which these molecular references can be included.
Furthermore, the higher accuracy of these standards will fill the increasing
demands brought on by increasingly dense wavelength channel packing. Combs
stabilized to these references may be incorporated in lidar, or as a stable,
portable rf source. The educational impacts will also be significant. Two
graduate students and an undergraduate would be employed in the research. The PI
will incorporate aspects of this research in teaching at the introductory,
advanced undergraduate, and graduate levels. The PI has already become involved
in outreach programs at Kansas State University that target high school and 6th
grade girls, and is working to recruit a talented minority college freshmen to
the lab.&lt;br/&gt;