* 0449184
* CAREER:    Computational Studies of Elastic and Dislocation Effects on Microstructure Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Mikko Haataja, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

TECHNICAL EXPLANATION:&lt;br/&gt;This grant is supported jointly by the Division
of Materials Research and the Division of Mathematical Sciences through the
Mathematical Sciences Priority Area program. The project involves the PI's
comprehensive career development program. The research part builds on and
significantly broadens the PI's successful work in the field of computational
materials science. The PI proposes several novel and interdisciplinary projects
for future research in this exciting field. Research topics discussed in the
proposal include studies of strain-assisted self-assembly of semiconductor
heterostructures on nanometer length scales, recrystallization kinetics, and
microstructure and dislocation evolution in pure metals and alloys on mesoscopic
length scales.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Developing predictive tools and
models for microstructural evolution is a challenging task due to the fact that
different physical processes operate across several length and time scales
simultaneously. Given the fact that there does not exist a single computational
approach that can describe all physical processes of interest, the PI will
construct appropriate physically-based continuum models which are simulated by
sophisticated numerical methods and linked to more fundamental (i.e.,
microscopic) approaches. In this sense, the approach described in this proposal
can be regarded as a multiscale one. These studies will lead to a better
understanding of nonlinear microstructure formation processes on atomic and
mesoscopic scales, and this in turn will push the frontiers of predictive
modeling of these technologically important systems beyond what is currently
possible.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. A successful scientist is both a prolific
researcher and an outstanding teacher and mentor. Thus, the PI's career
development plan contains a strong educational component. The PI will
incorporate his research topics into both undergraduate and graduate curricula
at Princeton University. The PI's research will also involve undergraduate and
graduate students on many different levels. For example, the PI will train
highly qualified and critically thinking graduate students who possess the
technical tools required to succeed in today's and tomorrow's science and
engineering. It is noteworthy that for graduate students who do not wish to
continue in academia upon their graduation, this line of research has much to
offer, since there is a growing need for computational materials scientists
within industry. Undergraduate students will be involved with the PI's research
through Junior Projects and Senior Theses, as well as through an outreach
program involving undergraduate students from schools that do not have strong
research programs. Additionally, the PI will incorporate his research within two
other outreach programs aimed at exposing high school students and teachers to
materials science. The results of this research will be made available to other
researchers and the general public through publications in peer reviewed
journals and active participation in conferences and workshops. In short, the PI
believes that the research and educational programs outlined here together
comprise a comprehensive and ambitious career development plan which will
significantly advance our understanding of complex microstructure formation
processes, as well as positively impact the lives and careers of undergraduate
and graduate students and post-doctoral fellows.&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
EXPLANATION: The research project involves developing techniques for
computational materials science and applying them to a variety of materials
systems such as semiconductors and metallic alloys. The education component
involves the integration of students at all levels into research, outreach and
integrating research results into teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;