* 0449258
* CAREER:  Fundamental Studies of Directed Assembly Leading to Innovative Processing of Controlled Thin Film Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2005,10/31/2008
* Ramki Kalyanaraman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 10/31/2008
* USD 406,000.00

The research objective of this CAREER proposal is to understand a novel laser-
based directed assembly approach and evaluate its potential as an innovative
surface nanostructure manufacturing technique. These objectives will be achieved
by combining experimental research with computational work. Ordering of Co, Ag
and Ti nanostructures will be studied on Si and SiO2 substrates. Ordering will
be achieved in a single-step by simultaneous laser-interference irradiation
during physical vapor film deposition. The assembly will be studied as a
function of laser and thin film growth parameters and will be characterized via
AFM,SEM, TEM and XRD techniques. Computational modeling via kinetic monte carlo
techniques will be used to understand modifications to film growth under laser
irradiation. The educational objective of this work is to promote fundamentals
of materials science and technology to a wide audience, including, students,
teachers and the broader community. This will be achieved through various means,
including: 1) a new interdisciplinary nanoscience course for undergraduates and
graduates; 2) by involving high-school students and teachers in summer research
in the PI's laboratory; and 3) through general science lectures in the local
community. These activities will strengthen and enhance the country's
contribution to technologies of the future, including, innovative manufacturing,
nanotechnology and thin film technology. If successful, this research will
provide fundamental and quantitative insight on laser-based dynamic thin film
assembly. This will enable a single-step process for nanomanufacturing of
ordered surface structures and will be: 1) simple to implement; 2) highly cost-
effective; 3) environmentally friendly; and 4) widely applicable to a range of
film-substrate materials. The education and outreach will lead to highly trained
students and a more knowledgeable general public, which are crucial in
maintaining the leading role of the US in future materials technologies.