* 0449684
* CAREER:  Education and Research in Nanomaterials Degraduation:  The Road to Molecular Fatigue Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Christopher Muhlstein, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 06/30/2011
* USD 640,000.00

The promise of revolutionary technologies has driven an aggressive investment in
the science of nanomaterials. However, the ability to effectively utilize these
materials is ultimately limited by how they degrade and fail. In this grant four
families of nanomaterials that have been shown to be susceptible to fatigue
degradation (brittle nanomaterials, ductile nanomaterials, organic monolayers,
and macromolecules) will be characterized using electron microscopy and
mechanically tested under monotonic and fatigue loading conditions using novel
sample preparation and testing techniques with the ultimate goal of identifying
the mechanisms underlying damage accumulation in these nanomaterials. Recent
studies suggest that nanoscale materials can accumulate fatigue damage, but how
and why such damage accumulates is unknown. As nanotechnology continues to
evolve, it will be essential to understand the fatigue behavior of ever smaller
structures, such as macromolecules and metallic nanowires, in order to avoid
unanticipated, in-service failures. The initial phase of the program will
develop techniques for the manipulation and selection of nanomaterials for
mechanical testing. These techniques will characterize the fatigue behavior of
Si nanowires and establish the deformation and fatigue behavior of single and
polycrystalline metal nanowires of elemental Au and Ni. The established
techniques will then be used to evaluate the fatigue behavior of assemblies of
macromolecules by testing organic monolayer-coated Si nanowires. Finally,
molecular fatigue will be explored during fatigue testing of carbon nanotubes.
The nanowires and macromolecules to be studied are currently in development for
a multitude of applications including electronics, sensors, and nanomechanical
components and structures, and the establishment of a methodology for testing
and identification of the mechanisms of fatigue in these materials will
constitute a significant contribution to the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
integrated education and basic research program will introduce students to
nanoscience research and related experimental techniques. Underrepresented
minority and women will be recruited for these positions to complement the
already diverse lab group of the PI (80% women and/or underrepresented
minorities). The results of this interdisciplinary research program will be
disseminated via peer-reviewed journal publications and conference presentations
to materials scientists, engineers, and physicists. The most effective materials
characterization techniques developed in this program will be codified by
proposing internationally recognized standards through the American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM) task group co-chaired by the PI. Finally, a series
of educational videos with supporting classroom materials will be produced for
secondary schools, targeting the 7th through 12th grades. This multimedia
package will be produced at the Penn State Public Broadcasting System station
for distribution through their video streaming website and national educational
video internet sites. &lt;br/&gt;