* 0449845
* CAREER:     Reactive Intermediate Promoted Polycyclization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Dean Tantillo, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2010
* USD 540,200.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Dean J. Tantillo of the University of California- Davis will perform
research that consists of both theoretical and experimental studies of
polycyclization mechanisms that are initiated by the generation of an organic
reactive intermediate, referred to as Reactive Intermediate Promoted
Polycyclization (RIPP) reactions. Polycyclization reactions, single
transformations in which molecules with multiple new rings are formed, are among
the most efficient chemical transformations known. In many cases, however, the
relative importance of geometric, stereoelectronic, electrostatic and
hydrophobic effects in controlling the rate, regioselectivity and
stereoselectivity of polycyclization is not known. The proposed Modern Quantum
Chemistry will be used to elucidate the mechanisms of both synthetic and
biosynthetic RIPP reactions in various chemical environments. Particular
emphasis will be placed on obtaining a quantitative understanding of catalysis
of polycyclization processes using the "theozyme" (theoretical enzyme) method
and on the theoretical design of new reactions not previously observed in nature
and not previously attempted in the lab, a strategy that Professor Tantillo
calls "ab initio reaction design". The overall goal of the proposed research is
to provide a detailed set of guidelines for designing efficient polycyclization
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program supports Professor Dean J. Tantillo of the University of California-
Davis whose projects described in this proposal are designed so that students
can construct complete stories that involve the development of theoretical
models to explain experimental observations, application of these models to the
design of new reactions, and testing of these designs through laboratory
experiments. The results of these studies will be presented at an annual
conference that will be organized during the grant period by the PI and his
students, which will bring together theoretical and computational chemists from
graduate and undergraduate educational institutions and from the pharmaceutical
and software development industries.&lt;br/&gt;