* 0449651
* CAREER: Development of a Structurally Based Plastic Flow Model to Enhance the Utilization of Bulk Metallic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Katharine Flores, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 09/30/2010
* USD 500,000.00

Bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) represent a revolutionary new class of engineering
materials with potential applications ranging from automotive and aerospace
structures to biomedical devices and sporting goods. These fully metallic
systems exhibit extraordinary tensile strengths, large elastic deflections, and
fracture toughness values an order of magnitude higher than traditional glasses.
Due to their unique, disordered atomic structure, BMGs soften considerably at
elevated temperatures prior to melting. This "homogeneous flow" at low stresses
permits the use of inexpensive polymer molding and forming techniques,
previously unheard of for high strength materials. Such inexpensive
manufacturing techniques give BMGs an additional competitive advantage over
traditional alloys. Structural reliability of BMG components, particularly in
safety critical applications, requires the capability for generalized plastic
flow at room temperature. While generalized, homogeneous flow occurs easily at
high temperature, at room temperature flow becomes highly localized in shear
bands. Rapid propagation of a single shear band can cause catastrophic failure.
Mechanisms for distributing flow over multiple shear bands are therefore of
interest. This requires a better understanding of the relationship between the
glass structure, particularly the local structure of "flow defects", and the
flow behavior over a wide range of temperatures and stress states. The
mechanical behavior of metallic glasses has been historically difficult to
characterize experimentally due to component size limitations. The high cooling
rates required to form the early metallic glass ribbons constrained experimental
work to specimens that were small in at least one dimension. The advent of bulk
forming metallic glasses, with characteristic dimensions on the order of
millimeters or centimeters, makes it possible for the first time to characterize
both homogeneous and localized flow behavior under the more complex loading
conditions expected in service. Flow in metallic glasses is typically understood
as a diffusional process involving the "free volume", atomic scale open spaces
in the otherwise densely packed structure. Variations in the free volume
distribution result in the formation of flow defects. Prior results by the PI
and others indicate that the observed softening during flow is associated with
an increase in free volume, consistent with model predictions. However, the
details of the glass structure, including flow defects, and the rearrangements
during flow and shear band formation are not well understood. The ultimate goal
of this work is to provide a model for the flow behavior in BMGs based on a
realistic understanding of the flow defect structure, similar to the
descriptions possible in crystalline materials. The proposed program focuses on
three areas of technical merit: (i) characterization of the homogeneous and
localized flow behavior as a function of temperature, strain rate, and stress
state; (ii) identification of the glass and flow defect atomic structure through
novel experimental techniques; (iii) description of the atomic structure
evolution during flow through computer simulations. This combination of
experimental techniques with computer simulations will provide the feedback
framework necessary to predict and validate the structure - property
relationship for flow in this unique class of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will have broad impact (i) as the
foundation for the accelerated development and optimization of new BMG alloys,
structures, and processing techniques and (ii) through the preparation of a new
generation of scientists and engineers. The proposed work will provide insight
into glass forming ability by clarifying the local atomic structure of BMGs as
well as identify structural changes that occur during flow. This knowledge will
in turn accelerate the development of manufacturing processes, including joining
techniques, critical for the widespread adoption of these unique materials in
structural applications. In terms of educational value, BMGs excite student
interest with their novel behavior and sports applications. Educational
activities will emphasize how the design of such advanced materials impacts
society and everyday life. These efforts are especially necessary for non-
engineering students because the discipline of materials science remains
underexposed to the general public. In the laboratory, proposed recruiting
efforts will focus on encouraging young women, particularly those from women's
colleges, to consider graduate work in engineering. Students directly involved
in this research will be exposed to cutting-edge science while obtaining the
solid foundation in the fundamentals of materials science required for
employment in industry and academia. &lt;br/&gt;