* 0449310
* CAREER:    Enabling Methods for Micro-Cantilever Based Nanotechnology
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Srinivasa Salapaka, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/2010
* USD 399,988.00

&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology is set to revolutionize the human condition through
fundamental contribution to science&lt;br/&gt;and technology. The ability to
control and manipulate matter at atomic scales wields an immense potential
-&lt;br/&gt;especially in areas of biology, material science and physics. Its
impact is already evident from the remarkable&lt;br/&gt;feats achieved in the
last two decades towards the goals of probing and manipulating matter at atomic
scales.&lt;br/&gt;The potential of this technology is evident from its proposed
use in quantum computing, quantum information,&lt;br/&gt;drug discovery and
tailoring material with atomic scale specificity. Micro-cantilever based
principles, (Atomic&lt;br/&gt;Force Microscopy for example) form the main
methods by which matter is investigated and manipulated at
the&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale. Devices based on these principles were the first to
demonstrate the feasibility of routine interrogation,&lt;br/&gt;control and
manipulation of matter at atomic scales. Even though impressive science has
resulted with their use&lt;br/&gt;significant challenges need to be met to tap
their full potential. This proposal is geared towards harnessing
this&lt;br/&gt;potential thereby enabling the nanotechnology promise to be
realized.&lt;br/&gt;Under the proposal's goals the PI will exploit a fundamental
idea that complex dynamics often manifest&lt;br/&gt;themselves as an abrupt
change in the qualitative behavior of the dynamics that can be employed to
provide&lt;br/&gt;unparalleled resolution in detection of changes in the
environment. Theoretical and experimental tools to understand&lt;br/&gt;the
complex dynamics and the parameters that control and trigger the abrupt change
will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;These parameters will be associated with the
property being detected.&lt;br/&gt;It is evident that robust broadband
nanopositioning is a necessity to realize the goal of interrogating
and&lt;br/&gt;manipulating matter at the nanoscale. Present methods
predominantly employ ad-hoc methods that result in&lt;br/&gt;large deficits in
achievable bandwidth as they fail to address the multi-objective concerns of
nonlinear behavior&lt;br/&gt;of piezoelectric actuators, coupling effects, the
effects of positioner dynamics on imaging and the uncertain
and&lt;br/&gt;diverse environment. The PI will develop a paradigm for robust
broadband nanopositioning with emphasis on&lt;br/&gt;nano imaging. This paradigm
will be utilized in realizing a new state of the art atomic force
microscope.&lt;br/&gt;The microcantilever force sensor provides for a unique
specificity with which bio-affinity between various&lt;br/&gt;molecules can be
unravelled. Based on this feature there are various combinatorial strategies
that utilize microcantilevers&lt;br/&gt;for drug discovery. Several of the
associated objectives fall under the rubric of resource
allocation&lt;br/&gt;problems. These optimization problems are non-convex and
computationally complex. The PI will develop a&lt;br/&gt;unique and attractive
theoretical direction for combinatorial resource allocation problems that
several groups in&lt;br/&gt;the control community are addressing. The algorithms
will be based on the central concepts of the deterministic&lt;br/&gt;annealing
method used by the data compression community. There will be an emphasis on
obtaining global&lt;br/&gt;optima in the presence of algebraic and dynamic
constraints on the resources. Related metrics will be researched&lt;br/&gt;for
the drug discovery problem in collaboration with a molecular
biologist.&lt;br/&gt;Data in many microcantilever based strategies are stored in
predetermined patterns. For example, the nanoarrays&lt;br/&gt;store bio-assays
in arrays of cells that are well characterized and in IBM's data storage devices
data is&lt;br/&gt;stored in the form of bits arranged in a prespecified pattern.
During the retrieval of the data the micro-cantilever&lt;br/&gt;tip geometry
convolves with the data and has the potential to significantly lower the spatial
resolution. The PI&lt;br/&gt;will develop methods for image restoration using
unique methods that he has pioneered that exploit the pattern&lt;br/&gt;in the
way the data is stored. Such a problem transcends AFM applications and the PI
will focus on developing&lt;br/&gt;a general framework and specialize it to the
AFM applications.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This proposal brings together
researchers from the traditional areas of engineering,
mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;physics and biology. It is at the confluence of dynamic
systems and control theory, control applications,&lt;br/&gt;numerical analysis
and optimization theory. All of the proposed goals are geared towards
nanotechnology -&lt;br/&gt;the successful completion of the proposed project
will give a good theoretical understanding of the devices
and&lt;br/&gt;translate into huge technological and economic gains. The
experimental aspects of the proposed research will&lt;br/&gt;be accomplished in
collaboration with Asylum Research, Bioforce Nanosciences Inc. and IBM Research
Lab,&lt;br/&gt;Zurich. This provides an opportunity for the labs involved to
learn the tools and methods of different areas and&lt;br/&gt;for outreach to the
industry. The graduate students involved will be trained in a unique
interdisciplinary manner&lt;br/&gt;that exposes them to the diverse set of
expertise mentioned. They will be trained both in the theoretical
and&lt;br/&gt;experimental aspects as is warranted by the proposal
needs.&lt;br/&gt;1