* 0449842
* CAREER:  Towards the Rational Control of Redox Potential and Catalytic Activity of Designed Functional Membrane Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Giovanna Ghirlanda, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2011
* USD 455,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Giovanna Ghirlanda of Arizona State University will design and study
novel functional membrane proteins with tunable properties. As a first step in
this direction, a heme-binding site has been engineered into a natural membrane
protein, Glycophorin A, which forms stable dimers by the association of its
transmembrane helical domain. The initial design, ME1, binds ferric
protoporphyrin IX with high affinity, exhibits a redox potential within the
range of natural membrane heme-binding proteins, and shows nascent catalytic
activity. During the funding period this system will be further investigated and
serve as the template for the design of a large library of mutants explicitly
designed to optimize heme binding and controlling the redox potential. The
library will be used to analyze the importance of the heme environment, its
hydrophobicity and the presence of aromatic residues in determining the midpoint
potential and the binding affinity within the context of the ME1 scaffold.
Building on these results ME1 will be evolved into an artificial enzyme for
monooxigenase and peroxidase reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports Professor Giovanna Ghirlanda of
Arizona State University whose research on membrane-associated proteins is a
relatively untapped resource for applications as biosensors and biocatalysts. A
deeper understanding of the relationship between protein structure and function
in the membrane environment will permit the preparation of artificial
miniaturized proteins tailored to specific biological and non-biological
applications. Dr. Ghirlanda will partner with an existing program at ASU to
implement a comprehensive approach that integrates classroom demonstrations in
K-12 schools, undergraduate training, and specialized workshops for teachers.
Undergraduates participating in this service learning internship and outreach
program will be trained in the PI's lab to perform classroom experiments
designed to spark an interest in biotechnology and to explain the underlying
concepts in a simple but scientifically sound manner. The program aims at
exposing K-12 students from diverse backgrounds to the college experience and
providing role models by facilitating contact with college students.&lt;br/&gt;