* 0449465
* CAREER: A unified study of singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Mattias Jonsson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,293.00

0449465 Jonsson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will use valuations to undertake a broad and unified, yet detailed
study of singularities arising in different mathematical fields, including
algebraic geometry, complex analysis and dynamical systems. A cornerstone in the
analysis is to encode singularities in terms of functions and measures on
suitable valuation spaces, that is, sets of valuations on an appropriate ring.
In the case of singularities at the origin in the affine plane, the valuation
space has the structure of a tree with infinite and dense branching. In more
general cases, it is expected to be a building, or projective limit of
simplicial complexes. Being fundamental objects in complex analysis, positive
closed currents may be approximated by varieties. &lt;br/&gt;As an analogue of
Hironaka's theorem, the investigator will study whether every positive closed
current admits an approximate resolution of singularities. He will also
investigate the corresponding question for dynamical systems defined by
holomorphic fixed point germs. Other problems to be addressed are semicontinuity
of multiplier ideals and degree growths of iterates of rational maps of
projective space. The investigator will design an undergraduate course and
continue his development of a masters course to suit the needs at the University
of Michigan (UM). Additionally he will engage middle and high school students in
mathematical activities, in particular through a summer camp at the
UM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Singularities play a prominent role throughout
mathematics, even when the primary objects of study are regular (smooth)
objects. An example of a singularity is that of a curve in the plane that does
not look like a line on a small scale, but rather as a cross or cusp, or even
more complicated.&lt;br/&gt;It is known that plane singular curves can be viewed
as "shadows" of nonsingular curves in space. This provides a way of
understanding complicated object thorugh simpler ones. Other examples of
singularities appear in dynamical systems, when studying the speed at which
iterative algorithms converge. Working with students at the graduate and
undergraduate levels, the investigator will undertake a unified study of
singularities in different branches of mathematics. In addition he will develop
a new undergraduate course and continue the redesigning of a graduate course.
Finally he will work with K-12 students, in particular by continuing the
development of a course in the framework of the Michigan Mathematics and Science
Scholars summer program for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;