* 0449373
* CAREER: Multiscale, Multiphysics Modeling of Synthesis, Manipulation, and Characterization of Si-Ge-Insulator Nanosystems
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2005,06/30/2011
* Gyeong Hwang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gyeong Hwang &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Texas-Austin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0449373&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project
aims to develop the theoretical foundations for the synthesis, manipulation, and
characterization of silicon-germanium (Si-Ge) insulator nanosystems, including
i) Si-SiO2 multi quantum wells, ii) Si nanowires encapsulated within SiO2, and
iii) Si/Ge nanocrystals embedded in insulator (such as SiO2, SiOxNy, high-k).
The research activities will focus on (1) investigation of the fundamental
mechanics of oxidation of Si nanostructures and Si-oxide interfacial properties;
growth of Si/Ge nanoparticles on insulator surfaces; formation of Si/Ge
nanoparticles in insulator matrices; and defect engineering and chemical doping
in Si-Ge-Insulator nanosystems and (2) development of predictive multiscale,
multiphysics models capable of linking the synthesis and structure of the
nanostructured materials systems to their properties in diverse process
conditions and environments, by integrating various state-of-the-art theoretical
techniques at different time and length scales including first principles
quantum mechanics, molecular dynamics, molecular mechanics, Monte Carlo, and
level set method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keys to successful completion of the
project involve (1) leveraging of the PI's ongoing research in first principles
calculations of surface chemistries, bulk dynamics, and interfacial interactions
and multiscale modeling of surface growth, phase separation, and ultrashallow
junction formation, and (2) the strong collaborations the PI has with
experimentalists/theorists in material research, who will share their expertise
in synthesis/characterization and electronic/optical property computations of
Si-Ge-Insulator nanosytems. Progress from this project will contribute to I)
realizing experimental control of the size and dimensionality fo Si/Ge
nanostructures on the atomic scale and ii) understanding the relationships
between the structure and electronic/optical properties, and will in turn iii)
guide the rational design and fabrication of Si-Ge-Insulator nanosystems for
future electronic and optoelectronic devices, without slow and costly try-and-
modify fabrication cycles. The fundamental knowledge and computational
techniques/tools from this project will be further applied to understanding the
synthesis, manipulation, and characterization of a variety of semiconductor-
semiconductor and semiconductor-oxide nanosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact/Education:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned educational activities
include (1) curriculum development to help chemical engineering students to
learn processing concepts with a solid grasp of the underlying physics and
chemistry so that they can play a vital role in emerging nanotechnology-based
electronic, chemical and related industries, and (2) outreach to promote further
involvement of women and underrepresented minorities in forefront research areas
and raise the level of community interest in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI takes part in the National Mathematics
Competition (NMC) for Korean-American students in grades 4-11, and plans to
organize a tutorial to introduce to the NMC participants a variety of emerging
technologies. The event has succeeded in stimulating students' interests in
mathematics and careers in the fields of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;