* 0449521
* CAREER:  Disorder and Symmetries in Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2011
* Victor Gurarie, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL EXPLANATION:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education in the field of condensed matter physics. One exciting
development in condensed matter physics is the realization that randomly
scattered impurities, always present in materials, can result in systematic
reproducible behavior, sometimes producing new physical phenomena which would
not have existed without disorder. Developments in the theory of disorder led to
successes in mesoscopic physics, and it also contributed to our understanding of
the quantum Hall effect, second order phase transitions, and other
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;In the research component, the PI will focus on the aspects
of the theory of disorder that are universal. In particular, the PI aims to
elucidate the universal aspects of low-energy bosonic excitations in a
disordered environment. Some of the most important problems in this field
include the "boson peak", the excess of phonons in disordered solids and
glasses, and the heat transport of magnons in random magnets. The PI plans to
study phonons in random elastic media as a model of disordered solids and
investigate the peak in their density of states at wavelength of the order of
typical disorder correlation length. The PI plans to study disorder in nanoscale
superconducting grains. At issue here is how a diffusive disordered system
responds to the introduction of a small number of strong scatterers. The PI will
study the second order phase transition in the presence of disorder using the
exact methods of conformal field theory. &lt;br/&gt;It appears to be
experimentally possible to create many-body condensed matter states in cold
atomic gases. Unlike those in typical condensed matter systems, the interactions
between the atoms can be tuned externally, and this allows to custom manufacture
atomic systems with various interesting properties. It may be possible to create
quantum Hall-like topological states in these atomic systems. Such states have
been proposed as possible building blocks of quantum computers. The topological
states in atomic condensates are expected to be far more robust than their
quantum Hall counterparts, making them more suitable for practical applications.
The PI will investigate different ways of creating a tunable non-Abelian quantum
Hall-like state in the fermionic atomic condensates. &lt;br/&gt;In the education
component, the PI will devise and teach a new set of courses designed to bring
many-body physics to all interested graduate students and bright undergraduate
physics majors. The aim is to teach modern theoretical physics in a logically
consistent way, avoiding representing it as just a collection of different
unrelated phenomena. In particular, the PI aims to devise a set of projects for
undergraduate students taking the class "Introduction to Solid State Physics,"
to help students to study the material actively, as opposed to passively. The PI
also plans to work with minority students through a strategic collaboration and
to participate in outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL EXPLANATION:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research
and education in the field of condensed matter physics. An exciting development
in condensed matter physics is the realization that randomly scattered
impurities, always present in materials, can result in systematic reproducible
behavior, sometimes producing new physical phenomena which would not have
existed without disorder. Developments in the theory of disorder led to
successes in mesoscopic physics, and have also contributed to our understanding
of the quantum Hall effect, second order phase transitions, and other
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;In the research component, the PI focuses on the aspects of
the theory of disorder that are universal, that is, independent of the
microscopic details of disorder in real materials and are likely to be found in
many different physical systems. The PI aims to investigate a variety of topics
from lattice vibrations in disordered materials and disorder in nanoscale
superconducting grains to the theory of phase transition in disordered systems.
&lt;br/&gt;It appears to be experimentally possible to create states in systems
of very cold atoms trapped by laser light that resemble the states of electrons
in various interesting materials. The interactions between the atoms can be more
easily tuned than the interactions between electrons opening the possibility to
custom manufacture atomic systems with various interesting properties. It may be
possible to create states in these atomic systems that have been proposed as
possible building blocks of quantum computers. The PI will investigate different
ways of creating cold-atom states that are of fundamental scientific interest
and may have impact on the emerging field of quantum information science.
&lt;br/&gt;In the education component, the PI will devise and teach a new set of
courses designed to bring many-body physics to all interested graduate students
and bright undergraduate physics majors. The aim is to teach modern theoretical
physics in a logically consistent way, avoiding representing it as just a
collection of different unrelated phenomena. In particular, the PI aims to
devise a set of projects for undergraduate students taking the class
"Introduction to Solid State Physics," to help students to study the material
actively, as opposed to passively. The PI also plans to work with minority
students through a strategic collaboration and to participate in outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;