* 0449560
* CAREER:  Phonotactics and Articulatory Coordination in Foreign Language Acquisition and Loan Phonology
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2012
* Lisa Davidson, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2012
* USD 400,098.00

CAREER: Phonotactics and articulatory coordination in foreign language
acquisition and loan phonology&lt;br/&gt;Why are foreign language learners
typically unable to eradicate an accent, despite years of practice? When English
speakers say the name of the pickle brand "Vlasic", why do they end up
pronouncing it "Velasic"? It is evident that speakers attempting to pronounce
non-native words either in foreign language acquisition or when borrowing words
from other languages face serious difficulties. While researchers of language
acquisition and loanword borrowing have long attempted to understand the factors
that contribute to non-native pronunciation, one little-studied issue that has a
substantial impact on the production of unfamiliar sound sequences (or
phonotactics) is the coordination of adjacent sounds. Coordination refers to
timing patterns in speech, such as the duration of a sound (like the /r/ in
"rat"), or how much overlap exists among the articulations of adjacent sounds
(does the tongue start moving to make the /a/ before it finishes producing the
/r/?). Previous research has shown that coordination patterns are language-
specific, which presents a challenge for speakers producing non-native sound
sequences like the /vl/ of "Vlasic": not only must speakers learn which sounds
can be combined into sequences, but they must also learn how such sequences are
temporally coordinated. With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr.
Lisa Davidson will investigate how foreign language learners learn to produce
non-native sound sequences and how language borrowers incorporate these
sequences into their native language. Acoustic recordings will be combined with
ultrasound imaging of tongue motion during speech to understand how the foreign
language learner's speech differs from the intended goal in the target language.
Another issue important both to language acquisition and to borrowing is how
speakers initially perceive the sound sequences that they are trying to produce.
The combination of information from perceptual data and from the way speakers
manipulate coordination in the articulation of non-native sequences will provide
critical insight into how speakers learn to produce foreign languages or adopt
new words into their native language.&lt;br/&gt;For the education component of
this project, graduate students at New York University will be offered classes
that combine formal linguistic methods with both sociolinguistics and
psycholinguistics to situate linguistics within a broader interdisciplinary
context. In addition, both graduates and undergraduates will gain valuable
laboratory experience. This research also benefits from interdepartmental
collaborations with language teachers who have years of experience in foreign
language classrooms. Through these partnerships, the results of this project can
be disseminated to those involved in the teaching of foreign language
pronunciation. Finally, NYU will host Ultrafest, a workshop that provides
investigators using ultrasound in the study of speech production an opportunity
to discuss both research and technical issues.&lt;br/&gt;