* 0449946
* CAREER: Theoretical and Practical Mechanism Design With an Emphasis on Public School Choice
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2005,10/31/2007
* Atila Abdulkadiroglu, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2007
* USD 160,818.00

Is there a fair and efficient way of allocating public schools among pupils? Can
parents manipulate public school admissions processes, and are school districts
able to avoid these manipulation efforts? Can school districts maintain racial
and ethnic balance at schools while providing parents with choice? The theory of
mechanism design attempts to provide theoretical answers to such questions by
studying the design of institutions through which individuals interact.
Practical mechanism design or market design, a rising field in economics, on the
other hand, goes a step further and designs and implements mechanisms for
complicated real-life problems.

This project aims to contribute to these two fields through the study of
problems of allocation of student places in public schools. The project
encompasses both theoretical and empirical areas of research. The first segment
of this project, a collaboration with the New York City Department of Education,
focuses upon the issue of controlled choice constraints in allocation and the
appeal of outcomes resulting from those constraints. The problem of
complementarity in this issue will be addressed through the development of a
theory of fair allocation. The design of an appeals process will, importantly,
yield a new class of problems involving hybrid models and consider the problem
of design efficiency. Further, research on related distributive issues will add
to the literature on atching. The second major segment of this project,
involving collaboration with the NYC DOE and Boston Public Schools, focusses
upon the design and evaluation of systems that address many of the theoretical
problems discovered and discussed prior. First, an evaluation exercise for the
public schools admissions process in New York will meet an increasing need to
report design efforts in economics literature. Second, a major multi-year study
of the Boston schools admissions process will assess the incentives and
efficiency of a system that has been in place for nearly two decades through
simulation exercises. The design and results of this study will represent both
an end-to-end process, from mechanism design theory to its application, and will
advance policy research and practice. The successful completion of the project
requires a highly interdisciplinary approach, both intellectual and social, with
collaboration across disciplines of economics, operations research, computer
science, and public policy. The participation of policy makers within the scope
of this project introduces new questions and access to rich data sets otherwise
unavailable to economists; access to such data encourages collaboration across
fields within economics, among theoretical economists, labor economists and
econometricians. The interdisciplinary approach of this project therefore will
yield the creation and maintenance of a network across disciplines and across
fields. The rising field of practical mechanism design provides immense
opportunity for interdisciplinary education at the undergraduate and graduate
levels and for the training of practitioners and public servants. One objective
is to integrate this frontier research into the economics curriculum and PhD
program, with courses open to economics and engineering students that provide
new research opportunities and new solution strategies by introducing the
economist.s approach to well-studied engineering problems. A website dedicated
to the training of public servants in school districts will be developed; it
will provide a forum for issues related to school choice, offer a database of
school choice plans throughout the US, and offer free software that will aid
practitioners in designing dmissions processes Intellectual Merit: The expansion
of knowledge on practical mechanism design would represent an important
development and cross-fertilization within the discipline of economics. First,
the practical mechanism design exercise introduces new theoretical problems and
policy questions. The project will push the frontiers of the theory of mechanism
design by studying these problems in a theoretical context. Second, the design
and implementation of mechanisms in real-life markets requires a systematic
study of institutional details; when these details expand beyond the boundaries
of economists. analytical toolbox, it will systematically incorporate
computational and experimental economics. Third, the results and the lessons
derived from the design exercises will be published in scientific journals,
thereby fostering the creation of a design literature, whose focus will differ
significantly from the theoretical literature. Fourth, a practical mechanism
design approach offers an opportunity to revisit long-standing questions with
new and rich data sets. Broader Impact: This project has a direct public
benefit: it will help school districts design better student assignment
mechanisms. It will also enhance policy makers. understanding of factors that
effect student achievement and parental preferences in school choice. The
development of new theories and design of new models and processes has several
other applications and extensions, including government or public-sector labor
markets.