* 0449732
* CAREER : A Research and Education Plan in Global Biogeochemical Cycles: Seawater Calcium Isotopes and Carbonate Deposition History
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2005,10/31/2007
* Adina Paytan, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 10/31/2007
* USD 442,849.00

Paytan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are provided for
a study of Ca concentrations and Ca isotopes in marine barite to study global
biogeochemical cycles back to the last glacial maximum, and then use this data
to better understand the Ca cycle and CaCO3 depositional history in the oceans
and to ultimately relate them to tectonic and climate changes. This will be a
two-part investigation. First, the calcium isotopic composition (delta 44Ca
values) of barite in box core-tops will be compared with the known constant
delta 44Ca of modern seawater to determine the fractionation between barite and
seawater, and to evaluate the constancy of this fractionation in a range of
modern environments. Then, a roughly 130 million year record of barite delta
44Ca will be produced, using existing deep-sea cores at a resolution of about
0.5 m.y., with higher-resolution sampling in a few key intervals. On the
education side the PI will develop student-focused problem-based classes and a
school-wide education outreach program at Stanford.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
field of study could provide valuable information regarding the sources and
sinks of Ca, including carbonate production/burial and hydrothermal exchange
reactions. Given linkages between the carbonate and carbon cycles, this work
could also yield valuable perspectives on the long-term history of ocean pH and
atmospheric CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;