* 0449139
* CAREER: Diversity Directed Fluorescence Sensor Development
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2005,09/30/2007
* Young-Tae Chang, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2007
* USD 338,117.00

Professor Young-Tae Chang of New York University is supported by the Analytical
and Surface Chemistry CAREER Program to create combinatorial libraries of
indicators for fluorescent staining of organelles and macro-molecular
assemblies. The PI will synthesize a library of new fluorescent styryl dyes that
will be investigated as fluorescent probes for biological localization in cell
organelles, selective response to biological macromolecules, and for the
development of an artificial "tongue" approach for low response small molecule
analytes. The PI has already prepared a library of styryl dyes and developed a
mathematical model for color prediction. This work will expand this library by
increasing the diversity of structural elements around the styryl moiety. He
will do this through the same solution phase chemistry already utilized, as well
as develop new solid-state phase chemistry. The key idea behind this research
work is the so-called Diversity Directed Sensor approach, which holds that the
various structural elements located around the fluorescent styryl dye moiety
will vary the selectivity of noncovalent interactions between the dyes and cell
organelles or biological macromolecules. The resulting recognition elements will
have applications in various sensing and chemical imaging
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal to chemically image a living cell is
a grand challenge. Production of small molecules that cause varying parts of the
cell to "light up" under a microscope hold one key to revealing the chemical
makeup of the cell. This research will expand our capacity to produce these dye
molecules. One application is the detection of amyloids in neural tissue, which
are thought to cause diseases such as Alzheimer's. The PI engages high school,
college and graduate students in this interdisciplinary research, enabling them
to publish in the scientific literature. &lt;br/&gt;