* 0449689
* CAREER:  Large and Multi-Dimensional Solutions of Conservation Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,08/31/2005
* Helge Jenssen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth J. Shaw
* 08/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

Understanding the properties of nonlinear Partial Differential
&lt;br/&gt;Equations (PDE) is a fundamental challenge in modern pure and applied
mathematics. The goal of the research projects is to gain new
insight&lt;br/&gt;into three specific areas of evolutionary PDE.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;(A) Large solutions of one-dimensional systems of conservation
laws:&lt;br/&gt;The combined effects of large data and nonlinear effects pose a
basic challenge as well as being of obvious importance in applications. Building
on existing work this project aims at giving further examples of blowup
solutions, understanding their stability properties, and identifying assumptions
guaranteeing global existence of large solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(B)
Existence and qualitative properties of solutions for particular
&lt;br/&gt;systems of multi-dimensional systems of conservation laws. Multi-
dimensional equations display an exceedingly rich&lt;br/&gt;variety of behaviors
and there is currently no general existence &lt;br/&gt;result available for
global solutions. Recent examples of blowup demonstrate that the small variation
theory for one-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;systems cannot be generalized to several
space dimensions. The &lt;br/&gt;research aims at a "bottom-up" approach where
insight is obtained from specific cases.&lt;br/&gt; The systems will be chosen
to provide simplified, but non-trivial, examples with strong structural
constraints. The goal is to create a toolbox of methods that can be applied to
more general systems. Both analytical and numerical tools will be employed to
gain insight into the structure of the solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(C) The
Navier-Stokes equations for fluid flow provide a basic&lt;br/&gt;model of
importance in a wide range of applications. The goal of this &lt;br/&gt;project
is to investigate three issues: formation of vacuums (cavitation), the effect of
including temperature dependence in the transport coefficients (viscosities and
heat conductivity), and multi-dimensional flows with large amplitudes. The
various projects will also address the significant numerical challenges one
faces in computing large or multi-dimensional solutions, and flows containing
vacuums. Vice versa, exact solutions&lt;br/&gt;will be used to benchmark various
computational codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects aims at a better
understanding of how nonlinear mechanisms &lt;br/&gt;interact with one- or
multi-dimensional effects in equations that are extensively used in physical
models, ranging from properties of materials and to fluid flow and meteorology.
While these issues are of independent theoretical interest they are also of
obvious importance in applications to Science and Engineering. Several of the
projects require development and testing of high performance computer codes with
&lt;br/&gt;important applications in everyday simulations. A combined approach
of analytical techniques, modeling, and numerical calculations will enhance
basic understanding of fluid flow and its applications.&lt;br/&gt;