* 0450106
* AGEP SUNY Phase II:  Building a Community of Science Scholars
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2012
* Robert McGrath, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 02/29/2012
* USD 5,552,510.00

SUNY AGEP Phase II: Building a Community of Science Scholars &lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SUNY AGEP is a coalition of the four major
doctoral granting institutions within the State University &lt;br/&gt;of New
York (SUNY) system; Stony Brook University (lead), University at Albany,
Binghamton University, and the University at Buffalo; SUNY Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (SUNY LSAMP) and Brookhaven National Laboratory. This
coalition works in collaboration with federal, state, and local government
agencies, funded programs, professional and community based organizations, and a
series of feeder schools. SUNY AGEP plans to build a community of science
scholars that will build on the highly successful and well-documented approaches
for recruitment and retention. The goals of SUNY AGEP in Phase II are to
substantially increase the number of underrepresented minority students getting
doctoral degrees and entering the professoriate in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines and to make the institutional
&lt;br/&gt;change necessary to develop a truly inclusive professoriate. Building
on the lessons learned and changes made in Phase I, SUNY AGEP plans to engage
faculty and STEM departments in a series of activities that will increase
recruitment, improve retention, address barriers in the academic and social
climate of graduate education, increase interest in and entrance to the
professoriate, and increase UREP STEM scholarship and program operation through
the growth of the National Center for Inclusive Education housed at Stony Brook.
In order to produce change in the order of magnitude necessary to meet degree
production, and enrollment targets, SUNY AGEP continues to design and implement
a comprehensive network of services that impact students, faculty, departments
and institutions. Services include: sharing information related to best
practices, financial support for research and professional development; a series
of community building activities, activities that provide academic and social
support; opportunities for students and faculty to attend professional
conferences to present of their research; the SUNY AGEP Summer Research
Institute and Summer Bridge Pro to recruit and prepare talented undergraduates
for graduate study and a range of statewide activities for students and faculty.
To facilitate these goals, SUNY AGEP continues to develop and implement: 1)a
comprehensive, timely and accurate data collection and tracking system, 2) a
comprehensive communication system throughout the &lt;br/&gt;Alliance, 3) a
program-wide evaluation that uses both formative and summative measures to gauge
program success and examine the program in the context of larger policy issues,
4) strong articulation in order to increase the pool of students who move
successfully from undergraduate to graduate institutions, and 5) a strong
support system within each institution to make SUNY AGEP goals become a
permanent part of the SUNY infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit &lt;br/&gt;SUNY AGEP is looking closely at curricular and pedagogical
issues and their effects on student success &lt;br/&gt;and choice of careers. In
addition, through the National Center for Inclusive Education (CIE), SUNY AGEP
will &lt;br/&gt;look to increase the scholarship about UREP STEM programs and
their effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt; Through
the assessment of activities and the work of the National CIE, SUNY AGEP plans
to add &lt;br/&gt;substantially to the knowledge base about UREP STEM issues and
programs. This in turn will help to not only &lt;br/&gt;transform the
institutions in the Alliance but also improve the overall climate for UREP
students nationally.