* 0450050
* Travel Grant(October-2004): Developing Cooperative Research Programs with Scientists in England and Greece
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Donald Baird, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2006
* USD 5,060.00

Proposal Number: CTS-0450050&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Donald G.
Baird&lt;br/&gt;Institution: VA Polytechnic Inst &amp; St
U&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant provides
funds for travel to England (Leeds University) for a planning meeting to develop
a cooperative research program (joint NSF/EPSRC) with colleagues in Europe(Leeds
University and the University of Athens). The title of the proposed program is.
Design of Long Chain Branched Metallocene-Catalyzed Polyethylene for Optimum
Processing and Properties. Although efforts will be made to draft the proposal
before the meeting, funds are requested for travel to Leeds University in early
October to complete details of the cooperative proposal. At least three days of
intense work will be needed to finalize the proposals and ensure that the
cooperative effort is fully developed. Funds for a follow up trip are requested
in the event additional work is needed to complete the proposals or to travel to
Greece in the event Professor Hadijichristidis can.t attend the working and
planning meeting in Leeds. Only by meeting on a face-to-face basis can the
proposals be thoroughly interfaced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The colleagues in England are the worlds experts in molecular theory for
branched and entangled polymers while those in Greece are the leaders in
metallocene-catalysts and generation of branching topology. Their expertise
coupled with that of the PI in extensional rheology and polymer processing will
allow us to develop predictive models for determining polymerization conditions
which will lead to molecules with the desired branching topology for optimum
processing performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The ability to
travel to Leeds to thoroughly develop the cooperative research program will
enhance the chances of generating a successful proposal. The proposed research
is of great practical value as it will allow industry to eliminate lengthy
experimental programs using statistically designed experiments for determining
the desired branching topology which will provide the optimum processing
performance and properties. The results of the research should allow companies
in the U.S. and Europe to compete better with the world in the polyethylene
market. The ability to keep graduate students at the forefront of molecular
theories for polymer flow and their applications will be considerably
enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;