* 0450300
*  A Ubiquitous Teaching Lab for Educating Next-Generation Engineers About Smart Sensing Technologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Le-Wu Lu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 10/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0450300&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Le-Wu Lu, Yunfeng
Zhang&lt;br/&gt;Lehigh University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smart structures
technology might revolutionize the design, construction and life-cycle
performance management of civil and mechanical systems and has been receiving
growing interests among researchers, practicing engineers, and decision makers.
However, most of today's engineering students are unaware of the remarkable
properties of smart sensors and many applications of smart structures
technology. The introduction of smart structures technologies during a student's
career is promising to the continued development of innovative structural
systems for the world's future. Sensing technology is a key component of smart
structures technologies. Pioneering work in incorporating smart structures
technologies into civil engineering curriculum has been done in Lehigh and the
experience shows that sensing technologies could be better taught to students
with hands-on experiments. This project aims to build a teaching lab with an
emphasis on smart sensing technologies in order to better achieve the education
goal and enhance outreach activities to a diverse group. The establishment of
this facility will provide invaluable opportunities for both research and
education efforts in the area of smart structures technologies. In addition, the
concept of ubiquitous training method featured by this facility will make
maximum use of the investigators' current and future research and educational
efforts in smart structures technologies to enrich the educational experience of
K-12 students and science educators, college students as well as practicing
engineers across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an equipment
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;