* 0450930
* Dissertation Research:  Ethnic Identity Switching Among Latinos in Two Queens, NY Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2007
* H. Russell Bernard, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2007
* USD 12,000.00

As the nation's ethnic diversity continues to grow, the distribution of
resources, ethnic conflict, and assimilation cannot be understood in terms of
neatly packaged identities in competition. Advances in communication and
transportation allow immigrants to maintain ties in both their country of origin
and in the countries where they settle. The great concentration of people from
diverse racial, ethnic and national backgrounds characteristic of urban centers
like New York City promotes the formation of inter-ethnic group networks and
inter-ethnic unions. An increasing number of people report being of mixed-racial
or mixed-ethnic ancestry in population surveys like the census. Taken together,
these factors suggest that more people can lay claim to multiple ethnic
identities. This dissertation project by a cultural anthropologist will examine
how Latinos in Queens, NY negotiate between multiple ethnic identities in
everyday contexts. The research builds on the proposition that an increasing
number of people regularly switch from ethnicity to ethnicity in normal
discourse, in an attempt to maximize their economic and political interests.
Close observations of participants' verbal interactions, interviews, discourse
analysis, social network assessment questionnaires, and household surveys will
be used to determine the contexts under with ethnic identity switching occurs
and how switching is done. While ethnic identity has long been understood by
anthropologists to be a contextual phenomenon, less is known about how the
process of ethnic identity switching works. The broader significance of the
project, in addition to contributing to the education of a doctoral student,
includes its contribution to an understanding of how people choose among ethnic
identities in day-to-day contexts. The research will specifically examine
language use among Spanish-bilinguals as an ethnic identity marker. The findings
will have practical applications for policy makers interested in refining
current methods for collecting and categorizing data on ethnic identification;
and educators interested in incorporating a bilingual approach in their
classrooms.