* 0450779
* Application of Cascade Processes for the Synthesis of Polycyclic Ring Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Albert Padwa, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2008
* USD 445,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The foci of this research are threefold. First, tandem
cyclization/cycloaddition with rhodium carbenoids will be used to prepare
natural products, for example the natural product komaroviquinone. Second, the
cycloaddition and cyclization reactions of thioisomunchnones will be employed
for alkaloid syntheses of representatives of the eburnamenine and aspidosperma
families. Third, domino ring-forming reactions using various oximes and
2,3-bis(phenylsulfonyl)-1,3-diene will lead to the formation of piperidine-
containing compounds such as halichlorine, a marine
alkaloid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this renewal award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational
activities of Dr. Albert Padwa in the Department of Chemistry at Emory
University. Professor Padwa will focus his work on developing tandem, or
cascade, methods for the formation of several carbon-carbon bonds and/or ring
systems in a single operation. A combination of cationic, anionic, radical,
carbenoid or pericyclic processes will be used to assemble complex target
molecules. Broader impacts of the project are in the area of training of
graduate students and the work has significant implications for the
pharmaceutical industry. &lt;br/&gt;