* 0450560
* SBIR Phase II:    Wavelength-Division-Multiplexed Surface-Emitting Lasers with Two-Dimensional Photonic Lattice Outcouplers
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Nuditha Amarasinghe, PHOTODIGM, INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2009
* USD 1,030,751.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II Project proposes to develop a
commercially viable monolithic Wavelength Division Multiplexed (WDM) two-
wavelength Grating-Outcoupled Surface-Emitting semiconductor (GSE) laser
emitting near 1310 nm. Phase I demonstrated the concept of WDM GSE lasers in a
cross-grating configuration emitting two wavelengths separated by 9 nm from a
common two-dimensional photonic lattice (2D-PL) aperture that can be efficiently
coupled to multi- and single-mode fiber. A low-cost package that can couple 2, 4
and 8 independent wavelengths from one or more 2D-PL GSE lasers directly to a
single fiber without multiplexers will also be developed on this program. The
knowledge required to develop these lasers requires expertise in materials,
optics, gratings, nanostructures, semiconductor processing, thermal transfer,
high-speed electronics, packaging, systems and telecommunications. Combining the
desirable traits of both edge emitting lasers (high power, reliable material,
low voltage, use of proven) and vertical cavity surface-emitting lasers (low
cost, wafer level testing, simple packaging, high integration ability), the
advanced research proposed is an innovative photonics technology that has broad
applications in telecommunications, information processing, data communications,
fiber to the business and home, scientific and medical instrumentation, and
computations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broader impact of this project is the
realization of very high data rates at very low cost, and the elimination of
barriers to deploying fiber to the desktop and to (or closer to) the home,
enabling ultra high bandwidth connections for business, distance learning,
entertainment, and computing. Each wavelength of the 2D-PL GSE laser can
presently be modulated at 3.125 Gbps and has the potential for 10 Gbps, enabling
data rates of 6.25 to 80 Gbps over a single fiber from a single transmitter
package. This research effort will provide an enhanced educational experience
for students working on this project. Students will gain an increased
understanding of materials, optics, gratings, nanostructures, semiconductor
processing, thermal transfer, packaging, electronics, and telecommunications
through both experimental and theoretical work. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;