* 0450719
* A Virtual Community of Construction Scholars
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Russell Walters, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2006
* USD 15,000.00

ABSTRACT FOR PROPOSAL CMS-0450719&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators develop
the technological backbone to facilitate the creation of a virtual community of
construction scholars. The virtual community concept allows construction
scholars to share their expertise with other academics and to create a greater
synergy to advance construction research and education. This web-centric virtual
community includes a robust source of information pertaining to each
construction scholar (e.g., contact information, researcher background,
interests, funding agencies with titles and project summaries, and links to
sample publications). In a virtual community such as this, it is easier for
researchers to identify others that share similar interests and promote
collaborative research opportunities such as publishing papers and working on
proposals together. The technological architecture includes open source
applications such as mySQL, PHP, and phpBB. In summary, the main objectives of
this project are to: 1) create a dynamic web site to support collaborative
activities among members of the Construction Research Council, 2) promote the
formation of virtual teams among researchers with similar interests, 3) promote
the exchange of ideas among construction scholars, 4) showcase the work of Ph.D.
candidates who are interested in joining the construction academic community, 5)
provide an avenue for the construction industry to learn about academic research
and its practical applications, 6) provide an avenue for funding agencies to
identify experts in different areas who may serve those agencies in a variety of
capacities including national committees and peer review activities, and 7)
serve as a pilot implementation that could be extended in the future to include
other ASCE Institutes such as the Structural Engineering Institute and the Geo-
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The construction industry, by its nature, is
fragmented due to the large numbers of subcontractors, material suppliers,
insurance agents, design firms, lending institutions, owner organizations, and
construction researchers. Any effort to provide greater synergy between and
among these groups has a significant impact on advancing knowledge and promoting
best practices to the construction industry. Construction researchers have
produced a significant body of knowledge in areas such as information
technology, construction materials, civil infrastructure, and environmental
issues among others. This knowledge needs to be shared with others in the
industry. This project is a first of its kind in terms of the scope and level of
collaboration with industry and government to create such an information source
for the construction industry. To ensure its success, the research team works in
collaboration with the Construction Institute (CI) to provide the most useful
product for the industry. The CI is interested in helping industry practitioners
solve problems using the expertise of construction researchers. For example, if
a construction firm is experiencing jobsite safety concerns, this web-community
will help the company identify experienced researchers in the area of
construction safety who can share valuable insights related to mitigating these
problems. The synergy provided by this virtual community of scholars helps in
advancing the discovery and understanding of construction research and promoting
teaching, training, and learning. It can also provide greater synergy between
researchers who are considered underrepresented and ones who are not by virtue
of knowing who is interested in doing what research. &lt;br/&gt;