* 0450320
* Collaborative Research:  Testing a Dynamical-Hortonian Scaling Theory for Flood Events on Whitewater Basin, Kansas
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Witold Krajewski, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2008
* USD 413,478.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Multifractal and multiscaling analyses of spatial rainfall
have become a standard tool to study its statistical and physical properties.
Almost all of the related studies are based on radar rainfall (RR) fields.
However, very little is known about the effects of the uncertainties in RR on
the estimation of multifractal parameters. Among the basic systematic factors
that could affect the results of multifractal analyses are the selection of the
Z-R relationship, the reflectivity threshold, and the dependence on the range
from the radar. In addition, the effects of the random errors in RR products
need to be investigated as well. In this study the authors examine the impacts
of systematic and random errors on the inferred multifractal properties of
rainfall. In investigating the effects of random errors, the approach followed
is to express the radar rainfall fields as a product of the true rainfall and
the error process, assumed to be multiplicative, lognormally distributed and
characterized by two different spatial correlation functions (highly correlated
and uncorrelated). This study indicates that, for some of the factors, the
sensitivity of the results on the RR errors is high and might even dominate the
outcome of the multifractal analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;7. Kruger,
A., R. Lawrence, E.C. Dragut, and J. Koladi, Building a Terabyte NEXRAD radar
database for hydrometeorology research, Computers &amp; Geosciences, 2004 (in
review.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The management and processing
of terabyte-scale data sets is time-consuming, costly, and an impediment to
research. Researchers need rapid and transparent access to their data,
unencumbered by the technical challenges of data management. We describe a
database and architecture that manages over 12 TB of Archive Level II data
produced by the United States National Weather Service's network of WSR-88D
weather radars. This work offers geoscientists an innovative, automatic system
for archiving and analyzing radar data that isolates them from the complexities
of data storage and retrieval. Data access transparency is achieved by using a
relational database to store metadata on the raw data, enabling simple SQL
queries to retrieve data subsets of interest. The second component is a
distributed web platform to cost-effectively distribute data across web servers
for access. This work demonstrates how massive data sets can be effectively
queried and managed.&lt;br/&gt;8. Kruger, A., and K. Kanukurthy, A cell phone-
based data logger and network for monitoring environmental variables, IEEE
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, 2005 (near submission)
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The authors designed a data logger for interfacing
with rain gauges to measure rainfall. Data is stored in SRAM and packaged along
with other meteorological data such as temperature and humidity measured by on-
board sensors and transmitted using a cell modem. Equipped with a real time
clock-calendar, ADC, 53 programmable I/O lines, two USART modules, I2C bus, SPI
bus, ISP and boot loading capabilities, onboard Flash, RAM etc., the data logger
provides unique capabilities not found in commercially available products. The
data logger could be modified with little effort for interfacing with other
systems involving data acquisition, storage and transmission. The data logger
was designed from the ground up to operate as part of a network, allowing for
flexible data transmission, flexible power management, and accurate onboard
clocks.&lt;br/&gt;