* 0450821
* Pragmatic Mechanism and Explanatory Pluralism
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2005,07/31/2008
* Carla Fehr, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2008
* USD 73,351.00

Project summary According to a mechanistic view of explanation, scientists
explain a phenomenon by revealing how it works or came to be. Mechanism is often
associated with explanatory monism, which is the view that a phenomenon is best
accounted for by a single explanation. If a phenomenon has one causal history or
one set of parts, and a mechanistic explanation is a description of that history
or those parts, then it seems natural to expect there to be a single correct
explanation for a phenomenon. However, biology is rife with explanatory
pluralism. There are many biological phenomena that seem to require, multiple
explanations. Rather than use this pluralism to characterize biology as less
scientific than physics, philosophers of biology have developed systematic
accounts of pluralism. None of these philosophical accounts of explanatory
pluralism address philosophers' best understanding of mechanistic explanation.
This is surprising since most biological explanations are mechanistic. Also, the
philosophy of biology and science studies lacks an account of the role that
epistemic factors related to pluralism play in the creation of mechanistic
explanations of biological phenomena. We need such an account in order to
understand explanatory pluralism in the context of mechanistic explanation. This
project will use the methods of naturalized philosophy of biology to develop a
view of mechanistic explanation, pragmatic mechanism, which takes philosophical
accounts of explanatory pluralism in biology seriously. According to pragmatic
mechanism it is necessary but not sufficient that a mechanistic explanation be a
description of a mechanism. A mechanistic explanation must also reflect the ways
that different biological disciplines individuate mechanisms and must be
consistent with local traditions of reasoning and experimentation in biological
research programs. The PI will write a 9 chapter book of interest to
philosophers, historians and sociologists of science, as well as biologists and
those interested in considering how explanatory strategies in science affect the
retention of women in science and our understanding of female biology. Further,
three articles will be written for particular audiences in philosophy, science
studies and women's studies. The research for those articles and arguments
developed in those articles will be developed in relevant sections of the book.
In terms of intellectual merit the project involves a close reading of the
biological literature related to the evolution of sexual reproduction, which is
a problem of central importance in evolutionary biology. Second, it develops a
novel account of pluralism that focuses on interactions of ontological,
pragmatic and epistemological factors. Third, this project involves an epistemic
and pragmatic analysis of mechanistic explanation, which is primarily studied
from an ontological point of view. Pragmatic mechanism advances our
understanding of biological pluralism by giving an account of pluralism that is
seriously engaged with our strongest theories of mechanistic explanation. This
view has implications for our understanding of interdisciplinary research,
scientific objectivity and the status of women in science and research into
female biology. In terms of broader impact the project integrates research and
education by involving an undergraduate research assistant who will take an
independent study course and will be used to develop a graduate course, Women in
Science. The PI will use this research to develop a graduate minor on women in
science that will make connections among faculty studying gender and science in
five science and humanities departments. This research will benefit society by
providing a set of prescriptions to help us understand and more successfully
engage in interdisciplinary research. Further, pragmatic mechanism ameliorates
many feminist concerns about mechanistic explanations of women's biology and has
the potential to help us conduct scientific research that more directly meets
women's needs. Finally, this research broadens opportunities and enables the
participation of women in science by developing an understanding of how the
social factors involved in scientific reasoning can be developed to better meet
the needs of women scientists.