* 0450876
* Energy Exchange between Nuclei and Electrons:  A Fundamental Chemical Question Addressed by Pure Electronic Rydberg Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Robert Field, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 03/31/2008
* USD 751,300.00

Robert Field of MIT is supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program
to develop experimental methods, theoretical models, and intuitive concepts by
which the mechanisms for exchange of energy and angular momentum between an
electron and a molecular cation may be characterized. Experiments will be
carried out on small, gas phase molecules in highly excited electronic states
with the goal of generating fundamental insights into the mechanisms and
strength of its electron nuclear coupling that are germane to larger molecules,
at all excitation energies, and in condensed phases. Multiplexed time-domain
terahertz spectroscopy will be used in combination with multiple nanosecond dye
laser excitation, in multi-laser schemes that will enable the probing of
molecular Rydberg launch states under supersonic molecular beam conditions. Pure
electronic spectroscopy studies of molecules of increasing spectroscopic and
dynamical complexity (CaF, CaCl, and nitrogen dioxide) are expected to
demonstrate the power of the combined nanosecond/femtosecond approaches to
characterize, with a minimum of spectroscopic detective work, important electron
--nuclear energy exchange mechanisms including their dependence on molecular
geometries.

Electron transport, electronic energy harvesting and disposal, and the making
and breaking of chemical bonds all involve the exchange of energy between
electrons and nuclei in molecules. Research outcomes from this effort have the
potential to lead to important impacts in the understanding of energy couplings
and flow in molecules. This project will enable effective research training of
students. As well, Field has written an expanded and refocused textbook in
molecular spectroscopy that is expected to be valuable for research and
education applications.