* 0450497
* SBIR Phase II:     A Device for Measuring Electric Field Strength from Dropsondes and Radiosondes
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* R. Paul Lawson, SPEC, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2009
* USD 499,970.00

This SBIR Phase II research project will provide research-aircraft and weather-
balloon flight tests a new, novel device for measuring the electric field
strength of thunderstorms and hurricanes. Electric field strength is a
significant factor in the development of precipitation and lightning, and may
even play a role in influencing the intensity of precipitation from
thunderstorms. Research aircraft flights that typically measure electric field
strength in thunderstorms and hurricanes are difficult and potentially dangerous
because of the hazardous conditions, such as lightning, hail and turbulence.
However, the new device, called an electric field module, can be contained in a
device called a dropsonde and dropped through thunderstorms from aircraft flying
above the storm, or attached to weather balloons called radiosondes that are
released from the ground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since over 7,000
dropsondes and 400,000 weather balloons are routinely deployed each year, adding
electric field measures to these devices represents a substantial commercial
market. Measurements using the new E-field modules deployed by the SPEC Learjet
research aircraft will be unique and open a new realm for analyzing the
structure of electric fields in storms. A more realizable goal is improved
aviation safety, by virtue of a better understanding of lightning discharges
from clouds associated with thunderstorms, particularly anvil clouds, where
commercial aircraft are often struck by lightning. &lt;br/&gt;