* 0450980
* Dissertation Research:  Linking Social and Cultural Capital:  An Analysis of Cultural Change in Two Q'eqchi' Maya Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,07/31/2006
* Edward Fischer, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Development programs in the Alta Verapaz region of Guatemala seek to provide
economic alternatives for the local Q'eqchi' inhabitants, improve their health
and nutrition, and protect the region's rich natural and cultural resources
which include rainforests, caves, and archeological ruins. Analyses of
development often consider program impacts and outcomes at a collective,
community-wide level rather than at the level of the individual. Using the
frameworks of social and cultural capital, this dissertation research project by
a cultural anthropologist examines how personal assets differentially position
Q'eqchi' individuals to take advantage of opportunities brought by development
projects. &lt;br/&gt;Social capital refers to the resources that an individual
or group has the ability to access through social networks, whereas cultural
capital is more diffuse, including education, ethnicity, and dispositions gained
through socialization. Research with Q'eqchi' participants and non-participants
of development projects in two villages will investigate how assets of cultural
capital such as bilingualism (Spanish and Q'eqchi'), educational level,
experience living outside of the village, and knowledge of natural resources
correlate directly with access to opportunities brought by development agents,
as well as how these personal assets position individuals to form relationships
with development workers which can lead to access to benefits. Benefits include
employment in tourism, training in cash crop production, educational workshops,
and travel opportunities. This comparative analysis will expand our
understanding of social and cultural capital, which will contribute to a theory
widely employed by economists, anthropologists, and sociologists. As
ethnographic research among the Q'eqchi' is limited, this research will also
expand the field of Maya studies. Broader impacts include new knowledge to help
development planners ensure the success of their projects, as well as the
advance in the education of a young social scientist. &lt;br/&gt;