* 0450418
* Collaborative Research: Labor Mobility, Relative Wages and the Growth of the Service Sector
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Kenneth Wolpin, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2008
* USD 142,554.00

Among the most striking changes in the U.S. economy over the past 50 years has
been the growth in the service sector. In 1950, 46 percent of workers were
employed in the service sector, by 1970 that figure had risen to 64 percent and
by 2000 to 76 percent. Over this period, the relative wage of service workers to
goods workers has remained roughly constant. Between 1968 and 1991 the average
real hourly wage in the service sector relative to that in the goods sector
ranged from .88 to .91, although there has been some upward trend in the 1990's.
In addition to these large sectoral changes in employment, the composition of
the workforce by gender and education have also changed markedly. Between 1968
and 2000, the proportion of total annual hours worked supplied by female workers
increased steadily from 28 to 42 percent. Similarly, over the same period the
mean level of completed schooling has increased by about 2 years; the proportion
of high school graduates increased from a little over a half to over 80 percent
and the proportion of college graduates from 10 to 25 percent. While movements
in relative wages by sector were relatively small, changes by education and by
gender have been more pronounced. The female to male hourly wage ratio began a
steady rise around 1980 from about .61 to about .75 in the mid-90's. The ratio
of the hourly wage of college graduates to high school graduates similarly rose
steadily from1.4 in 1980 to 1.75 by 1995. The general thesis of this proposal is
that these changes, in sectoral employment, in the composition of the workforce
by education and gender, and in the pattern of wages are all related phenomena.
The literature had generally treated these in isolation. The goal is to specify
and estimate a competitive multi-sector general equilibrium model of the U.S.
economy that incorporates the demand and supply factors postulated in the
literature to have been responsible for these changes in order to understand
better their fundamental causes. The model assumes a spot-market competitive
equilibrium. It builds on a long tradition of prior work. It extends Heckman and
Sedlacek's (1985) static model of sectoral choice in the presence of skill
heterogeneity to a dynamic choice setting, adopts the partial equilibrium
dynamic schooling and occupational choice framework of Keane and Wolpin (1997),
and extends the general equilibrium formulations of Lee (2001) and Heckman,
Lochner and Taber (1998) to allow for sectoral choice and aggregate shocks. The
model will be used to address the following issues. 1. To quantitatively assess
the relative importance of the separate demand and supply factors in the growth
of the service sector and the observed persistence in inter-sectoral wage
differentials. 2. To quantitatively assess the relative importance of demand and
supply factors in explaining increased education and the college wage premium. 3
To quantitatively assess the relative importance of demand and supply factors in
explaining increased female employment and the narrowing of the gender wage gap.
Broader Impact: The research will be disseminated through publications in
academic journals and through presentations at conferences such as the annual
meetings of American Economic Association and the Econometric Society. The
research findings, as they pertain to understanding the role of technical change
and the determinants of skill acquisition, will be of broad societal interest
and value.

