* 0450355
* SBIR Phase II:    Development of an Automated Ballast Water Exchange Monitoring System Using 'Through-the-Hull' Acoustic Modems
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2005,09/30/2007
* Kushal Talukdar, Harris Acoustic Products Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2007
* USD 497,767.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project is
aimed at building the first prototype of an automated ballast water exchange
(BWE) monitoring and reporting system. The system will use acoustic modems that
use ultrasonic acoustic energy through metal structures as the means of
communication. Wireless networking based on radio frequencies (RF) is not very
effective within enclosed metal structures such as the hulls of ships. The
acoustic modems can be used to overcome such limitations and can establish a
local wireless network for data transfer among sensors located in various parts
of the vessels. The through-the-hull communications technology is at a nascent
but proven state. Existing modems transfer data at 20 bits per second. The
Phase-I research showed that a data rate of 500 bits per second (or higher)
would exceed the data throughput requirement for BWE monitoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ballast water management is a global issue. The foreign
micro-organisms not only destroy the bio-diversity in the native coastal eco
systems but create problems for regional economies as well. The impact from the
introduction of Zebra mussels in great lakes is estimated at over four billion
dollars. Therefore developing an effective and inexpensive technology for
monitoring the ballast water has a broader impact on the society. It has the
potential to save economies that depend on coastal resources and ensure the
preservation of the local eco-systems for future generations without placing
excessive restrictions on international maritime trade.&lt;br/&gt;