* 0450744
* International Conference on Early Chemistry, Summer 2006, Philadelphia.
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2006,12/31/2006
* Lawrence Principe, Science History Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

Project Summary : A large international conference (ca. 80 attendees) on alchemy
and early chemistry is proposed for Summer 2006. The conference will last three
days, and include 22-27 presented papers, a roundtable discussion, and time for
study in the related collections at the conference site. The last such
conference was held in 1989 (Groningen) and since then the field has seen
explosive growth, significant changes to fundamental assumptions about the
subject, and heightened interest on the part of scholars in many fields. Thus
the time is right for a major new conference, one that will the evaluate recent
studies and their intellectual impact, map out future studies by identifying
crucial topics for development, and foster international , inter-institutional,
and interdisciplinary collaborations. The Chemical Heritage Foundation in
Philadelphia will host the event, manage all local arrangements, and provide ca.
75%of the funding (see letter of support). NSF support is sought for travel and
accommodation grants for fifteen junior scholars. A key aspect of the conference
is to identify and invite such promising younger scholars and to help them build
collaborative bridges with each other and with senior scholars. A tangible
product of the conference will be a volume of papers valuable to a broad
audience, and covering the current state of the field, recent studies, and
approaches to outstanding critical issues. The CHF has committed to publishing
the volume. .Intellectual merit: In the last 25 years, alchemy has moved from
the questionable fringes of the history of science to a central position. its
impact on the established sciences is being demonstrated, and its content is now
being taken seriously. But there remains considerable work to complete in order
fully to appreciate the role of alchemy/chymistry in early modern science and
culture. This conference will be a place for essentially all of the prominent
and promising scholars currently active in the field to share ideas, outlooks,
and talents, begin collaborations, and organize themselves for at least the
decade ahead in terms of identifying critical issues and approaches. The
proposed venue also holds some of the most important collections in the world of
materials directly relating to alchemy, which will be made available to
attendees. Broader Impacts: The topic of the conference has become a truly
interdisciplinary endeavor, and will involve and impact scholars in not only
history of science and technology, but also sociology, history of art,
literature, and cultural studies. A key aspect of this conference is to involve
and train younger scholars from around the world, by giving them a place to
express their findings and viewpoints, and to create international links both
among themselves and with senior scholars. The conference volume as well will be
a venue for younger scholars to present their work, and is intended to be a
fundamental text for training, education, and the advancement of the field over
the next decade or more.