* 0450213
* Workshop for Development of Minority Faculty in Engineering; October 16-19, 2004; Washington, DC
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Robert Ofoli, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 08/31/2006
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NSF Workshop for Development of Minority
Faculty in Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Poposal Number: CTS-0450213&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Robert Y. Ofoli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Michigan State
University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent American Society for Engineering
Education (ASEE) data on the number of engineering faculty who are African-
American, Hispanic or Native American (AAHNA) in Association of American
Universities (AAU) institutions in the US shows significant under-
representation, with members of this group constituting only 3.5% of the 8,400
engineering faculty at 53 AAU institutions that provided personnel data. Current
demographics and population trends suggest an increasing need to infuse the
engineering academy with AAHNA faculty members in significantly higher numbers
than currently exists, in order to guarantee that the profession has enough
manpower to continue to thrive and maintain its tradition of excellence. The
lack of AAHNA faculty in engineering classrooms has several drawbacks. It robs
engineering schools and colleges of essential diversity. It deprives aspiring
AAHNA students of role models and mentors. It provides little or no
encouragement to minority students who may otherwise opt for academia as a
viable career path, which may result in further accentuating the problem by
depriving the professorial pipeline of potential qualified minority candidates.
It puts US engineering education at risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
workshop is the first of a proactive series of intervention activities designed
to: a) provide support and guidance to young AAHNA professors in engineering
departments; b) recruit talented AAHNA candidates into academic positions in
engineering and provide them with the essential preparation required to ensure
their success and retention; and c) guarantee the availability of a diverse
manpower to ensure maintenance of excellent engineering education in the United
States. The workshop will provide targeted and essential programming for three
groups of participants: aspiring faculty in chemical and mechanical engineering,
new and untenured faculty in all engineering disciplines, and tenured associate
professors in chemical and mechanical engineering aspiring to become full
professors. This effort will provide a wealth of role models for minority
students who have an interest in pursuing academic careers. It will help to
diversify engineering classrooms across the country and benefit both majority
and minority students in their academic
pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;