* 0450035
* CAREER:  Frontiers of Continuum and Fracture Mechanics in Geology and Geophysics
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2009
* Yuri Fialko, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2009
* USD 508,000.00

Over the last decades, dramatic improvements in the quality
and&lt;br/&gt;quantity of geophysical and geodetic observations revealed
rich&lt;br/&gt;rheologic and brittle behavior of the Earth materials under the
wide&lt;br/&gt;range of stress and temperature conditions. These observations
exposed&lt;br/&gt;the applicability limits of the existing theories of
deformation, and&lt;br/&gt;opened new exciting opportunities in the field of
geological&lt;br/&gt;mechanics. The proposed research activities will focus
on&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary studies of the rheologic and fracture properties
of&lt;br/&gt;the Earth's lithosphere using natural and man-made sources
of&lt;br/&gt;deformation. The lithosphere is believed to respond to tectonic
and&lt;br/&gt;volcanic loads in a variety of ways, ranging from a
predominantly&lt;br/&gt;elastic deformation to brittle failure, viscous creep,
and plastic&lt;br/&gt;yielding. However, the bulk mechanical properties of rocks
that govern&lt;br/&gt;the large-scale deformation are still poorly known.
Detailed knowledge&lt;br/&gt;about the mechanisms of rock deformation is
essential for&lt;br/&gt;understanding a number of fundamental geological and
geophysical&lt;br/&gt;processes, such as the earthquake cycle, mountain
building, rifting of&lt;br/&gt;the lithosphere, volcanic activity, etc. While
significant insights&lt;br/&gt;into the constitutive properties of rocks have
been obtained from&lt;br/&gt;laboratory experiments, extrapolations of the
laboratory measurements&lt;br/&gt;to the crustal-scale deformation have proven
to be difficult. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed research will take advantage of recent
advances in (i)&lt;br/&gt;space-based geodetic observations of the Earth, (ii)
available&lt;br/&gt;computational power, and (iii) modeling capabilities to
address these&lt;br/&gt;problems. Robust inferences about the mechanisms of rock
deformation&lt;br/&gt;are important from a societal perspective, as they
directly bear on&lt;br/&gt;the issue of seismic and volcanic hazards in
populated tectonically&lt;br/&gt;active areas.&lt;br/&gt;