* 0450513
* SBIR Phase II:   The Visual Database:    Portable, Extensive Markup Language (XML)-Based Middleware For Media Representation, Interaction and Exchange
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,03/31/2007
* William Schroeder, KITWARE INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 03/31/2007
* USD 470,500.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project will create a
portable representational and interaction metaphor for digital media embedded in
a 3D context. Popular document technologies remain text oriented-that is,
content is organized into pages and viewed in reading order. The company is
creating a novel information exchange paradigm that is generally applicable to
information that is best understood in an interactive 3D environment.
Applications of this technology include embedded routes on maps, electronic
medical records, biological atlases, digital tours of 3D environments such as
buildings, and mechanical assembly/disassembly diagrams. Analogous to a PDF
file, but designed for a 3D interaction environment, the proposed solution
defines an open, portable schema that can be efficiently represented using the
portable Extensible Markup Language XML. In Phase II the company will specialize
the editor for geospatial application, atlas creation, and assembly planning;
addressing such technical challenges as large data and user interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful the technology will enhance the ability of
researchers, teachers, businesses, and consumers to record, describe and
exchange complex 3D content. This innovation has the potential to improve the
productivity of individuals and firms that create and communicate with such
information; and to enhance the effectiveness of researchers and teachers to
convey abstract concepts to others. This project defines a novel metaphor for
working with information that goes beyond traditional organizational metaphors
such as books and web pages. The proposed product supports complex 3D
information; and takes advantage of recent developments in 3D graphics and
visualization technology. The representational schema is simple enough to be
supported by small portable devices such as PDA's, and sophisticated enough to
support complex human/computer interaction in a 3D visualization environment.
&lt;br/&gt;