* 0450648
* SBIR Phase II:    Carbon Nanotubes Field Effect Transitors (FET) Platform for Electronic and Sensors Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Jean-Christophe Gabriel, Nanomix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 03/31/2009
* USD 1,075,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to design
and develop a molecular nano-sensor platform for researchers developing new
chemical and bio-sensors. The principal component of these devices will be an
array of single-wall carbon nanotube transducers on a silicon chip. The product
itself will be a sensor development kit comprised of a set of sensor chips, an
electronics module with a standard PC interface, adaptors for gas and liquid
sensing, data reduction and analysis software, and directions for product use.
General guidelines for the additional of specialized functionalization chemistry
and biology to the sensor chip will be included. The project objectives include
developing a set of 5-10 different chip architectures for gas, liquid and
biosensing together with modules for sensing in both gases and liquids. The CMOS
mask design will include as many as ten different architectures suitable for
different types of experiments and functionalization layers. The sensor chips
themselves will be manufactured on 4-inch silicon wafers and set into a standard
CERDIP package that fits into the top of the electronics module. Signal
processing electronics and software systems will be designed and integrated to
deliver digital sensor output to LabView(TM) on a PC. The research involved in
meeting these goals encompasses the design, prototyping and experimental testing
of each component of the development platform. At the culmination of Phase II,
the molecular nano-sensing platform will be validated by collaborative users in
UCLA, UC Berkeley and UC Irvine, and positioned for market introduction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercially this novel nanosensing platform will enable
research and product development in molecular level phenomena related to
chemical reactions and catalysis, chemical&lt;br/&gt;and biological sensing, and
photonics. The work described in this proposal will produce a valuable new
nanoelectronics research tool that will ultimately result in new discoveries and
products in sensing and diagnostics. Researchers seeking to develop new direct
electronic detection sensing applications and conduct charge transfer
experiments at the molecular level lack a robust, inexpensive experimental
platform. In most cases researchers must develop their own experimental
apparatus, interfaces and software. For those wishing to take advantage of the
sensitivity and flexibility of nanoelectronic arrays, fabricating the devices is
a formidable and cost prohibitive challenge. This project seeks to provide a
state-of-the-art nanotechnology-based solution in an ultra sensitive and
flexible detection platform.&lt;br/&gt;