* 0450514
* SBIR Phase II: Algorithms and Hardware for Real-Time H.264 Encoder
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Sassan Pejhan, VBRICK SYSTEMS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
novel algorithms and hardware accelerators, as well as a prototype, for a real-
time, high-resolution, H.264-based network video appliance. H.264 is the latest
video compression standard, jointly developed by the ITU-T and ISO/IEC (MPEG).
It is also designed for transmission over packet-based networks and to achieve
significantly superior compression efficiency compared to previous standards and
proprietary solutions. This compression efficiency, however, is achieved at the
cost of severely increasing the complexity of the encoder. Real-time, high-
resolution H.264 encoders are not feasible with current personal computers or
DSP-based approaches. The new algorithms and designs for hardware acceleration
will be targeted at video compression techniques that were introduced by the
H.264 standard for the first time. They are anticipated to improve encoder
performance by at least one order of magnitude compared to current
implementations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful a real-time, network
appliance with the compression efficiency of H.264 will have broad applications,
particularly in the areas of distance learning, remote training, security and
surveillance. The innovations resulting from this should enable implementers to
significantly improve the real-time performance of H.264. Limited bandwidth and
the resulting poor quality video have so far been an impediment to realizing the
full benefits of digital video. A real-time, high-resolution network appliance
with the compression efficiency of H.264 will bring digital video in the
mainstream by delivering high quality video to the endpoints of the network.
This will drive both business and consumer uses. It will provide the visual
communication crucial to making distance learning and remote training a superior
experience and compelling from an economic viewpoint - and therefore mitigate
geography as a barrier to participation in scientific and engineering
activities. Students can partake in classes offered at remote campuses while
rural K-12 schools can partner with museums in major cities to provide their
students with a richer education. &lt;br/&gt;