* 0450341
* Summer Dryness under a Warmer Climate over North America
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* C Schlosser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2009
* USD 492,153.00

0450341&lt;br/&gt;Eltahir&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most significant
potential impacts of the global warming predictions by GCMs is the dryness of
soil moisture in mid-latitudes during summer (e.g. Manabe et al., 1981;
Wetherald and Manabe 1995). If this prediction proves to be true, it would have
serious implications on water resources and agriculture in some of the most
productive regions of the world. However, this prediction is also one of the
least certain due to the complex set of interactions and feedbacks that shape
the climatology of soil moisture in mid-latitudes (Seneviratne et al., 2002).
These interactions involve soil hydrology, moist convection, and cloud dynamics.
All are processes that need to be better represented in climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of soil hydrology in regulating the
process of soil moisture drying will be investigated by studying the following
hypothesis. If summer evaporation is limited by the availability of radiative
energy to fuel the transformation of liquid water at the surface into water
vapor, an atmospheric warming would lead to an increase in evaporation. Further,
if this increase in evaporation is larger than the corresponding increase in
rainfall, it would result in an initial drying of the soil moisture, which could
be amplified by the soil moisture-rainfall feedback mechanism. However, if
summer evaporation is limited by soil hydrology, or if the initial increase in
evaporation is smaller than the corresponding increase in rainfall, any warming
would result in little or no drying. We hypothesize that the latter set of
conditions are more prevalent over North America. In the course of the proposed
project, we will test this hypothesis to determine if, and under what
conditions, would soil hydrology play any role in this global change process.
Results of any study on summer dryness would depend to some extent on the skill
of the land surface model. In the proposed project, the Global Soil Wetness
Project Phase 2 simulations will be evaluated over North America by comparing to
observations. Our analysis will determine the skill to which the land models
reproduce the observed climate of surface hydrology. From these results, a more
comprehensive analysis will look closely at the mechanisms by which hydrologic
anomalies are captured by the models, and whether there is uniqueness in model
features that results in high skill. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has
several intellectual merits. We propose to focus on the role of hydrologic
processes in the predicted drying of soil moisture in mid-latitudes during
summer. We will consider several potential global warming scenarios in a
modeling approach that focuses on North America. We will test the significance
of the drying process, and we will attempt to identify the physical mechanisms
responsible for it. We propose to use a regional climate model that has been
calibrated and tested against remote sensing data and other sources of
observations (Pal and Eltahir, 2001). The broader impacts anticipated from the
proposed activity include a better understanding and reduction in uncertainty
about a key global change process, and education of graduate students in the
general area of global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;