* 0450532
* SBIR Phase II: Dye Co-Sensitizer Combinations for Increasing the Efficiency of Dye-Sensitized Titania Nanoparticles in Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Russell Gaudiana, KONARKA TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 01/31/2009
* USD 1,011,917.00

This Small Business Innovation Research(SBIR) Phase II project aims to
commercialize lightweight, flexible, affordable solar cells and modules that
efficiently generate electricity from sunlight or indoor room light. These cells
are based on dye-sensitized titania which is coated on a flexible substrate at
high speed in a continuous coating, laminating process. The overall objective of
Phase II is to raise the cell efficiency from its current 7% to 10% or higher,
thereby raising the module efficiency from 5% to over 8%. To accomplish this,
the ability of the sensitizing dyes to harvest a much larger number of available
photons and convert them into electrons must be increased. In Phase I of this
program, a new class of sensitizing dyes that cover a larger portion of the
solar spectrum, have larger absorptivity than the currently used ruthenium-based
dyes was discovered. In addition, materials that have similar molecular
structures to those of the new sensitizing dyes, and act as co-sensitizers by
boosting electron injection from the dye to the titania, are co-adsorbed with
the dyes on the surface of the titania. It is anticipated that the combination
of these materials will bring the cell and modules performance to the desired
level.

Commercially, the project will result in an inexpensive, efficient, flexible
photovoltaic (PV) technology that can be integrated into consumer products.
Therefore a renewable source of energy could be used to power products,
minimizing the battery capacity and disposal requirements, and ultimately
delivering power to building structures, avoiding emissions associated with
fossil fuels. Security is a broad benefit on two levels. First, grid instability
demonstrated by widespread blackouts in 2003 emphasizes the need for distributed
power in our national grid. Secondly, growing homeland security concerns
underscore the importance of wireless networks of sensors, cameras, and other
monitoring systems for building and border security. Photovoltaics are uniquely
suited to serve these distributed applications.



