* 0450215
* Collaborative Research: Comprehensive Molecular, Genetic and Cytogenetic Analysis of Transposon-Induced Chromosomal Rearrangements in Maize
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* David Weber, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2010
* USD 281,474.00

Collaborative Research: Comprehensive Molecular, Genetic and Cytogenetic
Analysis of Transposon-Induced Chromosomal Rearrangements in
Maize&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transposons are segments of DNA that can move
(transpose) from one site to another in the genome. Sometimes the ends of
separate transposons will attempt to transpose; this alternative transposition
reaction can cause large rearrangements of chromosomes. The aims of this project
are to determine which arrangements of transposons can give rise to alternative
transposition reactions, and what kinds of chromosomal aberrations can be
produced. The research will be conducted using maize (corn), an ideal model
system in which transposition events can be detected by changes in kernel color.
The results should be relevant to other organisms, including humans. The results
of this project will help to elucidate basic principles of the biology of
transposable elements and their impact on genome structure and expression:
First, this research will lead to a greater understanding of the potential role
of transposable elements in genome diversification and speciation. Second, the
results could help to explain the origin of spontaneous chromosomal aberrations
that are often associated with certain human genetic diseases including cancer.
Third, the results may provide the basis for development of new methods for
studying eukaryotic chromosomes. An important aspect of this project is the use
of complementary approaches to bridge the molecular and chromosomal levels of
structure. In addition, students will be trained in methods of chromosome
analysis through the research project and workshops offered by the
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;