* 0450948
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Opening Common-Property Forests to Timber Production
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2006
* Elinor Ostrom, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2006
* USD 11,974.00

Indigenous groups who have managed and conserved forest lands for centuries are
increasingly motivated by policy changes to open their common-property forests
for timber production. Forest groups that have made this choice have to compete
with other forestry enterprises, while at the same time struggle to solve the
social dilemmas that motivate some households to take advantage of others. A
cultural anthropology student who specializes in public policy at Indiana
University will study which systems of governance can explain why some
indigenous forest groups do achieve greater social, economic, and ecological
outcomes from timber production. This research will take advantage of the
experience of indigenous forest groups from Bolivia, a country with
decentralized forestry. This research will assess the influence of commercial
policies on indigenous societies' decisions about forest use; compare indigenous
forest groups of the Bolivian lowlands to examine to what extent timber use
potential and governance incentives yield greater outcomes; and evaluate the
meaning of successful commercial community forestry. This will be undertaken
using a combination of formal and informal interviews, participant observation,
focal groups' workshops, and archival research. By linking institutional
analysis to the commercial forestry literature, this proposed research is aimed
to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the factors influencing
commercial community timber production. This research contributes to public
policy designed to help indigenous communities gain more sustainable benefits
from timber production. The research will also encourage horizontal debate among
groups of forest users to overcome problems encountered in commercial community
timber production.&lt;br/&gt;