* 0450977
* Acquisition of microsampling equipment and peripherals to create the NAU Earth Materials Microanalytical (EMMA) Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2005,06/30/2008
* James Sample, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2008
* USD 190,566.00

0450977&lt;br/&gt;Reid&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports acquisition of
equipment for research on microscale heterogeneity in trace element, radiogenic,
and stable isotopic compositions of natural materials. The Department of Geology
at Northern Arizona University will acquire a Nd-YAG UV laser and desolvation
nebulizer sample introduction systems to be interfaced to an existing multi-
collector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS), a
microdrill, and a continuous flow system to be mated to an existing stable
isotope ratio mass spectrometer (SIRMS). These peripherals will allow for
micron-scale sampling of microgram sized samples that can be directly introduced
into the mass spectrometers. The UV laser ablation system and desolvation
nebulizer will support research on the residence time and chemical evolution of
crustal magma chambers that requires radiogenic isotope geochronologic (e.g.,
U-series disequilibria) and trace element analysis of microscale, concentric
growth rims of accessory phases (e.g., zircon and allanite). The microdrill and
continuous flow system will support research on pathways and geochemical
evolution of crustal fluids driven by tectonic forces at active margins.
Additional research that would be supported include: themobarometric
investigations of the Proterozoic crustal assembly of the North American
Continent; stratigraphic correlation and evaluation of the distal extent of
Quaternary tephras in the Western U.S.; and "forensic" studies of the transport
and fate of radioactive fallout.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;