* 0450620
* SBIR Phase II: High-resolution, high-precision 193-nm photomask phase metrology system
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Andrew Merriam, ACTINIX
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 01/31/2008
* USD 736,342.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to design
and construct an ultra-high-resolution, high-precision phase-shift integrated
measurement system suitable for metrology of advanced phase-shifting photomasks.
A number of semiconductor manufacturers now expect to progress from the 90 nm
through the 45 nm nodes using an exposure wavelength of 193 nm. Advanced
photolithographic techniques are necessary to print these sub-wavelength
features. Phase-shifting photomasks, i.e. those in which the
optical&lt;br/&gt;thickness, as well as the opacity is controlled, are a key
reticle enhancement technology. Fast and accurate metrology of critical-layer
phase-shift masks is becoming necessary both for process control and repair
validation, but the enabling tools do not yet exist. The goal of this Phase II
program is to integrate the actinic high-repetition rate laser built in Phase I
into an interferometric laser microscope involving the design, construction, and
integration of a stable&lt;br/&gt;phase-shifting interferometer and laser
microscope, and the incorporation and optimization of phase-shifting
interferometry signal processing algorithms. The integrated optical system will
enable phase metrology on advanced photomasks, with the measurement precision
and spatial resolution required by the International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors (ITRS), mask makers and mask users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercially, the primary beneficiary of the
Phase II photomask phase metrology system is the semiconductor optical
lithography industry. The ITRS 'roadmap' for the 90-nm node and beyond requires
measurements of photomask optical path difference with sub-0.4 degree precision.
This metrology must be performed at spatial resolution scales consistent with
feature sizes of the respective technology nodes, and for both isolated and
densely-packed structures. No commercial metrology tools yet exist which satisfy
these demands. The Phase II high-precision metrology system will enable
manufactures to characterize, predict, and control mask-loading effects and
other repair and process control issues essential to the reliable fabrication of
phaseshifting masks. It is also likely that the integrated phase metrology
system will find utility in the area of nano-MEMS testing and other nano-scale
interferometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;