* 0450168
* Functional Characterization of an Arabidopsis Aspartic Protease That Regulates Cell Survival and Cell Death
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2008
* Yiji Xia, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 12/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

Abstract

PI: Yiji Xia Proposal number: 0450168 Title: Functional Characterization of an
Arabidopsis Aspartic Protease That Regulates Cell Survival and Cell Death

The death and survival of a cell are precisely controlled during an organism's
development and in its response to environments. Many human diseases are caused
by a failure in regulating normal cell death processes. Programmed cell death
(PCD) is also associated with a variety of developmental processes in plants.
However, the plant-encoded molecular machinery that regulates and executes PCD
remains largely unknown. The proposed study employs a combination of molecular,
genetic, and cell biology approaches to dissect the PCD process mediated by the
aspartic protease PCS1, a protein-processing enzyme, using the model plant
Arabidopsis. PCS1 has been found to function as an anti-cell death component.
Loss of PCS1 function causes excessive cell death of developing gametophytes and
embryonic tissues, whereas its over-expression leads to blockage of some normal
cell death processes. Cell biology tools will be used to characterize the
PCS1-mediated cell death process. Genetic and molecular approaches will be used
to identify other components involved in the PCD pathway. The study will advance
our understanding of molecular mechanisms that regulate cell death and survival
in developmental processes in plants. This project will also make available a
useful tool for engineering agriculturally important traits of crops and provide
an excellent cross-disciplinary training opportunity for students and post-
doctoral fellows.