* 0450339
* No Longer 'A Dream Deferred:' Greater Minority STEM Participation Through Academic Opportunity and Institutional Change
* EHR,HRD
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2014
* Julian Tyson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Leddy
* 02/28/2014
* USD 8,780,323.00

The Northeast Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (NEAGEP)
will implement a variety of innovative and proven strategies for the
recruitment, admission, retention and preparation for faculty positions of
underrepresented minority graduate students in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM). For the past five years, a number of these strategies
were developed and evaluated by the faculty at five Alliance (University of
Massachusetts Amherst, Boston University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Pennsylvania State University and Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey)
and five Partner (Jackson State University, Lincoln University, Long Island
University, Medgar Evers College and the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez)
Institutions. NEAGEP will be expanded and enhanced by the addition of the five
other major land-grant universities in the Northeast (the Universities of
Connecticut, Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont) into the Alliance.
Two new Partner Institutions, Bennett College and, beginning in the second year
of the new funding cycle, Trinity College, will also join NEAGEP. Together, the
New England Land-Grant Universities bring to NEAGEP the resources of 6,000
faculty members, a half-billion dollars in annual sponsored research,
connections to 26 additional minority-serving (predominantly African American
and Hispanic) institutions and access to the growing Native American population
in northern New England. Building upon the foundation laid and the experience
gained in the past five years, this expanded Alliance will more effectively
coordinate efforts to match graduate students' interests and skills with a broad
range of graduate programs. It will also create a critical mass of minority
graduate students with similar research interests. To address the national
shortage and increase the number of underrepresented STEM minority doctoral
students, NEAGEP proposes the following strategies:

Recruitment: (a) design a common supplementary NEAGEP application; (b)
facilitate faculty involvement in Diversity Teams; (c) revise practices in
summer research programs; (d) continue fall recruiting weekends; (e) ensure
multi-institutional presence at national meetings; (f) invite Partner faculty to
research residencies at Alliance Institutions; (g) hold Partner Science Days at
Partner Institutions;

Admissions: (a) initiate Rapid Response contacts; (b) involve NEAGEP graduate
program directors; (c) expand NEAGEP Research Internships; (d) offer NEAGEP
first and last year research assistantships;

Retention: (a) participate in the Graduate School mentoring grant competition;
(b) offer mentoring workshops; (c) set up mentoring website; (d) rotate NEA Day
among Alliance Institutions;

Future faculty preparation: (a) integrate teaching and research preparation for
underrepresented minority STEM graduate students and postdoctoral fellows; and
(b) offer career counseling and placement assistance.

Not all strategies will be undertaken by all institutions, but all will embark
on some activities in each area and take part in cross-cutting initiatives such
as: (a) implementation of a NEAGEP-wide Networking Group; (b) expansion of the
NEAGEP office structure and functions; (c) execution of NEAGEP-wide sharing of
admissions information; (d) establishment of joint Partner-Alliance doctoral
programs; and (e) participation in an Alliance-wide comprehensive evaluation.

Intellectual Merit: The NEAGEP strategies proposed are both innovative and
transferable. The underlying principle is that they are faculty-driven and
championed by the administration. Implementation of these strategies will
advance fundamental cultural change in academia and promote the success of
underrepresented minority students in STEM doctoral programs. The prior success
with the Alliance structure provided the impetus for the logical extension of
activities to the neighboring New England Land-Grant Universities. By extending
the Alliance activities to this group, hundreds more underrepresented minority
STEM students and beginning faculty will benefit.

Broader Impact: The number of U.S. citizens applying for graduate study in STEM
disciplines is inadequate to meet the growing national needs in these areas.
This problem is exacerbated by the fact that the number of international
graduate students applying to STEM graduate programs has decreased by over 30%
nationwide this year. The number of U.S. STEM scientists needs to be increased
if this country is to remain competitive on the world stage. The fundamental,
and most important, impact of this program will be to create an environment in
which minority persons can succeed in the STEM disciplines in the U.S. The
proposed efforts will lead to the successful recruitment, admission and
retention of a diverse group of graduate students and will encourage these
students to pursue careers in the professoriate.