* 0450567
* SBIR Phase II:      A Model for Virtual Dialogues with Master Teachers
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* William Harless, INTERACTIVE DRAMA INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 02/29/2008
* USD 728,680.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project describes
software that combines speech recognition, digital video, and personal computer
technologies to allow PC users to have "face-to-face" dialogues with video
characters that are real people. This software, called Conversim (Registered
Trademark), incorporates an independent speaker recognition engine so that any
English-speaking user can spontaneously say the words and phrases known to the
system and be understood. All Conversim (RT) programs include a non-directive,
intelligent prompting algorithm. Each time the virtual character responds to the
user, the system dynamically selects statements and questions that are
specifically relevant to the character's last response and then displays three
choices in a rhythmic scroll. Between questions, the character's active image
remains on the monitor as if waiting for the next question. The Conversim (RT)
dialogue model is unique since it enables the user to have a virtual
conversation with a real person whose intellect, personality, and personae are
intact and available. This very personal model opens the door to numerous
innovative applications in education. Scientific research has shown that most
users enjoy the virtual dialogue experience; many have significant, often
accelerated, learning gains; and almost all feel as though they have met the
person with whom they have been "talking." These findings strongly indicate the
method merits further research in conventional educational settings.

This model represents a new paradigm in education, one that allows the student
to learn through a one-on-one interview of the master teacher. The paradigm
involves non-directive, independent learning by conducting face-to-face
dialogues with master teachers in cyberspace, who are always present, always
available, and always willing to converse with people who wish to engage them.
Multimedia presentations can be used in concert with the dialogue to clarify
concepts and complex topics. Also, the power of the computer for tracking and
innovative, dynamic evaluation strategies are inherent in this model. The broad
objective is to make this model and this new paradigm available in all
educational institutions that would benefit from its use. It has potential to
provide a means for students everywhere to gain access to and learn by engaging
in dialogue with some of the best minds in the country; to be used to educate a
broad range of students, from high school to the post-graduate level; to help
students whose education is restricted by geographic location or economics; to
enhance learning for all students by making them active participants in the
learning process; and to provide high-quality education while significantly
reducing per student costs.