* 0450667
* SGER: Microbial Dating of Cracks
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Charles Dowding, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2006
* USD 53,640.00

Determination of the age of cracks is an important issue. For instance, millions
of dollars are spent on arbitration and litigation arising from damage claimed
to have been produced by some recent adjacent activity such as heavy traffic,
construction, blasting, etc. or some recent natural phenomenon, such as an
earthquake, hurricane, flood, etc. Once the crack is identified as a concern,
focus most often turns to an investigation of the age of the crack relative to
the time of the unusual event. Such age dating would then allow more precise
linkage to causation. Current methods used to date cracks are often subjective,
limited in their application and yield a relative age, rather than an absolute
age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will investigate a new biological method
to determine crack age. It will specifically determine the feasibility of
sampling of biota from a crack surface. Success in this initial phase will form
the foundation which will allow the complete study of the hypothesis that the
amount of biomass on a given surface is an indication of the amount of time that
has passed since the surface was exposed. The hypothesis is based upon the
premise that the change in the amount of biomass on a surface over time can be
quantifiably measured. A comparable procedure with macroorganisms, such as
insects, is currently used in forensic science to determine time of death.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The procedure combines two rarely connected fields in
science: microbiology and construction/materials engineering to establish the
crack age from the accumulation of biomass. Preliminary work shows that common
laboratory procedures can be applied to the construction materials of interest.
The research exploits biological laboratory testing procedures by applying them
in a new approach. The research explores the process of microbial colonization
of new, sterile surfaces introduced into the natural environment by cracking of
already present construction materials. Attention is focused on obtaining
relevant information with basic laboratory facilities, while avoiding expensive
equipment or time-consuming investigations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
promotes interdisciplinary interaction between two rarely connected fields of
study, biology and construction/materials engineering. It could reduce or even
eliminate millions of dollars spent in litigation surrounding the appearance of
cracks. Should the research prove successful, it will fuel further application
of bio-methods in the field of construction. The procedure addresses a problem
present in virtually every facility ever constructed and promotes understanding
of material responses by relating the time of cracking to any unusual activities
that may have occurred in the same time period. Quantification of crack age will
reduce the tens of millions of dollars spent each year in litigation over causes
of cracks. By pinpointing the time of cracking, the work will also allow
comparison of effects from natural changes in the environment and surrounding
anthropomorphic activities. &lt;br/&gt;