* 0450303
* AGEP: FACES: Facilitating Academic Careers in Engineering and Science
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2013
* G. Wayne Clough, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 7,846,856.00

Intellectual Merit: The FACES program is a significant ongoing commitment by the
Georgia Institute of Technology, Emory University, Morehouse College, and
Spelman College to increase the national representation of minorities (URMs) in
the engineering and the sciences professoriate. The program is comprised of
several components, and the aggregate program addresses each critical step along
the path to an academic career. To provide a mechanism for the early recruitment
of students into research and academic careers, FACES will establish a Research
Careers Office at Morehouse College. Furthermore, undergraduates who have
completed their sophomore year are provided summer and academic year research
experiences as a means of promoting their interest in research and graduate
school attendance. These students are then encouraged to enroll in graduate
programs using a series of recruitment efforts at national events such as the
NSBE Annual Convention or Annual Biomedical Research Conference for Minority
Students (ABRCMS), campus visits and tours, and a lecture/workshop series on the
merit of graduate school and careers in academia. Admitted Georgia Tech and
Emory graduate students are supported on doctoral fellowship supplements
throughout their matriculation. Graduate student support is provided by means of
a stipend which increases in value as the student meets the critical milestones
along the way toward the Ph.D. Another portion of these funds is used to support
travel to technical meetings for research presentations. Finally, senior
doctoral students compete for Career Initiation Grants, which they may use as
start-up funds to assist in establishing their research programs in their
initial academic appointments. Assessment of program outcomes will be performed
annually. Broader Impact: This program is a blending of the resources of these
universities to focus specifically on increasing the production of URMs who earn
engineering and science doctoral degrees. This proposal has been initiated by
African American faculty who are committed to this goal and recognize that
success breeds success. Recruiting, mentoring and academic support programs
initiated by Georgia Tech, Emory, Morehouse and Spelman have been quite
successful in increasing retention, grades, and overall production of URM degree
candidates. Our partnership has created a pipeline of successful African
American undergraduates and this proposal describes a doctoral-focused program
that builds on the successful undergraduate efforts. As one of the leading
producers of minority engineers and scientists, this alliance is ideally
positioned to increase the national production of African American students who
earn doctorates and promote their representation in academic careers. With the
assistance of NSF funding to keep the program elements in place, FACES will
continue to provide a mechanism to "change the face" of the national engineering
and science professoriate, substantially improving the current dearth of
underrepresented engineering and science faculty.