* 0450436
* SBIR Phase II:     Commoca Internet Protocol Phone - Making Communications Personal
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Walter Vale, Commoca, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,160,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a suite of server based infrastructure software and applications to empower
service providers with the ability to deploy, monitor, customize content, debug,
and upgrade their VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol) terminals remotely. The
proposed Transactional Applications Delivery System (TADS) will allow service
providers to define new revenue generating applications and corporate IT
departments and third-party IT solution providers to develop vertically
integrated, productivity enhancing data-voice applications. The proposed system
will also provide a cost-effective means for service providers to move high-end
VoIP terminals into the home consumer market, through, for example, multi-year
service contracts in exchange for subsidized phones (the new revenue generating
opportunities will allow service providers to do this). By addressing these
needs, TADS will allow tighter integration between telephony features and IT
based systems, taking better advantage of unified messaging (voice mail, e-mail,
video mail, instant messaging, etc), collaboration, conferencing, presence, etc.
It will also allow end-users access to ubiquitous features across different
networks and different locations.

This project will define, develop, and deploy a complex software platform that
will significantly accelerate the time to market of revenue generating and
productivity enhancing advanced VoIP applications and services. In addition, the
development of the proposed TADS technology will lead to new knowledge in the
areas of human computer interaction, data mining, IP information appliances, and
networking. The results to be obtained from this project will have a significant
impact on the structure of the VoIP consumer market and the way converged voice-
data applications are developed and deployed in the enterprise market.

