* 0450338
* SBIR/STTR Phase II:  A Semiconductor Device for Direct and Efficient Conversion of Radioisotope Energy
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Larry Gadeken, BetaBatt, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 01/31/2008
* USD 616,550.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will fabricate a
prototype betavoltaic battery in a form factor the size of a quarter coin. The
goal will be to generate approximately 100 microwatts of electrical power in a
volume less than half a cubic centimeter from a tritiated energy source.
Research conducted for the Phase I portion of this project established the
feasibility of constructing a semiconductor device that directly and efficiently
converts the energy released from radioactive decay directly into electric
current. Three dimensional (3D) diodes were constructed in macroporous silicon
by placing p-n junctions along the walls of all the pores. These junctions
formed the betavoltaic conversion layer for beta particles (electrons) emitted
by gaseous tritium (the radioisotope of hydrogen with a half life of 12.3 years)
that was distributed throughout the pore space. Measurements of the current-
voltage responses for this novel 3D geometry demonstrated an order of magnitude
efficiency increase compared to conventional 2Dplanar diodes. In the 3D diode
nearly every decay electron entered the p-n conversion layers. The focus of the
Phase II research will be to enhance the performance of the 3D diodes to
maximize conversion efficiency. Also, the source energy density will be
increased markedly by developing a tritiated solid that can be easily and
routinely dispersed in the pore space. This research will lead to the
development of a practical nuclear battery.

Commercially, betavoltaic batteries will be useful in a wide variety of sensors
and devices used for remote and extended missions in many inaccessible
locations. Successful commercialization of this nuclear battery with its order
of magnitude increase in useful life is to increase significantly the
utilization of self-powered devices and sensors. Stringent efforts will be made
to ensure the radiological safety of these nuclear batteries at every step in
the development, manufacturing and commercialization processes.

