* 0450547
* STTR Phase II: Novel OptoCeramic Materials for High Efficiency Ceramic Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2005,10/31/2008
* Kewen Li, Boston Applied Technologies, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 10/31/2008
* USD 571,403.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to
capitalize on the Phase I success of Novel OptoCeramic Materials for High
Efficiency Ceramic Lasers. During Phase I period, tasks were investigated and
critical issues related to the proposed approach were addressed. Extensive
research has been conducted and a lot of results have been obtained which will
be very valuable for a Phase II program. Erbium (Er3+), ytterbium, erbium-
ytterbium (Er3+/Yb3+), and neodymium (Nd3+) doped, transparent ceramics were
developed in this program, which will have a great impact to ceramic multi-
function lasers and the electro-optic technologies. The results show a promising
future for developing microchip and high power ceramic lasers using Er3+,
Er3+/Yb3+, Nd3+, or other rare earth doped ceramics. These Electro-Optical
(EO)-based, rare earth doped ceramics would have unique features in wavelength
tunability and phase and mode self-modulation that will lead to revolutionary
laser systems of higher efficiency, more compactness, and integrated multi-
functions. After successfully executing the Phase I plan and achieving the Phase
I objectives, this work is ready to be extended to bring a new generation
multifunction laser host materials with state-of-the-art performance to the
marketplace.

The technology developed in this program could greatly benefit many technology
sectors, including materials processing, laser and luminescent materials and
applications. High efficiency laser materials developed from this project would
be very valuable by enabling high power and low cost solid state laser systems
which have tremendous strategic and commercial values for both military and
civilian applications. These include remote-sensing applications, target
recognition and detection, missile guidance illumination, measurements from
airborne and space-borne platforms, multiple wavelengths next-generation
measurement systems, and industrial laser machining.

