* 0450649
* SBIR Phase II: Quantitative Detection of Bacterial Pathogens in Seeds by Use of a Novel Enrichment  Technique Coupled with Automated Real-Time PCR
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Parm Randhawa, California Seed and Plant Lab., Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 04/30/2009
* USD 999,598.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a highly sensitive PCR-based diagnostic kit for the detection of pathogens in
crop seeds. Seed health testing is important in order to identify infected lots
that should be excluded from seed sales. Because only a few seeds in a seed lot
are usually infected, highly sensitive test methods are needed. The standard
method consists of extracting the pathogen into a buffer followed by plating on
selective media to isolate the pathogen or identification by PCR. A major
limitation of this method is that only a small sample (0.1 ml) can be tested on
an agar plate, which gives a maximum sensitivity of only 10 cells per ml. In
this project, a novel device called Ampli-disk, has been developed, that allows
testing of a 4 ml sample. Further, this Ampli-disk can be stored and used, as
needed, unlike agar plates that require fresh preparation for each use. Prior
Phase I research has shown that pathogens from seed extracts can be successfully
detected and quantified by using Ampli-disk coupled with real-time PCR. In the
Phase II project, the objective is to develop Ampli-disks and real-time PCR
primers and probes into diagnostic kits for ten most important bacterial
pathogens of vegetable crops.

The commercial application of this project will be in agriculture. The proposed
technology will be useful to the seed industry and in other bacterial disease
diagnostics.



