* 0450452
* SBIR Phase II:   High Speed Optoelectronic Recognition of Al, Si, and Mg Alloys
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2007
* David Spencer, wTe Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2007
* USD 499,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II Project will apply an
optoelectronic detection system into an integrated high-speed manufacturing
system aimed at commercial identification and sortation of aluminum scrap by
alloy type - particularly aluminum alloys containing various alloying elements
such as silicon and perhaps magnesium. The goal of the program is to
commercially sort mixed aluminum alloys from an automobile shredder. Commercial
technologies in existence today sort automobile shredder nonferrous metals based
on density, but there are no technologies in commercial operation that sort the
metals into 1) cast and wrought alloys, 2) various aluminum alloy series (100,
200, 3000, 7000 etc.), or 3) into individual alloy types. Sorting aluminum
alloys based on chemical composition is the objective of this SBIR Phase II
program. A very sophisticated, proprietary sensor and detection system has been
developed and demonstrated in Phase I in order to demonstrate the capabilities
of the technology.

The broader impacts (commercial potential) of this proposed technology has the
potential to transform the efficiency and utilization of scrap metal in the U.S.
In 2001, the aluminum industry consumed nearly 800 trillion Btu, was responsible
for 1.8% of the total manufacturing energy consumed, emitted 43.5 million tons
of CO2, and consumed 1.6% of all U.S. electricity - mostly from primary
production. Secondary production is much more efficient - economically and
environmentally. Recovering aluminum from scrap consumes only about 6% of the
energy required to produce primary aluminum and requires only 10% of the
capital. In spite of efficiencies in making aluminum from scrap, exports in 2003
were 562,090 million tons because the industry could not utilize much of its
low-grade scrap. This technology will allow utilization of this scrap in
existing U.S. plants because the scrap will be converted from low-grade to high-
grade scrap which is more consistent with U.S. consumption and needs. The result
will be job preservation, reduced emissions, reduced energy needs, reduced raw
material imports, and a better balance of payments.