* 0450808
* Engineering India, Engineering America, Engineering the World:  International Technical Exchanges and the Indian Institutes of Technology, 1946-2000
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2009
* Ross Bassett, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2009
* USD 100,001.00

Project Summary The Indian Institutes of Technology have become famous in India,
the United States and many other parts of the world for the high quality
engineers they produce, and are at least partially responsible for making high
technology one of the dominant images of India today. The Indian Institutes of
Technology (IITs) were a paradoxical combination of the newly independent
India's desire to achieve self-sufficiency in the areas of science and
technology, and assistance from the United States, the Soviet Union, the United
Kingdom and West Germany. This study, focusing primarily, but not exclusively on
the cases of American involvement, will examine how Indians and foreigners
worked together to establish these institutions which were conceptualized by
many as Indian MITs. It will then examine how these institutions functioned
within the Indian economy and technological system, as well as in a global
technological system. It will do so first by looking at the development of
computer engineering, aeronautical engineering, and sanitary engineering as
disciplines at IIT and then examine developments in these areas within the wider
Indian economy, looking closely at the role played by IIT faculty and alumni. It
will then look at IIT graduates in the United States, examining their career
paths and their entrepreneurial activities in the United States. It will then
look at the flows of technical information and people back to India. This grant
will provide for one year's leave and travel funding, which together will allow
for the completion of the bulk of the research in American and British archives.
The intellectual merit of this study is that it will be the first sustained
consideration of the Indian Institutes of Technology by an academically trained
historian. It will go beyond being merely a narrow history of an institution and
link the Indian Institutes of Technology to broader developments in technology
in both the United States and India. This study will increase our understanding
of technical relations between the United States and India, drawing attention to
the reciprocal nature of those relations. It will contribute towards the growing
trends towards the internationalization of American history and the broadening
of our definition of international relations. It answers the call of scholars
such as Thomas P. Hughes and David Hounshell to consider the development of
technology across national boundaries, a call that has not been fully answered.
It will also provide an important case study of how systems of technological
education operate in a global environment. In terms of broader impacts the book
that will come out of this research will be written to be accessible to a wide
audience of historians, engineers, educators, and the general public. It will
broaden the base of the discipline of the history of technology in America and
the Society for the History of Technology to more fully include the history of
technology in post-independence India. It has the potential to lead to
collaboration between American and Indian scholars. It will provide resources
for scholars who wish to write or teach on global topics in the history of
technology. Given the great amount of attention the American press has given in
the last few years to India's role in the American economy, this study will make
an important contribution by broadening our knowledge of technological relations
between the United States and India, and providing a deeper understanding of the
role of an important and influential ethnic minority group within the American
technological community.