* 0450974
* A Parametric Study of the Link between Energy Dissipation and Bubble Creation in Laboratory Breaking Waves
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Malcolm Stokes, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2008
* USD 527,980.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0450974&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to study the link between energy dissipation and bubble
creation in laboratory breaking waves. Energy dissipation by breaking waves is
key to a number of important upper-ocean processes, including momentum transfer
and bubble-mediated air-sea gas transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
builds on the results of an earlier NSF grant to identify bubble creation
mechanisms within breaking wave crests. The earlier study identified the scale
dependence of bubble creation processes within plunging breakers: bubbles larger
than a length scale determined by the ratio of the fragmenting forces of
turbulent pressure fluctuations and the stabilizing force of surface tension
(the Hinze scale) are subject to a cascade of fragmentation events. Bubbles
smaller than the Hinze scale are stabilized against turbulent fragmentation. The
two main questions to be addressed in this study are: 1) how does the turbulent
energy dissipated in the breaking wave crest vary with variations in wave energy
and wave slope and 2) does the Hinze scale vary with intrinsic wave energy
dissipation as predicted? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research plan consists of
measuring of energy dissipation within breaking wave crests for various wave
energies and slopes, and estimating the Hinze scale for turbulent bubble
fragmentation as a function of energy dissipation. Estimates of energy
dissipation will be obtained by studying breaking wave packets in a glass-walled
flume for a range of wave energies and slopes, varied by changing the spectral
composition of the packets. The energy dissipation rate within the breaking
crest region will be independently estimated with two methods: quantitative
analysis of the light emission from bioluminescent dinoflagellates, and
conservation of energy. Using bioluminescence to quantify turbulence is a recent
technique, but has proven effective for transitory, two phase flows. The bubble
size distribution and void fraction of air during breaking will be obtained
using optical techniques and a conductivity cell. The bubble Hinze scale
corresponds to a distinctive change in slope of the bubble size distribution,
which can be estimated from the optical measurements. The total energy lost
during breaking will be estimated from changes in wave packet shape measured
upstream and downstream of breaking, and the residual energy in coherent and
turbulent fluid motions at the end of breaking will be measured with acoustic
Doppler velocimeters and ensemble averaging of multiple events. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The project will enhance the understanding of
atmospheric momentum transport to the ocean, the small-scale physical processes
controlling gas transport, and turbulence and bubble production in the marine
boundary layer and coastal regions. All of these processes have a broad impact
on atmosphere-ocean coupling dynamics, global climate modeling and coastal
oceanography. The experiment and data analysis will include the participation of
a graduate student and undergraduate interns from UCSD and the SIO summer
research fellowship program. These programs sponsor students from around the
country to gain hands-on experience in oceanography. Working with the California
Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence, the research team is also
developing an outreach plan with the Ocean Institute (Sea Bubbles!) so as to
increase public understanding of ocean-atmospheric
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;