* 0450063
* The Michigan AGEP Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2013
* Christophe Pierre, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 5,996,201.00

As an AGEP program participant since 1998, the University of Michigan (UM)
proposes to build &lt;br/&gt;upon its successes and achievements by forming the
Michigan AGEP Alliance (MAA). Our partnership &lt;br/&gt;will comprise four
leading Ph.D. granting institutions in the State of Michigan, all of which have
long-&lt;br/&gt;standing traditions of academic excellence in doctoral education
and research in science and engineering &lt;br/&gt;(STEM) disciplines, as well
as a firm commitment to achieving diversity in higher education. The MAA
&lt;br/&gt;will feature the UM as the lead school, and include Michigan State
University, Wayne State University, &lt;br/&gt;and Western Michigan University
as primary partners. The UM will share the many successes of its previous AGEP
activities with the new partner schools and, in turn, learn from the different
experiences and insights that each partner brings to the Alliance. The
institutionalization successfully carried out at the UM with AGEP funding, as
well as the considerable achievements of our partner institutions, will provide
a solid foundation on which to develop new avenues of programming for the
proposed MAA. Our Alliance will be a full partnership of the four institutions,
built upon our collective wisdom, the sharing of best practices, and the
assessment of outcomes and use of this knowledge to implement continuous
improvement. Through the development of joint programs and ventures, the MAA
will achieve (1) sustained, organized cooperation between MAA institutions; (2)
increased efficiency by aligning the resources and operations of MAA partners;
and (3) increased opportunities for under-represented students. &lt;br/&gt;The
primary objectives of the proposed AGEP program are: To sustain and expand upon
gains made in the recruitment of under-represented students in the STEM fields,
by sharing lessons of UM successes with alliance institutions and by adapting
successful programs from the alliance to UM.s institutional culture.
&lt;br/&gt;To develop and implement new initiatives to expand the student
pipeline, to retain and graduate &lt;br/&gt;enrolled students, and to prepare
students effectively for entering careers in academia. &lt;br/&gt;To ensure that
students are prepared to become leaders and innovators in the academic world.
&lt;br/&gt;To ensure long-term sustainability of gains made by
institutionalizing successes. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed AGEP program will be
centered on a set of programmatic activities that include: &lt;br/&gt;Recruiting
and outreach: recruiting fairs and outreach, coordinated summer research
programs, &lt;br/&gt;coordinated visits of students to partner campus, outreach
to potential students in industry. &lt;br/&gt;Retention: alleviating financial
concerns, identifying and finding solutions for academic &lt;br/&gt;concerns,
responding to social concerns, strengthening mentoring, improving programs that
&lt;br/&gt;prepare students for entering graduate programs.
&lt;br/&gt;Development of student leadership and innovation in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;Teaching preparation and career development: encouragement of
academic careers. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit- Collectively the MAA partners
have extensive experience in analyzing data, and &lt;br/&gt;we propose to
develop an evaluation model that will enable us to capitalize on our success and
remedy &lt;br/&gt;difficulties in a timely fashion. With this model we will
measure and analyze in depth outcomes between &lt;br/&gt;different student
groups, partner institutions, and other AGEP alliances. We will disseminate the
&lt;br/&gt;knowledge gained in a variety of ways, including meetings,
presentations, reports and journal &lt;br/&gt;publications. We intend to create
an approach to evaluation that may be adopted in other AGEP alliances,
&lt;br/&gt;producing a wider comparison of effort and success and perhaps
setting the groundwork for a national &lt;br/&gt;analysis standard in graduate
education. Broader Impact- Our efforts will lead to an increased number of
under-represented students successfully completing a Ph.D., and entering
academia. However, the aim of our AGEP program is not simply to increase
numbers, but rather to provide an educational experience, adoptable by other
graduate programs, that will enable our under-represented students to become
part of the next generation of leaders and innovators in STEM fields. We will
develop a series of programs that will help develop the skills and attitude
students need to become creative researchers, educators and leaders, who will be
ready to contribute to the knowledge, technology, security and quality of life
of the nation.