* 0450526
* SBIR Phase II:   Use of a Visual Programming Environment to Promote Bioinformatics Education
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Maciek Sasinowski, INCOGEN INC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 03/31/2009
* USD 680,100.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to provide
a tool to improve bioinformatics education. This tool, VIBE-Ed, is a software
product designed to augment bioinformatics at the college and university level
by creating an interactive, integrated, and comprehensive approach to
bioinformatics education using visual programming. During the Phase I project,
INCOGEN demonstrated that its existing research tool, VIBE, provides an
excellent foundation for an educational tool given its inherent technological
attributes. VIBE employs visual programming for bioinformatics, and in this
respect, VIBE-Ed will provide a novel approach to bioinformatics classroom
instruction. The Phase I work demonstrated the effectiveness of visual
programming in the learning process. In addition to visual programming, the
architecture of VIBE supports the inclusion of extensive information about the
bioinformatics tools contained therein, making VIBE-Ed well suited to host the
large and complex amount of resources and documentation required by an
educational tool. Finally, VIBE was created to be extensible, allowing it to be
naturally extended into VIBE-Ed. As the bioinformatics community discovers and
validates new analysis tools, these can easily be incorporated into VIBE-Ed,
along with the educational features to support them.

Bioinformatics education is a growing field, driven by the great need for
trained bioinformaticists in biological and biomedical research. Recent years
have witnessed notable increases in the number of bioinformatics courses and
degree programs at colleges and universities worldwide. Textbooks and lectures
alone do not expose bioinformatics students to hands-on data analysis and, by
themselves, they are insufficient for bioinformatics education. Despite the
growing trend in bioinformatics education and the need for educationally focused
tools, there is a significant lack of commercially available software tools
specifically designed for bioinformatics education. Currently, bioinformatics
instructors fill this gap by using either complicated and expensive research
tools or collections of web-based tools. Bioinformatics research software is
often cost prohibitive for an educational application, and the software itself
is geared toward experts in the field rather than toward students. Web-based
tools are often free of charge, but they are also frequently dispersed
throughout the web, requiring excessive time and sometimes also requiring
programming skill to combine the use of several tools. Many of the tools are not
accompanied by instruction or related conceptual information, making them less
suitable for education. VIBE-Ed successfully addresses these concerns and
promises to have immediate impact on bioinformatics education and, ultimately,
in knowledge discovery on life science research.