* 0450229
* A Matter of Convenience: The Food Industry in Postwar America
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2007
* Deborah Fitzgerald, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2007
* USD 74,578.00

PROJECT SUMMARY The extraordinary growth and development of the American
processed food industry in the 1950s and 1960s was one of the most stunning and
important transformations in this century. This industry changed fundamentally
what, how, and where Americans eat, shifting people's habits from buying raw,
unprocessed foods to be prepared at home, towards buying precooked, pre-packaged
foods. Most of what grocery stores carry, including fresh produce, is highly
processed "convenience" food, a sharp change in just fifty years. As several
recent books have emphasized, the diets of Americans have never been so
concentrated with sugars, "bad" fats, and fast food. Despite all this, there is
little scholarship on the origins of the food industry in America, and the ways
in which modern science and technology have fundamentally reshaped its mission.
This project will explore those issues by examining the synergistic role of the
federal government, food processors, and university departments of food science
and technology in defining and forming the post-war food industry. The project
will employ the notion of "convenience," an idea that the food industry attached
to the marketing of processed foods in the post-war era, as a vehicle for
exploring those organizations, strategies and goals. Opening the black box of
convenience reveals a great deal about how the technologies of mass-
production,mass-marketing, and mass consumption have standardized not only the
tools of production, but also the daily routines of people worldwide. The
project calls for a two-year course of research to examine materials in
government, university, and business archives, and to read the vast amount of
popular and trade literature on the subject. INTELLECTUAL MERIT This project
will draw together scholarship in military history, gender studies, consumer
studies, business history, and the history of technology and science to answer
questions about the nature of the modern food production system: what problems
were processed foods designed to solve,and how did this change over time? what
has been the role of the federal government and commercial firms in shaping the
American diet? in what ways is the food industry similar to, and in what ways
different from, other industries? how has a desire for "convenience," however
defined, led the industry and the public to embrace industrial foods? BROADER
IMPACTS A historical study such as this will put in perspective both the
alarmist outcries and the glib reassurances of the industry that are issued when
trouble appears in the food sector. In addition, the project will open up a new
set of scholarly as well as popular concerns around the issue of "convenience"
and progress, and may encourage other scholars to look to the mundane for
answers to the larger, entrenched questions regarding modernity and its
ramifications.