* 0450680
* Correlated Cell Movement in Embryogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2007
* Timothy Newman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 07/31/2007
* USD 130,357.00

Correlated Cell Movement in Embryogenesis (Pilot
Study)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gastrulation is a key
structural transition in the growth and development of the vertebrate embryo.
The developmental processes involved share common features across a diverse
array of organisms, so much can be learned about embryogenesis in humans from
the study of model organisms such as the mouse and the chick. Very recently it
has become possible to track individual cell movements in chick embryos during
gastrulation. The aim of this proposal is to construct an individual-based
modular theory of cell movement which will allow direct interpretation of this
data. The investigators will start with the simplest biologically plausible
model and add new features (such as additional morphogens and chemical signals,
or more finely differentiated cell types), continually confronting the models to
experimental data within a close-knit theory/experiment collaboration. With the
data constraining the models, and the models suggesting possible scenarios which
can then be experimentally tested, the investigators hope to initiate a more
complete and soundly based understanding of gastrulation. They will focus their
modeling efforts on fundamental developmental processes in the chick embryo, in
particular the formation of Koller's sickle, progression of the primitive
streak, and ingression of mesodermal cells through the streak.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will integrate this research program
with both graduate and undergraduate research projects. This will allow students
exposure to and involvement in a wide-ranging international and
multidisciplinary research effort involving new theoretical ideas and direct
experimental application. The proposed research meshes well with Arizona State
University's rapidly growing interdisciplinary biophysics program which
successfully attracts both female and minority students. The investigators will
use this work as a central component of two outreach programs: one designed to
emphasize how advances in the life sciences can arise through interdisciplinary
research; the other to encourage high school students from under-represented
groups in the Phoenix area to pursue careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;