* 0450552
* SBIR Phase II:      Advanced Planning and Scheduling Tools for Extended Enterprise Systems
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Guining Li, LS OPTIMAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 03/31/2008
* USD 644,965.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will build upon
the successful development of the Phase I project that developed models and
algorithms for planning and job scheduling systems. The software tool described
in this proposal will allow organizations to schedule their operations in real-
time to generate the optimal plan to maximizing their operational targets.
During Phase I, the team created new planning and scheduling algorithms and
successful empirical studies using recent innovative research in the areas of
large-scale optimization and the newly developed methodology of Nested
Partitions. In Phase II the team plan to further develop the concept to create
successful implementations in several manufacturing firms. The technology to be
developed in Phase II will greatly enhance the capability of the current
planning and scheduling software tools. This innovation brings the state-of-the-
art decision and optimization methodology to the Advanced Planning and
Scheduling software market. In addition, planning systems developed with the
proposed methodology will add new levels of flexibility for companies to more
quickly adapt to changing material, operational, and market conditions.

This SBIR project will make new planning and scheduling tools broadly accessible
to virtually any manufacturing firm. The proposed scheduling and planning tools
will enable them to communicate, collaborate, and integrate their planning and
scheduling functionalities to obtain optimal results throughout their enterprise
and their entire supply chain. It is expected that coordinated use of these
tools will eventually create an integrated cyber-infrastructure for American
manufacturing firms and create more efficient supply chains that will enable
these firms to be more competitive in the global marketplace. Moreover, if
successful, the development of this proposed tool will lead to fruitful attempts
to develop and commercialize an advanced planning and scheduling software tools
that can be used for many other sectors of the economy.