* 0450090
* SGER: Teacher-adapted versus linguistically simplified items in the testing of English language learners
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Guillermo Solano-Flores, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 05/31/2006
* USD 99,987.00

This project addresses the validity of academic achievement measures for English
language learners (ELLs) and the need for effective approaches to testing these
students. In this study, we will examine the dependability of measures of
mathematics achievement produced by two forms of accommodation for ELL students:
linguistic simplification and teacher adaptation. In the former, a team of
professionals modifies the wording of the items with the intent to reduce their
linguistic demands; then a single set of modified items is given to all students
in the target population of ELLs. In the latter, teachers modify the wording
based on their knowledge of the language used in their communities; then
students from each community are given local versions of the adapted items.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While effective, linguistic simplification has produced
only modest results in reducing the impact of language on ELL performance on
tests. The effectiveness of teacher adaptation has just begun to be
investigated. Evidence thus far shows that this promising form of accommodation
is sensitive to subtle but important variations due to language.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will assemble a test composed of 30
mathematics items. From this original version of the test, we will create two
versions, linguistically simplified and teacher-adapted. ELL students who are
native speakers of Spanish will take the same set of items in two of these three
versions (original and linguistically simplified, original and teacher adapted,
or linguistically simplified and teacher adapted). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will
assess the effectiveness of the two forms of accommodation by examining the
differences between the mean scores obtained by the students on the
linguistically simplified and teacher-adapted test versions and between each of
these versions and the original version of the test. Also, based on
generalizability (G) theory "a theory of measurement error" we will assess the
dependability of the scores obtained with each test version and the number of
items that are needed with each test version in order to be able to make valid
generalizations about the students' knowledge of the domain. &lt;br/&gt;