* 0450638
* Approaches to Improved Synthesis Design: Mechanistic and Synthetic Studies on New Annelation Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Paul Wender, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 11/30/2008
* USD 917,063.00

&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is to advance understanding of the
mechanisms and selectivities of recently introduced reactions, on the
investigation of newly identified reactions, and on the identification of new
reactions including intermolecular allenyl- and alkenyl-vinylcyclopropane (VCP)
[5+2] cycloadditions; allenyl-VCP-CO [5+2+1] cycloadditions; asymmetric [5+2]
cycloadditions; metathetical processes for the generation of VCPs and VCBs
(vinylcyclobutanes); [4+2+1] cycloadditions of dienes, alkenes, and CO; allene-
diene-CO [2+2+1] cycloadditions; 3-component reactions based on dienes and
allenes; [6+1] reactions of allenylcyclobutanes; carbonylative allenyl ether
transpositions; [5+1+2+1] cycloadditions; [3+2]/[5+1] reactions; and the use of
4-component cycloadducts as ligands for catalysis and molecular
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this renewal award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational
activities of Dr. Paul A. Wender in the Department of Chemistry at Stanford
University. Professor Wender will focus his work on the design or discovery and
development of fundamentally new reactions, reagents, and strategies for organic
synthesis. The continuing emphasis of the project is on the identification of
new reactions as new reactions enable new synthetic strategies and better if not
ideal syntheses (high yielding, step economical, resource effective,
operationally simple and environmentally acceptable) of targets of theoretical,
materials, or medicinal value. A special emphasis is placed on catalyzed
reactions, especially processes that in the absence of catalyst are forbidden or
difficult to achieve. The introduction of new reactions offers new ways to think
about synthetic problems, new process options that could minimize or avoid
environmentally problematic steps and process inefficiencies, and often new
mechanisms and insights that add to our basic knowledge of bonding, structure,
and reactivity. The project has broader impact by engaging in education from
outreach to high school students through the training of postdoctoral
participants. Scientific impact on the chemical, pharmaceutical and agricultural
industries will also accrue &lt;br/&gt;