* 0450288
* Testing Climate Models by Detecting Climate Signals in Space Data
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2008
* Richard Goody, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 01/31/2008
* USD 604,935.00

The PI will investigate statistical methods, based on first moments or climate
averages that can contribute to the goal of quantitative evaluation of the
credibility of climate change models. Space data on resolved thermal radiances
and radio refractivities obtained from Global Positioning System (GPS)
occultations are particularly suitable for this task. The statistical approach
is Bayesian, with three levels of inference. The first involves detecting a
specific forcing in the climate record. The methodology is that of optimal
fingerprinting and this level of inference corresponds to existing "detection
and attribution" studies. The second level of inference permits an objective
evaluation of the quality of the model, and the third allows conclusions to be
drawn about model improvement. The Bayesian paradigm permits the direct use of
observed data (radiances or refractivities) without inversion to physical
climate variables. Synthetic data will be constructed by means of forward
calculations from the output of fully coupled climate models. By the end of this
grant the methodology should have advanced to a point at which it can be
combined with other work on statistical second moments to give the basis for a
systematic approach to testing, improving and evaluating climate models. The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the use of Bayesian methods to
understand the relationship of observed data from space to the development of
credible predictions from numerical climate models. The broader impacts of this
project lie in (1) the potential to improve the quality of climate projections
and to increase their credibility, and (2) the provision of objective criteria
for climate observing systems. Both are central to the societal goals described
in the recently issued Strategic Plan for the U.S. Climate Change Science
Program. Two graduate students will be involved.