* 0450537
* Species Inventory of Nematodes in  Tropical Rain Forests  of Costa Rica
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Thomas Powers, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 12/31/2006
* USD 199,999.00

Nematodes (roundworms) are abundant, ubiquitous, ecologically important and
diverse but there appears to be a discrepancy in nematode species diversity in
temperate versus tropical ecosystems. For example, a temperate grassland plant
may have more than 100 species of roundworms around its roots, whereas plants in
tropical rainforests have strikingly lower nematode biodiversity. The simplest
explanation for this discrepancy is that tropical habitats have yet to been
sampled intensively. We hypothesize that most tropical nematode biodiversity
will be found in intricate relationships with arboreal habitats and
invertebrates. For this project, we will conduct a comprehensive regional survey
of nematode species in Costa Rica in partnership with Consortium UNA-UCR
(Universidad Nacional and Universidad de Costa Rica) to accelerate the inventory
of nematodes during a time of rapid deforestation. We will sample nematodes from
mineral soil, litter, forest understory plants, epiphytes, and associated
pollinators and herbivorous invertebrates. We will sample from La Selva along
the Barva transect to Braulio Carrillo National Park in Cordillera Volcanica
Central Conservation Area, ranging in altitude from 30 to 2800 m above sea
level. Species will be characterized and documented using permanent microscope
slide collections, bulk community associate samples, DNA vouchers and digital
image libraries. Video tapes, vouchers of specimens and molecular sequence data
will be integrated into: 1) the official INBio database in Costa Rica, ATTA, 2)
web linkages at http://nematode.unl.edu, 3) GenBank and 4) NSF Tree of Life
database for Nematoda (NemATOL, DEB 0228692) for global access and future
systematic studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four women (2 PIs from the U.S., 2
collaborators in Costa Rica) will serve as senior scientists. In Costa Rica,
research and teaching will be integrated by: 1) providing a formal short-course
for Costa Rican graduate students and technicians, and 2) ensuring that sampling
teams include PIs, technicians and local guides to facilitate intellectual
exchange. One postdoctoral, two graduate and three undergraduate students will
be trained in our laboratories in the United States; this is an important
training goal because nematology is a rapidly expanding discipline within
systematics and biodiversity studies. Our results will be globally accessible
through internet-linked databases and interactive keys. Our results will help to
establish a baseline for future conservation efforts in Costa Rica and other
Neotropical regions.&lt;br/&gt;