* 0450516
* SBIR Phase II:    Direct Measurement of Wafer Temperature in White/UV LED Manufacture
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Vincent Woods, Bellwether Instruments, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 02/29/2008
* USD 449,635.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project will develop a highly
accurate temperature measurement system that can be used in optimizing the
growth of high brightness light emitting diodes for solid state lighting
applications. This product does not currently exist due to technical
difficulties in measuring the substrate or gallium nitride (GaN) epilayer in a
region where they absorb energy. During Phase I of this program the company
showed possible solutions to this problem that it can implement as the work
progresses to Phase II. This SBIR Phase II program will address scientific and
technical issues that has hindered the adoption of the Reflectivity Compensated
Pyrometry (RCP) in the growth of GaN light emitting diodes (LEDs), the basis of
solid state lighting sources. This program will result in a commercial
instrument for directly measuring surface temperature during manufacture of
visible and UV LEDs. Typical temperature variations during the growth of GaN-
based LEDs results in a product which, even over a 2dimensional substrate,
requires the LEDs to be separated into those with similar characteristics.
Existing temperature measurements do not allow the accurate measurement of the
substrate or the GaN epilayer because they are transparent at the measurement
wavelength of ~1 micron. Commercially, this project will increase manufacturing
productivity in wide-bandgap materials and LED manufacture by providing better
process control data. The improved manufacturing yields of LED's enabled by this
work will lead to more widespread adoption of LEDs for solid state lighting with
the accompanying economic and environmental benefits. For example, the use of
LEDs has already saved the US economy nearly 10 TWh per year (equivalent to one
large power plant) of energy in the niche applications implemented so far.