* 0450975
* The Global Biopolitics of Security: An Anthropological Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2007
* Paul Rabinow, Molecular Sciences Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 09/30/2007
* USD 270,118.00

In recent years, biosecurity and biodefense have emerged as topics of
politicalurgency as well as medical and scientific challenges. A broadening
range of experts and decision-makers are turning their attention both to the
threat of bioterrorism and to the specter of new epidemics, such as BSE, SARS,
and avian viruses that pose distinctive challenges for the protection of life on
a global scale. Today, biological agents constitute a vital challenge to
security and health. Nations and peoples live on the threshold of (or have
perhaps already passed over into) an era of global bio-politics; that is, an era
in which living beings and fundamental life processes are being deployed for
strategic ends, including destructive ones. In this context, experts are
grappling with biosecurity in relation to a range of threats to health, both
from naturally occurring agents and from those that have been altered through
human activities. Their work is defining one aspect of what can be called the
global biopolitics of security.

Given contemporary developments, there is a need and an opportunity for critical
engagement with developments in the domain of biosecurity at a number of levels.
The existing literature on biosecurity and biodefense is predominantly
journalistic and policy-oriented or it is technical literature in the biological
and physical sciences. This project proposes to develop a conceptually
sophisticated and empirically grounded inquiry into the technical, political,
and ethical dimensions of biosecurity. The approach singles out for analytic
attention the specific initiatives and actors -policymakers, funding agencies,
scientists, planners, entrepreneurs, and others - that are seeking to articulate
the elements of a biosecurity system today. The aim of the project is to
understand how these actors are working to specify the problem of biosecurity
and to forge a technical response.

The project involves two components that will be undertaken simultaneously and
in close interaction. First, intensive field research using the tools of multi-
sited ethnography will be conducted at specific sites of expert activity in
which biosecurity is being defined and worked on. Second, these individual
studies will be coordinated in a framework for comparison and collaboration that
seeks to elaborate a range of broader concepts and to understand broader
combinations of forms in this emerging domain.

The objective is to take the first steps in developing a rich and multi-
dimensional social scientific approach to contemporary problems of biosecurity.
The conjuncture of rationalities of public health and new formations of security
presents an opportunity to develop novel concepts and methods that are
appropriate to studying the global biopolitics of security. Such engagement is
essential if social scientists wish to participate in developments that are of
cardinal importance to our social and political life.