* 0450658
* The Irminger Sea Boundary Current System and Interior Convection
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Robert Pickart, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2010
* USD 918,139.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;OCE-00450658&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Irminger Sea a
particularly complex area of the western North Atlantic where a host of
important processes occur. It is where the final transport of the dense water
overflow from the Nordic Seas is established, it is a site of intermediate mode
water formation, and it is where freshwater of Arctic origin gets fluxed off the
boundary into the open Atlantic. All of these things impact the North Atlantic
subpolar gyre, with ramifications for the global overturning circulation.
Understanding how each of these processes work, and their relationship to one
another, will enable us to better understand an important piece of the North
Atlantic climate puzzle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2001-2004 an NSF-sponsored
field program was carried out in the Irminger Sea to document the occurrence of
open-ocean convection in mid-basin, and investigate the evolution of the
boundary current system from Denmark Strait to the southern tip of Greenland.
The experiment included moored conductivity/temperature/depth profilers in the
interior, and high-resolution shipboard hydrographic/ADCP surveys of the
boundary current system. From the initial analysis of these unique data ,
together with historical measurements and the use of oceanographic and
atmospheric models, a variety of new and important ideas have emerged with
respect to this important area of the ocean. This includes new modes of ocean-
atmosphere interaction leading to interior convection, and heretofore undetected
boundary current processes leading to shelf-basin exchange. This proposal seeks
funds to carry out the analysis phase of this project. A set of studies is
described, each with its own hypothesis, that will significantly advance our
understanding of convection and subpolar mode water formation, as well as the
mechanisms and dynamics governing the offshore flux of mass and properties into
the western North Atlantic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: New and
important means by which the atmosphere interacts with the subpolar ocean will
be elucidated in this project, as well as the dynamics of coastal and shelfbreak
currents that link the Arctic and sub-Arctic domains and help dictate the
lateral transfer of properties from shelf to basin.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will help us understand the important
role that the Irminger Sea plays in the ventilation, stratification, and
freshwater budget of the North Atlantic subpolar gyre. This in turn has
important ramifications for the global meridional overturning circulation,
including the manner in which this system might respond to climate change.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;