* 0450970
* Structure of Cation-Coupled Active Sugar Transporters
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2011
* Ronald Kaback, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2011
* USD 1,327,302.00

Active transport driven by electrochemical ion gradients (i.e., secondary active
transport) is a fundamental biological process found in all life forms that
plays an essential role in many aspects of cell function, such as nutrient
uptake, signal transduction and resistance to noxious components in the
environment. The aim of this project is to obtain an x-ray structure of the
melibiose permease of Escherichia coli (MelB). Recently, a breakthrough was
achieved in this general area. X-ray structures of two secondary transporters,
LacY and the GlpT, were determined. However, there is no x-ray crystal structure
available for any Na+-coupled secondary transport protein. MelB consists of 469
amino acid residues and is a biochemically well-studied member of the glycoside-
pentoside-hexuronide:cation symport family. MelB catalyzes the accumulation of
galactopyranosides by utilizing the free energy from the energetically downhill
inward movement of Na+, Li+ or H+ to drive stoichiometric uphill transport of
galactosidic sugars, and the coupling ion is dependent on the nature of the
sugar transported. Generally, alpha-galactosides (melibiose, raffinose and
p-nitrophenyl-alpha-galactoside) are symported with either H+ or Na+, while
beta-galactosides (lactose, methyl-1-D-galactopyranoside or p-nitrophenyl-beta-
D-galactoside) are symported with Na+ but not with H+, which makes MelB a highly
unique transporter. Like LacY, MelB appears to contain 12-transmembrane domains
with the N- and C-termini facing the cytoplasm. 2D crystals have been obtained,
and a projection map at low resolution displays a molecule consisting of two
domains lining a central cleft, similar to the overall structure of LacY;
however, neither the location of the sugar nor the cation binding sites are
resolved, making the mechanism of Na+-driven transport unresolved. Lately,
manipulation of the concentration of phospholipids during co-crystallization has
led to reproducible crystals of LacY that diffract to higher resolution, as well
as a number of important mutants defective in H+ translocation. By using the
approaches described, initial crystals of MelB have been obtained. The structure
anticipated will provide important insights. Cocrystallization will also be
attempted with IIA-Glc, a soluble regulatory component of the
phosphoenolpyruvate:sugar phosphotransferase system that binds to MelB and LacY
and co-crystallizes with glycerol kinase.

Membrane proteins, particularly those that catalyze ion-coupled transport, are
notoriously difficult to crystallize presumably because of their hydrophobic
nature and conformational flexibility. This is reflected by the fact that there
are some 40,000 structures of soluble proteins in the Protein Data Bank (PDB),
but only about 45 independent membrane protein structures. Understanding of the
mechanism of the cation coupled transport is a major challenge in the field of
bioenergetics. This project extends a recent breakthrough, and these activities
are expected to lead to an x-ray structure of a unique transporter that utilizes
either H+ or Na+. The expected results will significantly improve overall
knowledge of active transport and bioenergetics. In addition, manipulation of
phospholipid concentrations to obtain and improve the quality of membrane
protein crystals is a novel approach and further characterization of the
phospholipid effect may provide a basic guideline for a general method of
membrane protein crystallization, which remains a major barrier in structural
biology.

Broader Impacts: Structure/function studies on LacY, an obligate H+/sugar
symporter, have served as a model for studies on active transport and
bioenergetics. These studies have been widely selected for inclusion in various
textbooks, reference books and teaching materials in many languages for both
undergraduate and graduate teaching worldwide. The project will involve outreach
to high school and college audiences in order to convey scientific knowledge to
young people and stimulate their interest in basic science. The progress
expected will directly provide databases for public access by submission of
original data to the PDB. Invited lectures, oral presentations at symposia,
multi-disciplinary conferences held around the world will serve as multiple
channels to convey this novel knowledge to society in a timely manner.