* 0450812
* Comparative Fungal Genomics
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Matthew Sachs, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2009
* USD 668,481.00

The overall goals of this project are to develop and share computational tools
for comparative analysis of fungal genomes, and to apply these tools to
available genome data to address key questions about genome evolution, genes,
and regulatory elements. The project addresses three related problems in
comparative genomics: (a) detecting synteny and genome rearrangement between
organisms over a range of evolutionary distances, (b) improving gene prediction
through comparative analysis, and (c) detecting and characterizing conserved
non-coding elements. The specific objectives are to (1) develop a hierarchical
clustering-based algorithm for characterizing synteny between related organisms,
(2) utilize comparative sequence analysis to improve fungal gene annotations,
(3) utilize comparative sequence analysis to identify and characterize conserved
non-coding elements, (4) experimentally validate conserved upstream open reading
frames (uORFs), and (5) apply these methods to analyze available genome
sequences from clusters of related fungi and make the results publicly
available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will contribute to the understanding
of fungi and to the ability to exploit these organisms for the benefit of
mankind. It will also contribute to the scientific understanding of all
eukaryotic genomes, including that of humans, through the development of tools
for interpreting genome sequences. It will foster biological insights into the
myriad of cellular processes that fungi, plants, and animals share. In addition,
the project will contribute to the training of computational biologists by
involving students ranging from undergraduates to postdoctoral fellows. Students
in the Minority Outreach Program at the Broad Institute will also be recruited
for the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;