* 0450164
* SBIR Phase II:      Multi-Coil Surface NMR Instrumentation and Software for 3-D Groundwater Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2005,05/31/2007
* David Walsh, VISTA CLARA INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

This SBIR Phase II research proposal aims to develop a commercial multi-Coil
Magnetic Resonance Sounding (MRS) system for 3-D groundwater imaging and
characterization. The principal innovations are the use of multi-coil arrays and
the development of coherent signal processing methods to reconstruct 3-D images.
The feasibility of this system concept through computer simulation, analysis,
and by acquiring experimental (very low SNR) multi-coil NMR data has been
established. It is now proposed to design and assemble a field-scale multi-coil
MRS prototype instrument with surface coil diameters on the order of 50-100
meters, and to field test this prototype extensively with the U.S. Geological
Survey and a groundwater -consulting firm. This multi-coil MRS system enables a
critical performance improvement in the area of spatial resolution (3-D vs. 1-D)
and at least an order of magnitude improvement in sensitivity (effective
SNR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inadequate access to clean, safe, and reliable
sources of drinking water is a primary cause of disease in the developing world.
Inadequate access to groundwater resources, and inadequate understanding of the
long-term effects of groundwater use, pose fundamental limitations on economic
and agricultural development in much of the developed world, including the
United States. As an inexpensive, low-energy, and non-invasive groundwater
exploration method, the proposed technology could have significant positive
impacts on world health, natural resource management, and economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;