* 0450673
* Dissertation Research:  Resistant to Treatment: Medicine, Molecules, and the Global Politics of Drug-Resistant HIV
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2006
* Vincanne Adams, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 01/31/2006
* USD 5,275.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant is a multi-
sited ethnographic research project, and will involve qualitative interviews
with HIV scientists and participant-observation at selected sites relevant to
the production of knowledge about drug-resistant HIV. Research will be conducted
over 14 months, beginning in August 2004. Twelve of these months will involve
fieldwork based in the San Francisco Bay Area, where interviews and participant-
observation will be conducted with North American researchers studying HIV drug
resistance in the U.S. and in Africa. In addition, interviews and participant-
observation will be conducted at several scientific conferences over the course
of the 14-month fieldwork period. NSF funds will primarily support the remaining
three months spent conducting fieldwork in Uganda, where interviews and
participant-observation will be conducted with Ugandan scientists and clinicians
involved in research on HIV treatment and drug resistance. The background for
this fieldwork is that the certainty expressed by some researchers and health
policymakers regarding the danger of drug-resistant HIV emerging from Africa
contrasts sharply with the uncertainty surrounding the scientific definition and
measurement of antiretroviral resistance. Following in the tradition of the
social study of science, this dissertation project seeks to examine this paradox
by examining how scientific uncertainty over the measurement, description, and
meaning of resistance to antiretroviral medications is negotiated in the context
of politically and racially charged debates over the role of the industrialized
West in preventing and treating AIDS in Africa. Specifically, the project will
pursue two interrelated research questions: first, how (through what practices
and technologies) do scientists construct knowledge about antiretroviral
resistance; and second, in doing so, how do they construct knowledge about
Africa? This project makes two principal contributions to social science
knowledge and theory. First, it makes an innovative contribution to the
anthropology of AIDS by applying the analytic tools of the social study of
science to the global epidemic. Currently there is very little social science
scholarship that critically examines the biology of HIV/AIDS, antiretroviral
medication, or drug resistance. Secondly, this project will contribute to the
development the anthropology of science by contextualizing the science of HIV
drug resistance within a broader network of social, political, and economic
relations. Within the last year and a half, there has been a substantial
increase in international support for AIDS treatment in Africa. As treatment
access expands, the science and politics of antiretroviral resistance is likely
to become both more prominent and more complex. Biological questions about the
pharmacogenomics of drug resistance in Africans, the genetic and geographic
diversity of HIV strains, and clinically optimal treatment will emerge deeply
enmeshed with political questions regarding cost-effectiveness, international
pharmaceutical patents, race, geography, and inequality. The increasingly
complex biology of HIV drug resistance will remain inextricable from the global
politics of HIV treatment. By tracking the biopolitics of drug-resistant HIV,
this project aims to expand our understanding of the relationship between
science and policymaking and to contribute to the growing efforts to improve
access to antiretroviral medications in the developing world.

