* 0450486
* SBIR Phase II:    Field Demonstration of a Novel Biotechnology for In-Situ Bioremediation of Methyl Tert-Butyl Ether (MTBE) in Groundwater
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2007
* Fatemeh Shirazi, Microvi Biotech LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 04/30/2007
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a novel process for in-situ bioremediation of methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) in
groundwater. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) considers MTBE a
potential human carcinogen. Currently, MTBE's Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) in
drinking water has been set for 18 parts per billion. It is estimated that the
cost of cleaning up MTBE contamination nationwide is $29 billion and growing.
Bioremediation holds a great promise for destruction of MTBE in groundwater. The
key problems with currently used bioremediation methods for MTBE are (1) the
inability to establish high densities of MTBE- degrading bacterial, (2) the
inability to maintain contact between the degrading bacteria and MTBE, and (3)
the upsets and losses of key bacteria. Prior Phase I work has successfully
demonstrated the effectiveness of a new technical approach called Biological
Permeable Barrier (BPB) that uses encapsulated MTBE-degrading bacteria for
removal of MTBE in water. The primary objective for the Phase II project is to
assess the long-term performance of a BPB field pilot unit to remove MTBE at
Port Hueneme Navy site, and to assess the cost and performance of the BPB /
MicroBeads system for longer periods of time under field conditions. The
novelties of this technical approach are four folds : (1) the proposed system
will deliver high cell density of MTBE-degrading bacteria right to the zone of
contamination; (2) the proposed system will create the perfect environment for
bacteria with a high degree of degradation and stability; (3) the proposed
system will protect the bacteria against environmental stresses; and, (4) the
proposed system will prevent wash out of key bacteria. It is anticipated that
the proposed BPB pilot scale unit at Port Hueneme will effectively degrade MTBE
and other contaminants in groundwater to non-detectable levels.

The immediate commercial application of this project will be on the
bioremediation of MTBE in groundwater. However, the proposed technology holds
promise for effective, controlled and cost efficient cleanup of groundwater at
sites contaminated with other toxic and polluting chemicals as well. Other
potential applications include the treatment of industrial wastewater and
drinking water.