* 0450444
* Use of High Resolution Field Data to Improve Model Microphysics and Investigate Orographic Precipitation Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Brian Colle, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 06/30/2009
* USD 261,324.00

Quantitative precipitation forecasts from short-term numerical weather
prediction (NWP) models have improved only gradually during the last few
decades. Recent model verification using field data has revealed some
potentially large deficiencies in bulk microphysical parameterizations (BMPs).
These problems often lead to little increase in precipitation accuracy when
model grid spacing is decreased to less than a few kilometers, even for
stratiform orographic precipitation. The primary objectives of this project are
to use high-resolution observations to verify and improve the microphysics in
mesoscale models, and to document the three-dimensional structures and physical
mechanisms of orographic precipitation. This project builds on previous results
obtained during first phase of the research, during which the model
microphysical predictions were compared against remotely sensed (radar)
observations, in situ aircraft data, and ground measurements for an IPEX
(Intermountain Precipitation EXperiment) case over northeast Utah and an IMPROVE
(Improvement of Microphysical PaRameterization through Observational
Verification Experiment) event over the Oregon Cascades. In order to make
improvements to the BMPs in the new Weather and Research Forecasting (WRF)
model, additional cases need to be investigated, including 1-2 events from the
PACific JETs (PACJET) experiment along the California coast in February 2001. In
addition, this project will complete 3-4 months of high-resolution simulations
over the northern Oregon Cascades in order to compare the simulated cloud
structure with WSR-88D radar data. Model microphysical budgets aloft will be
calculated along hydrometeor trajectories to determine the dominant
microphysical processes that result in surface precipitation errors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These additional field studies and long-term model
comparisons with WSR-88D data will also provide an opportunity to study some of
the detailed three-dimensional structures and physical mechanisms of orographic
precipitation. These datasets will help verify the project's idealized modeling
results, which suggest that an upstream-tilting gravity wave induced by
relatively wide barriers, such as the Cascades or Sierras, can enhance the ice
generation aloft and help seed the lower-level feeder cloud with ice and snow.
Radar and in situ aircraft data will help illustrate how the windward orographic
cloud and microphysics are modified by the mountain circulation aloft. These
observational results will also be combined with high-resolution case study
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, by increasing the understanding of
orographic precipitation processes and improving BMPs, this project will improve
quantitative precipitation forecasting, which is a major initiative of the U.S.
Weather Research Program. Deficiencies in BMPs also exist in global climate
models (GCMs), since similar assumptions are made for snow and cloud water
distributions. Given the importance of clouds in determining global climate
change, this research also benefits the climate community. This project will
involve the education and training of two graduate students and the mentoring of
undergraduate research projects in real-time mesoscale modeling at Stony Brook.
Project results will also be shared within the mesoscale meteorology and
numerical weather prediction classes at Stony Brook. Collaboration with Eastern
Regional Headquarters of the National Weather Service in the area of forecaster
training on mesoscale models will be continued. &lt;br/&gt;