* 0450604
* STTR Phase II: Rapid Nondestructive Residual Stress Characterization of Semiconductor Materials
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2007
* Thomas Mackin, Stress Photonics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2007
* USD 494,436.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II research project aims to
introduce a series of instruments to the microelectronics industry that allow
rapid, high resolution residual stress inspection, defect location and
quantification. In silicon wafer manufacture, small cracks may appear at the
beginning of the wafer process and must be located to avoid adding value to
damaged wafers. In semiconductor wafer bonding, de-bond defects may result from
trapped dust particles and gas bubbles resulting in reliability and performance
degradation. The infrared grey-field polariscope was able to locate these
defects and quantify the residual stress state using a laboratory-based system.
Now, this technology will be interfaced with optimized detectors to improve
defect resolution and introduced onto a microscope platform to improve
inspection of smaller defects. Finally, these stress analysis tools will be
integrated into an automated inspection system that will be applicable to on-
line inspection of the above-mentioned defects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
profitability of many devices and processes can be significantly hindered by low
process yields. Yields can be improved with process control tools that catch
stress variations immediately, and customer satisfaction and device reliability
improvements made by implementing affordable 100% inspection to eliminate all
damaged devices. In addition to making our nation's microelectronics industry
more competitive, this tool will advance the state of scientific knowledge by
improving resolution limits and provide quantitative measurements for
researchers who study semiconductor substrates, wafer bonding, MEMS and
integrated circuits.&lt;br/&gt;