* 0450380
* SBIR Phase II:    Enabling Pedagogical Choice and Cost-Efficiency in the Development of Web-based Curricula
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Linda Chaput, AGILE MIND INC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,020,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will build a
first-release Web-based system for content authoring and delivery that supports
multiple approaches to pedagogical practice and provides efficient, easy to use
methodologies with which course designers can employ system capabilities.
Specifically, this project will continue the work started and demonstrated to be
feasible in Phase I to create online authoring and complementary course
management systems, which have features and benefits that are immediately
available to innovative instructional designers. The goal is to enable the
development of technology-mediated instruction through cost-effective means for
producing new content and to do so with a focus on supporting instructional
design innovation without compromising the capabilities of the technology. The
goal is an innovation that will empower content providers to use principled
learning theories and pedagogical practices for creating new online curricula
that support technology-mediated instruction. The project will produce a new
type of authoring and delivery system in which the functionality available to
create course structure; manage multimedia content development; translate course
specification into reliable production delivery; and access course-related
activities for learners and their teachers or mentors, including dynamic
learning interactions and real-time behavior tracking and reporting reflects the
authors' preferred learning theories and pedagogies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to provide a set of enabling tools that support the development of
technology-mediated instruction through cost-effective means for producing
content, focused on supporting instructional design innovation without
compromising the capabilities of the technology. The commercial applications of
the research result are sales and licenses of the created systems, both with and
without content, to content developers, publishers, and also middle and high
schools, districts, and other local entities for use by individuals and groups
who desire to create and to publish content and assessments for communities of
practice and who are impeded by cost and time constraints. The resulting systems
will address a major problem in education: the consolidation of content
development and dissemination in the hands of a small number of publishing
conglomerates and the consequent lack of quality and diversity of choice that
have been a result of that consolidation. With an extensible authoring system,
the company would be positioned to tap into a large market with a business model
that supports both new business development and the legacy assets of publishers
and eLearning providers, and to create major new opportunities for many other
types of content providers. &lt;br/&gt;