* 0450588
* SBIR Phase II: Variable Azimuth Wave-Equation Imaging (VAWEM)
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Dimitri Bevc, 3DGEO DEVELOPMENT INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,162,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will implement
and demonstrate the feasibility of a new technology that enables enhance seismic
resolution and imaging of deep water complex geologic structures by using
variable azimuth wave-equation migration (VAWEM). VAWEM will provide much
greater resolution and accuracy than what can be accomplished today for towed
marine streamer data, and at significantly less computational cost. The software
will be optimized for deployment on Linux clusters, and testing will be
conducted to determine the optimal geophysical parameters for obtaining the best
possible images. The project involves significant computer engineering to obtain
the maximum efficiency required to image terabyte size data sets and significant
geophysical work to demonstrate the validity of the approach. This advanced
imaging methodology will improve success rate and cost effectiveness for new
field discoveries and increase recovery efficiency for the development of
existing fields. This technology is a fundamental revolutionary advance, and is
a necessary building block in any seismic processing system that images 3-D
prestack data using wave-equation methods for imaging deep water, under-salt
complex geological structures which are the focus of modern oil and gas
exploration.

Societal and economic benefits from the proposed VAWEM technology will accrue
directly to the nation by lowering energy costs and reducing dependence on
foreign energy sources. Energy is at the core of the U.S. and world economies;
therefore, the political, societal, and economic benefits of the proposed
technology go well beyond the substantial direct economic benefit that this
technology will bring to the proposing company and its customers. Commercial
potential of the proposed technology is directly applicable to the fastest
growing and strategically most important area of U.S. exploration, namely the
deepwater subsalt oil and gas province of the Gulf of Mexico federal waters. It
is estimated that most of the Gulf's untapped resources (45 Billion barrels of
oil and 207 trillion cubic feet of natural gas) are trapped in deepwater subsalt
reservoirs, and in ultra deep (over 15,000 ft) gas deposits. Since exploratory
wells in these areas typically cost more than $30 million, tapping these
reserves will require advanced imaging technology such as VAWEM to reduce risk
and make exploration feasible. Reduction USA's dependence on Persian Gulf
sources and the strategic benefits of maintaining strong U.S.A. leadership in
oil technology transcend purely financial considerations.