* 0450581
* SBIR Phase II: Hybrid Inorganic/Organic Ion Exchange Material for the 227Ac/223Ra Generator
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2007
* Hariprasad Gali, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2007
* USD 452,553.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a generator to produce pure radium-223 for use in cancer therapy. The alpha-
emitter Ra-223 has a longer half-life than the other alpha-emitting
radioisotopes (213 Bi, 212Bi and 211At) that are currently being evaluated for
use in radio-immunotherapy (RIT), and has been shown to have higher bone uptake
than the commercially available beta-active bone seekers. This makes it very
attractive for Ra-223 to be developed further for radiopharmaceutical
applications and for use as a pain palliation agent. However, the research and
clinical application of this isotope are hindered by the limited availability of
pure Ra-223. A simple technique to produce the isotope is a generator where a
suitable parent, in this case Ac-227, is immobilized on an ion exchanger column
and Ra-223 is eluted when required. Current separation methods frequently use
organic resins, which tend to degrade under ionizing radiation and thus the
product may contain impurities. Prior Phase I work developed new hybrid
inorganic/organic ion exchange materials with high affinity for actinium, but
low affinity for radium and good resistance against radiation. The Phase II
project will optimize the exchanger performance and fabricate a prototype of the
Ra-223 generator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of this
project will be in the area of cancer therapy. It is expected that the easy - to
- use generator, which poses a smaller radiation hazard to personnel, will be
used at medical research centers, radio - pharmacies and hospitals to produce
pure radium - 223 to treat patients with bone metastases and other small solid
tumors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;