* 0450103
* Synthesis of New Platinum Group Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Hans-Conrad zur Loye, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 02/28/2009
* USD 396,497.00

This project focuses on the synthesis and crystal growth of new platinum group
metal oxides belonging to several different structural families. The synthesis
of new materials will be approached from several directions, including solid
state reactions for powder synthesis and the use of high temperature solution
reactions for crystal growth. Great strides have been made in the development of
new preparative approaches for platinum metal group oxide phases. These new
methods will be applied toward the synthesis of new chemical compositions and
help explore the composition-property-space of these oxides. To accomplish these
tasks, undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will be
trained in cutting edge synthetic and characterization techniques, such as flux
growth of crystals, magnetic measurements on oriented single crystals, and
structure determinations of new compounds using state of the art equipment,
including high-temperature high-pressure reaction vessels, SQUID magnetometers
and CCD based single crystal diffractometers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many important physical
properties that enable the functioning of new electronic devices, data storage
materials, battery components and superconductors are found in oxide materials
containing transition metal elements. This is a versatile group of chemical
compounds that can be selectively modified to exhibit desirable physical
properties that will lay the groundwork for new devices and applications of the
future. Advanced methods are being developed for synthesizing oxides containing
selected transition metal elements from the platinum group, either as powders or
as single crystals, in order to determine the atomic structure of these
materials, to investigate their electronic and magnetic properties, and to
enable their utilization in a variety of applications. To accomplish these
tasks, undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers are being
trained in cutting-edge techniques for synthesizing and characterizing these
materials using state of the art instrumentation. The educational aspect of this
research assures that highly trained men, women and underrepresented minorities
can enter the workforce and meet industry's need for
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;