* 0450487
* SBIR Phase II:    High Resolution Infrared Imager
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* Conor Rafferty, Noble Peak Vision Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 02/29/2008
* USD 983,509.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to leverage
new materials technology to drive a revolution in infrared imaging. Silicon
imagers are widely used, from supermarket scanners to the ultra-sensitive
charge-coupled devices (CCDs) used in astronomy. Germanium is photo-sensitive
over a wider spectrum, from visible to well into the infrared. Combining this
new spectral capability with fine-line silicon manufacturing brings high
resolution, high reliability and lower costs to infrared imaging, enabling new
applications, especially in dentistry and medicine. Short-wave infrared (SWIR)
imagers today using exotic materials have limited resolution and are too costly
for widespread use. This SBIR Phase II project proposes to design a prototype
silicon-imaging array for use with integrated germanium pixels.

The proposed project has broad impact. The short-wave infrared (SWIR) spectral
range from 800 to 1600 nanometer (nm) holds considerable scientific and applied
interest. The human eye does not focus wavelengths past 1.4 micron, so that
infrared imaging using active illumination with bright flashes is possible
without endangering safety. The most promising immediate application is dental
imaging, where the transparency of tooth enamel at 1300 nm allows improved
diagnostics through infrared imaging.