* 0450268
* Collaborative Research:  WCR:  Is Deforestation Changing the Hydrologic Climate and Vegetation Dynamics of the Amazon?
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Roni Avissar, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Liming Zhou
* 02/28/2009
* USD 94,482.00

In this collaborative work, the PIs will test the hypothesis that the long-term
hydrologic climate of Amazonia is changing as a result of deforestation. A
regional coupled atmosphere-biosphere-hydrosphere model will be developed. The
model's formulation addresses important limitations in earlier studies of
Amazonian deforestation by (i) simulating observed patterns of land-cover
change, (ii) simulating the long-term (decadal-to-century scale) consequences of
the interaction between the vegetation, atmosphere and land-surface hydrology,
(iii) incorporating forest edge effects (sub-grid scale variability in
vegetation dynamics associated with forest pasture-interfaces), and (iv) running
at spatial resolutions high enough to simulate explicitly mesoscale variability
in important hydrologic climate processes such as cloud formation that are
caused by fine scale patterns of deforestation. The following three sub-
hypotheses will be evaluated:&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 1: Observed patterns of
deforestation are changing the long-term hydrologic climate of
Amazonia.&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 2: The changing hydrologic climate is changing
both short (hourly-seasonal-yearly) and long-term (yearly-decadal) vegetation
dynamics across the region.&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 3: Changes in the land surface
arising from the changing hydrologic climate are, in turn, shifting the climate
and hydrologic cycle towards a more arid state.&lt;br/&gt;The constrained model
will then be used to predict the future state of the hydrologic climate and
vegetation of the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this study will
be disseminated through webpages and links to existing Amazon research programs.
It is planned to prepare an outreach program for high schools in Boston.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the research.