* 0450279
* The South East Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
* EHR,HRD
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2013
* Joseph Glover, University of Florida
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Leddy
* 02/28/2013
* USD 6,879,599.00

The proposed SEAGEP Program includes The University of Florida (UF) as lead
institution and two primary partners . Clemson University and The University of
South Carolina. SEAGEP unites three Research Extensive institutions that
combined offer PhD degrees in over 50 STEM fields offering unparalleled
opportunities for graduate studies. In 2002, the total STEM graduate enrollment
at these institutions was over 400. Secondary partners are the Florida-Georgia
Louis B. Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (FGLSAMP), the South
Carolina Louis B. Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (SCAMP) and the
University of the U.S. Virgin Islands. SEAGEP will also provide international
opportunities for students through a collaboration with the Latin American and
Caribbean Consortium of Engineering Institutions (LACCEI) and other Latin
American and worldwide projects. SEAGEP will organize and deliver a
comprehensive program that successfully guides STEM graduate students from
underrepresented groups toward doctoral degree completion and entry into
academic careers. The components of the program will be guided by the design
principles suggested by the Building Engineering & Science Talent organization
and will include targeted recruitment activities, bridging activities that
prepare students for the graduate school experience, retention activities that
include faculty and peer mentoring, professional preparation activities for
entry into academic careers, and post doctoral opportunities. The objectives of
the program are to: Increase the number of minority STEM PhD students from
underrepresented groups and prepare them for successful entry into productive
faculty careers, Develop synergistic partner relationships for
institutionalizing changes that will continue to promote diversity in STEM
graduate education Increase the pool of undergraduates from underrepresented
groups who are prepared for entry into graduate STEM fields, Develop a model to
evaluate the effectiveness of the partnership. The SEAGEP program will be
evaluated throughout the five years of the program- using both qualitative and
quantitative methods, including formative evaluation of the program activities
as they are implemented, as well as summative program impact evaluation. The
intellectual merit of SEAGEP is evident in that this Alliance includes a diverse
team well qualified to serve as PIs and facilitators of the activities designed
to address the preparation of doctoral students in creative and innovative ways,
thereby increasing the numbers of underrepresented scholars that earn doctoral
degrees in STEM disciplines and enter the professoriate. SEAGEP has been
developed from a thorough understanding of the challenges inherent in this
mission as reported in the literature. Each partner has unique strengths to
contribute and benefits to realize. Through this synergy, SEAGEP will result in
national models for cultural and institutional change, and partnership
effectiveness. The Mission of SEAGEP is to create a regional partnership for
enhancing diversity in higher education by developing innovative and sustainable
graduate education programs to prepare and train students to enter STEM fields
and to foster models of institutional cultural change. When realized, it will
provide a direct impact by increasing the number of minority PhDs and will also
result in broader impacts by establishing a model partnership and proven
strategies that will be widely disseminated. SEAGEP will contribute to the
development of a more inclusive, skilled, and versatile technical talent pool,
strengthening the diversity of the Nation.s workforce, particularly academia,
thereby contributing to the fields that are critical to the Nation.s economic
strength, national security, and quality of life.