* 0450308
* SBIR Phase II:     Rapid Application Development Architecture for Product, Process, and Cost Configuration Across Manufacturing Verticals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Nainesh Rathod, IMAGINESTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2008
* USD 962,153.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
prototype architecture of an engineering advisory system and validate its
application. Although the cost of product design could be only about 5% of the
total product cost, decisions made during the design stage can contribute as
much as 70-80% to the final product cost. Inappropriate design decisions made
without sufficient manufacturing knowledge, or information, increases iterations
in the product development lifecycle, causing significant costs to both the
original equipment manufactures (OEMs) and the lower tier manufacturers. A
survey by Purdue University indicated that 90% of the engineers/designers had
very little process knowledge, thus indicating that there is a serious design-
manufacturing knowledge gap. The aims and responsibilities of the Phase II
project are to bridge the design-manufacturing knowledge gap through the
development of an engineering advisory system to be used in early design. The
system would be analogous to a spell-checking tool, advising engineers/designers
on manufacturability and cost. The system will perform Dynamic Design for
Manufacturability (DFM) analysis, evaluate part geometry in order to provide
advice on the manufacturing aspects of the part, especially tooling and process
related parameters in part design, help in estimating relative manufacturing
costs for a part by mapping the geometric and non-geometric parameters of the
part to a cost-based manufacturing process model, integrate 3D Shape Search
Engine (licensed from Purdue University) with Part/Tooling/Cost Advisor &amp;
Knowledge Reuse Agent, seamlessly integrate with commercial Computer-Aided-
Design (CAD) system using sophisticated geometric reasoning algorithms and a
hybrid B-rep-voxel approach, and extract manufacturing feature-based geometric
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful this product will enable
engineers/designers make informed decisions early in product design about
processes and part/tooling for manufacturability while serving as an on-demand
manufacturing "what-if" educational tool for engineers/designers. It will reduce
non-value added design features so optimal and economical processes can be
considered, thus lowering tooling costs while minimizing the risk in the
quotation process for both OEMs and tooling firms. The outcome of this research
also have an educational impact in engineering schools by introducing students
to manufacturing processes and design for manufacturability concepts. The
company will provide the engineering advisory system to universities to use in
their engineering curriculum. The outcome of the proposed research can improve
product design, lower cost and positively impact the local economy by linking
local suppliers in early design directly through an engineering advisory system.
&lt;br/&gt;