* 0450221
* Collaborative Research: Water Balance of western North America: Â Dynamics of the Miocene summer monsoon
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Noah Diffenbaugh, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2009
* USD 230,060.00

0450221 Diffenbaugh

This project focuses on the analysis of the water balance in the Western U.S.
during Miocene time through the application of an innovative approach that links
changes in precipitation patterns to sea surface temperature (SST) variations in
the eastern Pacific and Gulf of Mexico. In contrast to the prevailing arid
climate of the modern Western U.S., conditions during middle Miocene time were
far wetter despite similar atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. This project will
determine how SST variations affect the net transfer of water from ocean to land
by using existing Ocean Drilling Program sediment cores to reconstruct a SST
time series for the middle and late Miocene, by groundtruthing the time series
using terrestrial proxies for climate change, and by applying both regional and
global climate models to simulate the impact of SST variations on climate
conditions in the Western U.S. The project will produce the first well-
constrained SST record for Miocene time and will provide modeling results that
hindcast Miocene climate conditions and that may also be applied in a predictive
sense to determine the potential impact of warming episodes on the future
aridity of the Western U.S. Broader impacts of the project include linkages
between the water cycle and regional climate change, support for relatively
recent PhDs as principal investigators, and training of graduate and
undergraduate students.