* 0450289
* Functional Analysis of Phenylpropanoid Cytochrome P450-Dependent Monooxygenases
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Clinton Chapple, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 03/31/2009
* USD 468,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Phenylpropanoids play important roles in plant
structure, growth and development, as well as in plants' defenses against biotic
and abiotic stresses. From a human perspective, phenylpropanoid metabolites
influence both human health and the potential utility of plants in agricultural
contexts. The most abundant phenylpropanoid product is lignin. By definition,
the biosynthesis of lignin is a hallmark of vascular plants because it is in the
xylem of the vasculature that lignin is deposited. In these cells, lignin
functions to allow tracheary element cell walls to resist the tension generated
during transpiration. Further, its deposition, particularly in plants in which
secondary growth occurs, provides physical support to the plant body. Finally,
many phenylpropanoids have been exploited by plants to serve as UV protectants.
It is for these reasons that the evolution of the phenylpropanoid pathway is
thought to have been critical to the colonization of land by tracheophytes.
Despite the profound importance that lignin, and phenylpropanoid metabolism in
general, had on the emergence of land plants, virtually nothing is known about
the evolution of the pathway.&lt;br/&gt;The lignin heteropolymer is produced via
the oxidative coupling of subunits termed monolignols. The polymerization of
these subunits leads to the formation of p-hydroxyphenyl (H), guaiacyl (G), and
syringyl (S) lignin, respectively. H subunits are generally minor components,
and the degree to which G and S units are incorporated into the polymer varies
widely among species, tissue types, and even within an individual cell
wall.&lt;br/&gt;S lignin is generally considered to be restricted to flowering
plants, but it is also deposited in members of the genus Selaginella. Members of
the genus Selaginella are lycophytes, an ancient group of vascular plants that
diverged 300 to 400 million years ago from the lineage that ultimately gave rise
to the angiosperms. There are two fundamental questions to be addressed by this
project. First, how has the ability to deposit S lignin has been conserved in,
or reinvented by, such divergent taxa? Second, to what extent are the enzymes
involved in S lignin synthesis similar or different in Selaginella and
Arabidopsis? The approach to be taken involves isolating genes encoding critical
enzymes in lignin biosynthesis from Selaginella moellendorffii and testing their
function in Arabidopsis and yeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Although the phenylpropanoid metabolism produces many
compounds of interest, a major goal of research on the pathway has been to
improve our understanding of lignin biosynthesis. The extraction of lignin
during the pulping process is both costly and damaging to the environment, thus
the production of plants with more readily extractable lignin would be
beneficial for both economic gain and for long-term environmental
sustainability. Furthermore, the quantity and quality of lignin in forage
species has been found to impact negatively their digestibility in ruminant
animals. As a result, the application of similar strategies to crops used as
animal feedstocks might be expected to lead to comparable gains. The ability to
engineer lignin biosynthesis is critical to these efforts. The presence of
syringyl lignin in Selaginella suggests that new methods to engineer lignin
synthesis may emerge from the research to be completed in this project. In this
context it is noteworthy that to date, efforts to engineer syringyl lignin
synthesis in gymnosperms have failed. This may indicate that our understanding
of lignin biosynthesis, particularly in plants other than angiosperms, is as yet
incomplete. Studying this important pathway in Selaginella may provide new
insights that will aid in metabolic engineering of a broader range of
economically important plants.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this project will provide
training in biochemistry, genetics, and molecular biology to the students
involved in the research. This project will also begin research into a new model
organism that will soon be embraced by others because of its potential for
putting plant biology into an evolutionary context, while at the same time
deepening our explorations into the enzymes that dictate lignin monomer
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;