* 0450317
* Water flux and nitrogen cycling in the hyporheic zones of a semi-arid watershed: Hydrologic and geomorphic driving forces in a transitional climate
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2011
* Donald Siegel, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2011
* USD 744,069.00

0450317&lt;br/&gt;Siegel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hyporheic exchange, the temporary
storage of surface water in stream bank sediments, affects the transport of
solutes, including nutrients, through watersheds. Water diverted into the
hyporheic zone has a longer residence time and more interaction with
biogeochemically active sediments than water in other flow paths. Hyporheic flux
rates and geochemistry have not been studied in semi-arid intermountain
watersheds, transitional in climate between alpine catchments and desert
lowlands. Hyporheic exchange in watersheds in humid regions is enhanced by
stream meanders, variable flow rates, and sediment hydraulic conductivity. In
water poor regions other geomorphic characteristics, particularly beaver dams,
may equally influence hyporheic exchange. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to
complete an intensive study of hyporheic interaction and nitrogen uptake
potential in an intermountain semi-arid watershed with significant beaver
activity. The study will include field experiments and numerical hydrologic
models designed to 1.) identify and quantify hyporheic pathways and fluxes of
water and dissolved solutes across the surface-groundwater interface and 2.)
identify the causes of hyporheic flux variability. We will test the hypothesis
that in-stream flow obstructions, particularly small beaver dams, particularly
enhance the extent of the hyporheic zone along semi-arid streams compared to the
effects of other geomorphic and hydrologic controls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
will test our hypothesis by inversely modeling a series of in-stream tracer
tests to characterize hyporheic storage parameters along various reaches of Red
Canyon Creek, Wyoming. We will use Darcy flux calculations and observations of
tracers at near-stream wells to independently test the results of the in-stream
tracer tests. We will test the hypothesis that reaches with a greater degree of
hyporheic interaction have a greater potential for uptake of nitrate. Dissolved
nitrate will be paired with the conservative tracers during in-stream tracer
tests. Using the rate of decline of nitrate concentrations downstream,
measurements of ammonia and other nitrogen species, and an exponential nutrient
uptake model, we will quantify nitrogen uptake lengths along Red Canyon Creek
and compare these results with hydrologic measures of hyporheic exchange.
Furthermore, we will do microbial investigations incorporating molecular
techniques and analysis of the geochemistry of near-stream waters to
independently evaluate the degree to which denitrification and nitrogen uptake
drives nitrogen processing in the hyporheic zone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
of in-stream tracer tests are empirical in nature, and therefore difficult to
generalize to other sites. For this reason, we will use three-dimensional
numerical computer models of near-stream flow paths to evaluate the physical
processes controlling the aerial extent and flux of water through hyporheic
zones. The results of these models will be combined with detailed measurements
of stream geomorphological and sedimentological characteristics in a series of
multivariate geostatistical approaches to explore what stream characteristics
most affect hyporheic exchange in the study setting and in similar order streams
elsewhere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on the ongoing
collaborative relationships between Syracuse University, the University of
Missouri's Branson geology field camp, and the Wyoming Nature Conservancy.
Previous collaborations between these institutions have resulted in hydrologic
instrumentation of part of the Red Canyon Creek watershed for student research
and education in fields from glacial history to ecology. We will build on this
previous work, enhancing the site with instrumentation that will provide
research grade hydrologic data at a watershed scale. Through this project,
students from across the Nation studying at the Branson geology field camp will
have unprecedented access to a broader range of hydrogeological field
experiments at a wider variety of sites within the Red Canyon Creek watershed.
In addition, students from Central Wyoming College, a 2-year community college
with a large Native American enrollment, will be recruited to participate
directly as summer research assistants for the project. These collaborations,
undergraduate through graduate in level, will potentially have broad educational
impact at both the local and larger scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;