* 0450599
* SBIR Phase II: Customizable Question Answering System for Homeland Security and Commercial Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2008
* Munirathnam Srikanth, Lymba Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 08/31/2008
* USD 924,271.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will result in a
novel question-answering technology. The features of this technology are as
follows: (1) Automatic filtering of questions. During Phase I, Language Computer
Corporation (LCC) developed a system that decomposes high-level questions into
low-level, fact-seeking questions. Some of these questions, however, turn out to
be nonsensical. In Phase II, the firm proposes to submit all of the decomposed
questions to a knowledge-based system, which will eliminate questions that are
inconsistent with tacit knowledge. All of the questions that survive filtering
will be passed back for processing by the question-answering system. (2)
Aligning domain ontologies with a large reference ontology. During Phase I, LCC
developed a tool that generates domain ontologies from raw text. During Phase
II, the firm will extend this tool so that the domain ontologies are
automatically aligned with an overarching domain-independent ontology. This
alignment will permit deeper expansion of query concepts, because it will allow
domain-independent concepts to be augmented with domain-dependent content. (3)
Formal evaluation of semantic relations. The foundation of the question-
answering system is semantic relations extracted from queries and documents.
These relations will be evaluated to assess the relative contribution of each
one to question answering. The result of this evaluation will establish which
aspects of semantics are most useful to question-
answering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a direct impact in the
following areas: (1) The system can be deployed in commercial and government
settings where the accuracy, coverage, reliability, and usability of the
retrieved information are crucial. Ideal applications for the technology include
homeland defense, CRM, education, medicine, and the law. (2) The system bridges
the gap between domain-independent and domain-specific content. Domain
ontologies are constructed automatically, and these ontologies are automatically
aligned with a large reference ontology, so that queries can be simultaneously
expanded into the terms appropriate to many different domains. &lt;br/&gt;