* 0450112
* SGER: Prototype Institutional Repository for the Sharing and Preservation of Archaeological Materials
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Stephen Plog, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2006
* USD 75,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;NSF-0450112&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to share data
and the need to guard against the loss of data are&lt;br/&gt;important in any
discipline. However, in archaeology they may be critical&lt;br/&gt;for two
reasons: First, data collection in archaeology-the equivalent of "experiments"
in many other disciplines-is never replicable because (a) archaeologists destroy
the contexts they are studying as they excavate and (b) all settlements are
remnants of unique combinations of people and activities at particular times.
Data that are lost are data that can never be duplicated.&lt;br/&gt;Second,
archaeological fieldwork most often focuses on only one or two settlements.
However, in order to understand culture history and culture change in a given
region or to examine similarities and differences among regions in trajectories
of cultural evolution, there is a need to integrate data from large numbers of
settlements. The proposed project will undertake the design of prototype
repository processes to extend the ability to share archaeological data and the
range of data types appropriately preserved from archaeological fieldwork. A
major aspect of the design process will be the identification and delineation of
the key institutional, archival, and informatics issues that must be addressed
to resolve the growing crisis within social science broadly and within
archaeology specifically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will have
broader impact in several dimensions. First, as with any preservation activity,
there will be an impact on the possibilities for future analysis by preventing
the loss of data crucial to that analysis. Second, the design of extended access
modes will make practical archaeological analysis of spatial and temporal
variation. Finally, the accessibility and preservation of cultural data from
archaeological projects has the potential to impact social science scholarship
beyond archaeology. Graduate students will be actively engaged in this prototype
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;