* 0450388
* Collaborative Research: River Stage Tomography for Automatic Characterization of Fluxes between Surface and Groundwater Reservoirs: A Pilot Study
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2007
* Tian-Chyi  Jim Yeh, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 04/30/2007
* USD 62,500.00

&lt;br/&gt; The accurate knowledge of water and chemical mass balances is the
key to proper management of water resources in a watershed. After decades of
field investigations and modeling, groundwater storage, fluxes between surface
and subsurface reservoirs, and fluxes between land surface and atmosphere over a
basin/watershed still remain highly uncertain. A breakthrough in
characterization, monitoring, and modeling approaches is needed to resolve this
issue. In this proposal, we propose a novel hydraulic tomography approach to
characterize, monitor, and predict the hyporheic zone and beyond, using spatial-
temporal variations in river stages and the corresponding groundwater responses
near a river. This new technology allows three-dimensional imaging and
determination of fluxes across the river/groundwater boundaries and
characterization of the hyporheic and subsurface system in a manner that is
presently not feasible. If this proposed proof-of-concept study is successful,
the technology can ultimately be extended to basin/watershed scale
problems.&lt;br/&gt; The goal of the study is to demonstrate that hydraulic
tomography based on river stage fluctuations is a valid concept and a viable
technology for detecting large-scale subsurface heterogeneity near the river. We
intend to show that the concept and technology can accomplish its goal in
unconfined aquifers that interact with rivers. Proposed tasks include: 1) the
modification of existing hydrologic tomography inversion algorithm to
accommodate temporally and spatially varying boundary conditions, which
represent the temporally and spatially varying river stages; 2) the examination
of the effects of temporal and spatial varying river stage on groundwater level
in synthetic heterogeneous unconfined aquifers through numerical simulations; 3)
the use of these simulated well hydrographs in the modified inversion algorithms
to test its ability to detect heterogeneity within the hyporheic zone; and 4)
the conduct of laboratory studies using two existing sandboxes with a synthetic
heterogeneous unconfined aquifer.&lt;br/&gt;Results from the study should
demonstrate that while river stages may change rapidly in time and space, the
tomographic inversion is a valid and logical approach as long as the variation
of the river stages is well characterized.&lt;br/&gt;