* 0450794
* CAREER:  Learning Entropy and Energy Project (LEEP)
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Walter Stroup, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 09/30/2007
* USD 247,419.00

Absent an adequate language to talk about change and the direction of change,
science&lt;br/&gt;curricula are fundamentally constrained to over-emphasize
static constructs like&lt;br/&gt;taxonomies and memorized sequences of events.
In contrast with these over-simplified,&lt;br/&gt;statics-based curricula, the
world students live in is complex and dynamic. A&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
disconnect is created between what learners know of their world and
the&lt;br/&gt;current statics-based science they are taught in school. In
addition to moving toward a&lt;br/&gt;math of change strand in school curricula
and early university curricula (e.g. early non-calculus&lt;br/&gt;sciences), a
full dynamics-based curriculum needs to address the directed-ness&lt;br/&gt;we
experience in the world around us. When we get up in the morning, energy
always&lt;br/&gt;flows from our warm feet to the cold floor and never the other
way around. The second&lt;br/&gt;law of thermodynamics the entropy law is the
only law of science that allows&lt;br/&gt;learners to understand the directed-
ness of physical process. Replacing statics-based&lt;br/&gt;curricula with a
full dynamics-based reform depends vitally on being able to talk
about&lt;br/&gt;change but also on being able to talk about the direction of
change. Recent educational&lt;br/&gt;innovations related to the early
introduction of the math of change e.g. the use of&lt;br/&gt;motion detectors
and powerful simulation software are starting to find their way
into&lt;br/&gt;significant curricular reform. Unfortunately, entropy related
fundamental research,&lt;br/&gt;materials development, and course-work aimed at
advancing the dynamic-based&lt;br/&gt;understanding of all learners is all but
non-existent. This grant is aimed at addressing&lt;br/&gt;this critical missing
element in pursuing dynamics-based reform.&lt;br/&gt;Over a decade of entropy-
based research and innovation leads me to believe that&lt;br/&gt;entropy ideas
can be incorporated into learning about energy dynamics early on
in&lt;br/&gt;science education, that entropy can be taught in a way that is
cross-disciplinary and cross-level&lt;br/&gt;(from the very small to the very
large), and that moving in this direction not only&lt;br/&gt;advances student
understanding of entropy but that the ability of all students to
better&lt;br/&gt;understand and succeed, at virtually all levels of their
science learning, is significantly&lt;br/&gt;advanced. Although I intend for
this entropy-focused work to impact science learning&lt;br/&gt;from late
elementary through the wide range of undergraduate science courses,
my&lt;br/&gt;primary focus will be on two critical junctures in students' lives
relative to formal&lt;br/&gt;science learning: early high school and early
university level work. Coming into these&lt;br/&gt;junctures many students are
"still in the game" and are interested in further science&lt;br/&gt;study.
Coming out of these junctures many students decide to leave, especially
students&lt;br/&gt;from under-represented groups. Courses taught at these levels
will serve both as&lt;br/&gt;testbeds for the efficacy of entropy-based learning
and as research settings. In schools, I&lt;br/&gt;will focus primarily on the
state-mandated, ninth-grade Integrated Physics and Chemistry&lt;br/&gt;course.
At the university level I will focus on a newly developed undergraduate
science&lt;br/&gt;course titled Entropy and Energy that I will co-teach with a
research physicist who is also&lt;br/&gt;Co-Director of the completely
restructured and rapidly growing new secondary&lt;br/&gt;certification program
called UTeach. Domain courses, such as this, in the new UTeach&lt;br/&gt;program
are to model Standards-based teaching at the university level.
Research&lt;br/&gt;insights related to student learning as such learning with
entropy will be integrated&lt;br/&gt;with my newly developed Knowing and
Learning course that is the first required&lt;br/&gt;education course for all
the UTEACH students. Through the establishment of a work&lt;br/&gt;circle of
teachers in schools, through the establishment of a brown-bag seminar series
at&lt;br/&gt;the university, through research presentations and publications,
and through the&lt;br/&gt;development of a Learning Entropy and Energy (LEEP)
website, this project is intended&lt;br/&gt;to support a larger conversation
related to the efficacy and significance of learning about&lt;br/&gt;and with
entropy as a vital part of moving towards a dynamics-based curriculum for
all&lt;br/&gt;students.