* 0450554
* SBIR Phase II:  Reflectance Sensitive Image Sensor for Illumination-Invariant Visual Perception
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Vladimir Brajovic, Intrigue Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2008
* USD 709,907.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project
proposes to develop an adaptive CMOS image sensor that estimates and largely
eliminates illumination variations in sensed optical images thus reporting
electronic images that are indicative of the reflectance of the viewed scene. By
eliminating illumination-induced variations from the raw optical images the
proposed sensor will eradicate the vision system's vulnerability to illumination
variations and signal loss due to high dynamic range. The core innovation is in
a signal processing technique for estimating the illumination field from sensed
images. The technique efficiently implements as a dense on-chip massively
parallel analog processor distributed among the photo-detectors to produce a
reflectance sensitive image sensor. By compensating for illumination, the
proposed image sensor inherently addresses the wide dynamic range problem, that
routinely causes conventional cameras to over or under expose producing
inadequate images. Even when illumination conditions do not saturate an image
sensor, the vision system has to account for object appearance variations caused
by illumination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has the potential to
broadly impact computer vision performance and reliability. Most present and
future vision applications including automotive, biometric, security, and mobile
computing applications operate in unconstrained environments and have to cope
with unknown and widely varying illumination conditions. Image sensors are
rapidly finding their way into people's cars, cell-phones, personal digital
assistants, medical and diagnostic equipment, automated drug discovery, cutting
edge security, surveillance and biometric systems. &lt;br/&gt;