* 0450874
* Probing acclimation responses in Prochlorococcus ecotypes through analyses of global gene expression
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2009
* USD 550,000.00

Despite its discovery only a little over a decade ago, the prochlorophyte,
Prochlorococcus marinus, has been shown to be very abundant in oligotrophic
tropical and subtropical open oceans. It is among the most productive
phytoplankton in the oceanic gyres, accounting for up to 80% of primary
production. As such, it is an important component of the marine food web for a
significant fraction of the world's oceans. What adaptive features of
Prochlorococcus strains make them so successful in oligotrophic environments,
how have they adapted to changing environmental conditions and how do they
acclimate as conditions fluctuate? Unfortunately we do not understand the
processes that control either the dynamics or the boundaries of acclimation with
respect to changing temperature, nutrient, or light conditions. Furthermore,
while acclimation responses occur within the boundaries of adaptation, little is
known about the critical cellular changes linked to acclimation, and if similar
changes are observed among different groups of phytoplankton.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Arrigo and Grossman will explore acclimation
processes and the means by which adaptation has limited acclimation of
phytoplankton by monitoring physiological and molecular responses of
Prochlorococcus strains (both a high light- and low light-adapted ecotype)
following the imposition of specific light, nutrient, and temperature
conditions. Examination of acclimation in the laboratory will yield extensive
mechanistic information that can eventually be used to explain growth rates and
features of photosynthesis observed in open ocean phytoplankton.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the research is to determine the
molecular and physiological constraints that set limits on the ability of the
different Prochlorococcus strains to acclimate to both high and low irradiance
levels, increased temperatures, and nutrient stress. To attain this goal the
investigators will address several questions related to features and mechanisms
of acclimation: 1) How do different environmental cues modulate the acclimation
responses? 2) How do cells sense environmental cues and convey that information
to biosynthetic machinery? 3) What are the specific short-term and long-term
responses of phytoplankton to changing conditions? 4) What are the relationships
between physiological activities critical for acclimation and patterns of gene
expression? 5) To what extent do the patterns of gene expression reflect changes
in cell physiology? Prochlorococcus cultures will be monitored during growth in
a cyclodyne following exposure to various light levels delivered over a day-
night cycle with sinusoidal daylight variation. The investigators will also
initiate studies to determine responses of cultures to different temperatures
and nutrient levels, mostly in batch cultures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will generate results that can be adapted to enhance student and public
understanding of relationships between organisms and their environment. These
researchers will work closely with science educators at science centers to
develop and build a classroom version of the cyclodyne, and design a series of
experiments around it that explore the interaction between aquatic microbes and
the environment. Prototype classroom cyclodynes and an associated curriculum
will be developed and deployed in collaboration with local science training
centers, including the Chabot Space and Science Center and/or the Exploratorium
in San Francisco. Furthermore, detailed plans and protocols for building and
using the cyclodyne and the microarrays, plus any software developed under the
umbrella of this grant, will be made public on a website developed specifically
for this project. &lt;br/&gt;