* 0450585
* SBIR Phase II:     High Performance Thin Film Transistors on Plastic Fabricated from Dense Thin-Films of Oriented Semiconductor Nanowires
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* David Stumbo, NANOSYS INC
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 02/29/2008
* USD 999,554.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
revolutionary new high-performance thin-film-on-plastic technology that will
provide single-crystal silicon, thin film transistor (TFT) performance. This
technology is based on a novel thin-film semiconductor on plastic composed of a
dense film of parallel nanowires with electronic properties comparable to
single-crystal silicon that can be deposited at low temperatures. In Phase I,
the feasibility of this innovative technology was successfully demonstrated and
key device design and material processing parameters to address underlying
device performance were identified. Specific developments included (1)
nanomaterial deposition (2) contact technology (3) doping processes and (4)
device architecture. Phase II research will build on the knowledge gained in
Phase I, and focus on further optimization of device performance and the
development of roll-to-roll manufacturing processes. The output of Phase II will
be a prototype array of transistors on plastic. In addition, this fundamental
concept can be applied to nanowire materials other than silicon, allowing the
production of thin films of material that presently are impossible to produce
over large areas on any substrate, including semiconductors relevant to
communications (GaAs, InAs), optically active materials (GaN, InP),
piezoelectric or ferroelectric materials (SrTiO3), or materials of mixed
composition with newly engineered properties.

Commercially, this research will impact greatly the development of high
performance TFT devices on plastic for commercial, military, and homeland
security markets. These high-performance, flexible semiconducting films have the
potential to replace amorphous and polycrystalline silicon in important large-
area electronics applications such as displays and also radio frequency
identification tags (RFID'S).

