* 0450420
* Evaluating Bridge Reliability Following Natural and Man-Made Hazards in Real-Time:    Formulating an International Collaborative Research Program
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2006
* Ahmet Aktan, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 07/31/2006
* USD 35,000.00

Abstract for: Evaluating Bridge Reliability Following Natural and Man-Made
Hazards in Real-Time: Formulating an International Collaborative Research
Program, CMS proposal 0450420

PI: Ahmet Aktan, Drexel

This proposal is being submitted to NSF's Structural Systems and Engineering:
Structural Systems and Hazards Mitigation of Structures program of the Division
of Civil and Mechanical Systems. Dr. Steven McCabe is the Program Director and
Dr. Galip Ulsoy is the Division Director. The objective of the proposal is to
solicit a small travel grant for a group of academic, government and industry
representatives to travel from the US to Japan for three related purposes: (a)
Participating at the International Association for Bridge Management and Safety
Conference at Kyoto, Japan (IABMAS?04, 18-22 October, 2004), (b) Participating
at a meeting of the Executive Council of the International Society for
Structural Health Monitoring and Intelligent Infrastructures (ISHMII) that is
being arranged to take place at Kyoto on October 20, (c) Participating at a
half-day Workshop between the US and International participants of a problem-
focused collaborative research project: "Evaluating the Reliability of Highway
Bridges In Real-Time Following Hazards By Structural Health Monitoring" during
17 October.

The research project for "Bridge Reliability Following Hazards.." offers
significant potential for buy-in from bridge owners. This is necessary to
overcome the reluctance of most bridge owners to embrace new technology and to
demonstrate how leveraging recent research and technology development pays by
advancing the state-of-practice for post-hazard emergency response and recovery
of the highway transportation infrastructure. We note that there is consensus
between government engineers from State DOT's such as CALTRANS, as well as FHWA
and USGS that reliable post-hazard condition assessment of critical elements of
the highway infrastructure is perhaps the single most pressing problem urgently
requiring research and leveraging of technology for advancing the state-of-
practice. Based on various meetings between groups of stakeholders at
Sacramento, Irvine and Bethlehem, the outline of a collaborative multi-
institutional research project has been formulated by a group of academic,
government and industry participants. The research will be detailed in a
proposal before January '05. The US participants of this collaborative project
will be soliciting funding from various federal and state government agencies,
and especially the NEES Program, while the European and Japanese participants
already have or will receive funding from their respective governments. The
outline of this project and the current participants will be described further
in the following. In addition to supporting the travel of a US delegation to
continue building an extremely rewarding international collaboration with their
counterparts from Canada, Europe and the Far East, a travel grant requested by
this proposal will continue to serve for building a strategic relationship
between the two U.S. federal government agencies that have responsibility for
advancing the engineering and management of critical infrastructure systems.
Since 23 April 2003, NSF and FHWA have been exploring a synergistic partnership
for launching a holistic and problem-focused research initiative to enhance the
operations, protection and preservation of the highway transportation
infrastructure. This program is envisioned to take advantage of actual highways
and bridges as test-sites that will be transformed into field laboratories for
scientific research. There is further opportunity to expand an NSF-FHWA
partnership by including USGS and NIST as we expect that delegates from these
latter agencies will also be present. Additional information on the background
of the proposed partnership for research and collaborations between the academic
and industry communities associated with NSF and FHWA is presented in the
following sections of the proposal.

