* 0450635
* SBIR Phase II:    ELISA Biosensor for Rapid Bioterrorism Related Agent Diagnosis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Winston Ho, MAXWELL SENSORS INC.
* Standard Grant
* F.C. Thomas Allnutt
* 12/31/2006
* USD 468,453.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a self-contained enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) biochip for
rapid and confirmatory clinical diagnosis of multiple bio-threat pathogens such
as antigens, antibodies, toxins, and viruses. The ELISA chip utilizes
microfluidic technology to automate and simplify the assay process on a small
chip platform. The plastic chip (reagent pre-loaded) will be affordable and
ready for use, and will eliminate the need for a network of tubing connected to
bulky external reservoirs and pump systems used in current large clinical
laboratory systems. Prior Phase I work successfully developed the microfluidic
chip platform and the reader system, and performed assays with anthrax toxin
protective antigen (PA) and Francisella tularensis. The Phase II project will
focus on system optimization, integration and panel tests, and will result in a
prototype to be refined into a commercial product in Phase III.

The commercial application of this project will be in the area of homeland
security, for detecting biological warfare agents (BWA) and in managing BWA
suspected patients. The ELISA based biochip has the potential to be used as a
rapid testing standard to quickly yield preliminary data in advance of
microbiology tests. The system, with its extreme sensitivity and specificity,
also offers commercial opportunities in the field of clinical diagnostics.

