* 0450441
* SBIR Phase II:    Development of High Performance, Environmentally Benign Lapping Fluids for Hard Disk Drive Manufacturing Applications
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2005,09/30/2007
* John Lombardi, VENTANA RESEARCH COMPANY
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 09/30/2007
* USD 562,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
novel, water soluble, environmentally benign, aspartate co-aspartamide
copolymers for use as aluminum titanium carbide (AlTiC) Giant Magnetoresistive
(GMR) Read Write Head lapping fluid additives. Efforts will be directed towards
refining the composition of these copolymers such that they exhibit maximum
adsorption & electrostatic charging effects upon AlTiC surfaces. This will
enable rapid removal of AlTiC swarf formed during lapping producing GMR Heads of
superior surface quality and uniformity compared to those manufactured
currently. Furthermore, the adsorption properties of these copolymers upon AlTiC
ceramic GMR Head surfaces as well as their metallic sensor layers will also be
characterized in greater detail using Zeta Potential & Electrochemical
Techniques. An optimized procedure for synthesizing these copolymers will be
established enabling them to be economically produced in bulk quantities.
Finally, the company will work closely with hard drive manufacturers and will
integrate the aqueous lapping fluids formulated from these copolymers into its
current GMR Head manufacturing operations. Commercially and from an industrial
standpoint, lapping fluids formulated from these copolymers will enable the last
vertically integrated domestic hard drive manufacturer to produce GMR Read Write
Heads more economically & efficiently thereby enhancing the company's
competitiveness within the marketplace. Future data storage technologies may
also benefit from these fluids since they will in all likelihood still require
high precision lapping or a related super finishing technique to polish their
drive components.