* 0450695
* DNA Replication in Halobacterium sp. NRC-1
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2005,07/31/2010
* Shiladitya DasSarma, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2010
* USD 621,550.00

Halobacterium sp. NRC-1 is a model system for studies of Archaea and
extremophiles. DNA replication is of special interest in this Archaeon because
it can serve as a simple model for replication in eukaryotes and because it is
relatively poorly understood in Archaea. The replication origins from the
chromosome of the model archaeaon, Halobacterium NRC-1, and the common region of
the large extrachromosomal replicons, pNRC100 and pNRC200 have been cloned.
Additional bioinformatic analysis has identified a set of likely genes involved
in DNA replication. The goal of this project is to further examine the cis and
trans acting factors that are important for DNA replication initiation in
Halobacterium NRC-1. The cis acting regions will be studied by detailed random
and site-directed mutagenesis of previously identified autonomously replicating
sequence (ARS) elements, in order to establish the essential regions and their
functions. The protein factors which bind to the conserved ARS element sequences
will be identified by biochemical methods, in vivo and in vitro. A second goal
of the project is to establish which genomic regions are used to initiate DNA
replication in vivo, their directionality, and the mechanism of coordinate
regulation of the three replicons in the Halobacterium NRC-1 genome. For this
goal, DNA microarrays and genetic methodologies will be used. A third goal of
the project is to address the essentially of genes predicted to be involved in
the initiation of DNA replication using a recently improved genetic knockout
system. This project will provide valuable insights into a fundamental and
relatively poorly studied process in the third branch of life. A deeper
appreciation of the diversity of microbes, especially extremophiles, will
result, with possible implications for biotechnology. This project will
contribute to the development of human resources in an important area of
biological research, including the training of graduate students and involvement
of other non-scientists through outreach. The ultimate goal is to bring the
understanding of the players and processes of DNA replication in an archaeon
closer to the level of understanding in bacterial and eukaryotic model systems.