* 0450067
* Grid-enabled Integration of Experimental Data and Simulations for Flexible Protein Docking
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Jesus Izaguirre, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2009
* USD 843,867.00

The University of Notre Dame is awarded a grant to pursue grid-enabled
integration of experimental data and simulations for flexible protein docking.
The elucidation of interactions of a protein with ligands or other proteins is
crucial for structure-based drug design and proteomics. Modeling the flexibility
of proteins is substantially more accurate (and more expensive) than considering
the protein as a rigid conformation. Current methodology effectively
accommodates side chain motions. In this award this methodology is extended to
accommodate larger motions using experimental data and multiscale simulations.
The efficiency of docking will also be improved through integration of docking
protocols with conformational sampling and analysis. These methods will be
validated on HIV-1 protease, HIV-1 integrase, and Dihydrofolate Reductase
(DHFR), for which abundant structural and dynamical data exists. Putative
interactions will be validated through NMR experiments. This research will
produce grid-based tools and a database for molecular simulations and docking
accessible to the research community. A novel aspect of the database technology
will be the efficient management of reliability and availability of storage on
the grid. There will be interdisciplinary training and collaboration among
students and the investigators.