* 0450230
* SBIR Phase II:   Creating Functionally Decomposed Surface Models from Measured Data
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2007
* Tamas Varady, RAINDROP GEOMAGIC INC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 01/31/2007
* USD 489,179.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project deals with the problems
of reconstructing complex free-form shapes from measured data. Raindrop Magic's
primary interest is to produce well-structured, high-quality CAD models. Several
techniques exist to reach this goal; unfortunately, automatic surfacing systems
provide only rough approximations and do not capture the original design intent,
while manual segmentation methods are not very stable and require tedious work.
Using functional decomposition, objects are built up as a collection of large,
independent primary surfaces being connected by smaller, dependent feature
surfaces, such as fillets or swept surfaces. In Phase I, semi-automatic methods
were elaborated to create good segmenting curve nets. Exploiting the specific
properties of different feature types, the research team proposed algorithms to
compute optimal surface representations for each. In Phase II, the team
envisions transforming and extending their theoretical results into robust and
efficient computational algorithms. Five subsystems are proposed: Surface-
Indicators, Constrained-Fitting, Curve-Tracing, Fairing, and Feature-Fitting.
New core technologies are developed for creating different geometric entities,
which are eventually integrated to obtain high-quality surface models. This
technology should significantly shorten lead-time in related industrial design
and manufacturing processes and produce aesthetic objects, having a positive
impact on the whole society.

The proffered technology has broader impacts in two key market sectors: reverse
engineering and advanced surfacing. At the research front, the proposed project
deepens the understanding of computer-aided geometric modeling working with scan
data, a field that has not received much attention from the large CAD companies,
but is an active area of research. It combines the knowledge of both discrete
and continuous mathematics and takes advantage of the strength of both
approaches. On the technology front, it introduces a new paradigm that will
significantly improve the current commercial systems of reverse engineering with
better engineering features and advanced surfacing through simpler operations.
The main applications will be product design, including automotive, aerospace,
consumer products, and medical devices. The improved product will help the US
manufacturing industry to be more competitive in the world market, providing a
way to introduce design on demand and engineering on demand services. The
proposed project will help US companies to increase customer-focused production
and reduce the time between product iterations.