* 0450089
* Collaborative Proposal: On The Causes of Recent Trends in Precipitation over La Plata Basin and Their Impact on the Basin's Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Ernesto Berbery, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2009
* USD 192,004.00

Berbery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0450089&lt;br/&gt;La Plata is the second largest
river in South America and its tributaries are the life blood of the southern
part of the continent. La Plata has an annual-mean discharge at its mouth near
Buenos Aires larger than that of the Mississippi. The installed hydropower
generating capacity (mostly in the Parana, a major subbasin) exceeds 20,000 MW,
almost double that of the Columbia River basin, which by far has the largest
hydropower production among U.S. rivers. On the other hand, the region is
vulnerable to large scale floods with losses of life and damages to
property.&lt;br/&gt;Precipitation and other land surface water cycle variables
have undergone very large decadal scale changes over the last century in much of
the southern part of South America, and within La Plata Basin in particular. In
the last thirty years, precipitation increased up to 30-40% over the central La
Plata basin, and important scientific questions have emerged: what are the
reasons for these changes, and how are variations in precipitation linked to
streamflow changes? Up to now, no certain evidence has been offered to explain
the reasons for such changes.&lt;br/&gt;A team of North and South American
hydrologists and atmospheric scientists has been assembled to address this
crucial and unique aspect of the basin's regional water cycle. The overarching
scientific question to be addressed by this research is: "What is the importance
of local effects in the observed interannual-to-decadal scale changes in La
Plata Basin precipitation and streamflow?" Specifically, it will be sought to:
(a) Assess the degree to which regional climate simulations capture the
precipitation changes in the 1970's over La Plata Basin; (b) Estimate the
effects of local forcings (e.g., soil moisture, vegetation) on the precipitation
and surface hydrology of La Plata Basin; (c) Identify the role of local effects
and large scale precipitation variability in the basin.&lt;br/&gt;The research
strategy outlined in this proposal is based on diagnosis analysis and numerical
experiments with the atmospheric regional mesoscale Eta model and the VIC
hydrologic model, in coupled and uncoupled mode. The Eta model, coupled with VIC
and a river routing scheme, will be employed to describe the pathways from
remote and/or local forcings to the changes in river discharge. Experiments are
designed to understand the impacts of land use changes on the longer term
climate and the feedbacks between land use/land cover and precipitation and
river discharge. Experiments will also focus on the mechanisms by which large
scale variability affects the regional precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;The relevance of
this research is not only due to the yet unanswered scientific questions it will
address, but also because it is a defined application for water resources of a
region of the developing world. The approach aims at having the atmospheric and
hydrologic problems treated in a consistent manner. &lt;br/&gt;The proposal has
a strong educational component. Students will be directly involved in the
research; scientists from Universities of South America will participate adding
regional expertise but also enhancing the educational component. Plans are in
place for exchanges with students of South America, and one or two related
courses at the University of Buenos Aires are planned (at no cost to this
project).&lt;br/&gt;This proposal takes advantage of available infrastructure
both at the University of Maryland and the University of Washington. Computer
systems are already in place and needed upgrades will be ready by the time this
project starts.&lt;br/&gt;