* 0450072
* SBIR Phase II:      Athermal Multiplexers Based on Reflective Arrayed Waveguide Grating Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Luis Grave de Peralta, MULTIPASS CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2006
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will optimize
Performance and demonstrate reliability of temperature insensitive silica-based
arrayed waveguide grating (AWG) multiplexers developed under SBIR Phase I award.
In Phase I we have successfully demonstrated that the temperature sensitivity of
silica-based AWGs can be eliminated by a combination of a reflective device with
a unique external mirror that rotates with temperature at a constant rate. The
rotation of the external mirror compensates for the temperature induced index
change of silica waveguides and the resulting peak wavelength shift of
individual channels, making the device athermal. This has been accomplished
without penalties in the device performance. The goal of Phase II is to develop
compact 40-channel, 100 GHz, totally passive athermal AWGs with Gaussian or
flattop passband profiles that is manufacturable in large volume. Special
attention will be given to the reliability certification of athermal AWGs as
specified by Telcordia standards. During Phase II we will distribute reliable
prototypes to our partners and potential customers for field tests. The research
and development program carried out under this Phase II project will result in
robust manufacturing process of reliable athermal AWGs ready for
commercialization. This project is focused on producing a highly reliable,
temperature insensitive, AWGs based on silica-on-silicon technology. AWGs are
planar optical devices that are considered key components in dense wavelength
division multiplexed (DWDM) optical Networks. The novel approach to the
manufacture of silica based AWGs, relying on high-technology silicon IC
foundries, results in high quality devices that are produced at low cost, in
high volume, and without a large front-end investment. The innovative design
results in complete suppression of the temperature sensitivity of silica based
AWGs. This approach eliminates the need for electric power and external
temperature control of AWGs, resulting in a more robust, and considerably less
expensive device package.