* 0450207
* ALD1-Dependent Signaling in the Plant Defense Response
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Jean Greenberg, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2010
* USD 739,018.00

Plants respond to a local infection by producing molecules that can travel to
different parts of the plant and set in motion a multi-faceted program of
defense. This program enables the plant to better fight off future infections.
Previous work from this laboratory identified a gene called ALD1 that is
important for activating the defense program. ALD1 codes for a protein that can
alter the chemical make up of certain amino acids. This research aims to test
the hypothesis that modified amino acids are themselves the molecules that
travel in plants and activate the defense program or that these amino acids are
an intermediate step in the process. The current work seeks to identify genes
that act together with ALD1 to activate defenses and to identify possible
modified amino acids and/or other metabolites responsible for triggering
defenses. The work also seeks to ascertain whether ALD1 has a similar function
in different types of plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
&lt;br/&gt;This work will serve as a model for understanding how plants defend
themselves against disease. In particular, additional components of the defense
response pathway will be identified, the properties and/or identity of a
potential novel signal molecule(s) will be determined and the generality of
defense functions in different plants will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the
pathway through which plants activate defenses could enable the development of
crop plants with robust disease resistance. Plants make hundreds if not more
metabolites, but information about their roles in signaling pathways and plant
protection is limited. This work could lead to a greater understanding of the
role of some metabolites and to the development of approaches to better
understand their actions. An important outcome of the project will be the
creation of a public database of metabolites induced during the plant defense
response. This project will involve significant training opportunities for a
postdoctoral scholar, one or more undergraduates and at least one high school
student. Ten undergraduates have been trained in this laboratory, most of who
have gone on to graduate school. These include eight women, four of whom are
members of underrepresented minorities (African-American and Hispanic).
Currently, one high school student is involved in significant research
activities as part of another NSF-funded project. The lab will continue
aggressively offering research opportunities to members of underrepresented
groups and high school students as part of this research
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;