* 0450756
* Some Problems in Stochastic Flows and Random Media
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Michael Cranston, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2007
* USD 109,998.00

0450756&lt;br/&gt;Cranston&lt;br/&gt; The PI will work on problems in the area
of stochastic flows and random media. The problems in flows involve rates of
dispersion of a set of passive tracers carried by the flow. Of special interest
here are the set of ballistic points, those which travel at a linear rate that
greatly exceeds the diffusive rate. The PI will examine the Hausdorff dimension
of this set of points and the structure of the image of the set of points which
have traveled at a superdiffusive rate. Another problem is the study of the
length of a curve moving under the flow. The PI will attempt to show, under the
assumption that the top Lyapunov exponent is positive, that the length grows
exponentially at a rate greater than the top Lyapunov exponent. The PI also
proposes to study solutions of the parabolic Anderson equation in both the
scalar and vector case. The problems in the vector case involve establishing
exponential growth rates for magnetic fields generated by turbulent velocity
fields. In the scalar case, the problems involve gaining more insight into the
properties of solutions. &lt;br/&gt; The proposed problems on stochastic flows
are motivated by the motion of pollutants on the ocean surface or in ground
water. A stochastic flow is a convenient model for the motion of particles under
the effect of ocean currents. The proposed work on the parabolic Anderson model
arises from a problem in astrophysics called the dynamo problem. The solution of
a vector version of the parabolic Anderson equation models the magnetic field in
a young star. The basic open question in astrophysics which will be approached
by the PI is whether the magnetic field grows exponentially fast and to
determine the exponential growth rate. &lt;br/&gt;