* 0450897
* Emergence of an Institution for Sustainable Development: Cross-Country Study of Global Reporting Initiative
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Halina Brown, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 04/30/2009
* USD 314,700.00

The subject of this cross-disciplinary research is Global Reporting Initiative
(GRI), a rapidly diffusing standardized system for voluntary reporting of
environmental sustainability performance by companies worldwide. The process of
institutionalization of the GRI in three countries with different environmental
regulatory styles (the US, the Netherlands, and Hungary) will be examined and
compared. The theoretical underpinnings of the research derive from two areas:
economic-sociological, and business-organizational perspectives on institutions;
and comparative study of national styles of environmental business regulation.

Objectives: (1) To elucidate the mechanisms by which the practice of GRI
reporting becomes a societal institution; (2) To identify country-specific
factors affecting the institutionalization of formal GRI Guidelines: its
adoption, adaptation, and subsequent workings in the new context; (3) To
contribute to theory development in two areas: emergence of new informal
societal institutions; transplantation of institutions for environmental
sustainability across countries and cultures; (4) To identify country-specific
policy approaches for enhancing corporate transparency and accountability with
respect to environmental and sustainability performance. The work will focus on
the organizational field: it will follow the dynamic interactions within and
among the key actors who collectively comprise the institution of GRI reporting.
It will identify the characteristics of the emerging institution in each
country, using a set of specific criteria. Three hypotheses, derived from the
PI's previous work, will guide the international comparative work. The data for
the project will be collected through documentary analysis, interviews, and case
studies of selected organizations. Two international teams-in Hungary and the
Netherlands- will accompany the leading US team.

Intellectual merit: What makes this research unique is that it brings together
several active but traditionally separate bodies of research: comparative study
of national styles of environmental business regulation; institutional theory;
transplantation of institutions across countries and cultures; and environmental
policy analysis (specifically with regard to using information disclosure as a
regulatory tool). The project will contribute to theory development in each
area, and the interaction among these four areas of research will enrich each
contribution. The project's focus on an institution combining both private and
public sectors is also unique. The broader impacts will be in the domains of
environmental policy making and global governance. The work will contribute to
the current policy debates concerning treating business as a partner to the
government and civil society in pursuing environmental protection and
sustainable development; It will contribute to identification of the major
facilitating factors and barriers to increasing corporate transparency and
accountability through information disclosure programs; It will generate fresh
insights on such key questions as how new global institutions for sustainable
development arise and evolve, how country-specific context impacts such
institutions, and the role of civil regulation and information in pursuing
environmental sustainability. The results of this work will inform the ongoing
debate on the extent to which successful institutions for sustainable
development and environmental protection can be transplanted across countries
and cultures.