* 0450397
* SBIR Phase II:   Photonic Crystal Coherent Thermal Emission for Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Irina Puscasu, ION OPTICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2007
* USD 507,949.00

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to fabricate a photonic crystal, thermal
mid-IR source with low divergence and low dispersion at about 0.1% the cost of
competing technologies. Phase 1 research resolved fine structure of the emission
spectrum from 2-D photonic crystals showing that the high intensity, large
bandwidth peak had many submodes with strong polarization and angular
dependence. In a series of designed experiments the intensity and central
wavelength of these submodes were varied with geometrical alterations of the
photonic crystal, and theoretically were correlated to surface plasmon
resonances. A computer model was developed that matched experimental data.
Results imply optimization of photonic crystal structure in Phase 2 could
isolate a single sub-mode resulting in very low dispersion, very low divergence
emission that could be coherent. The project will support high-end computational
research at a university for complex electro-magnetic modeling of photon -
surface plasmon interactions. Improved structures predicted by these
calculations will be fabricated at an NSF supported nano-fabrication facility.
We will examine effects of altered symmetry, periodic defects, and detailed
shaping of electrostatic fields.

All existing choices for coherent radiation in the mid-infrared spectral region
are too expensive for widespread vapor detection. Examples are wavelength
shifting of high power pulsed lasers using non-linear optical effects or quantum
cascade lasers (now $5,000 each). The proposed source could sell for less than
$10. Additionally, it could significantly reduce the cost of sensitive
spectroscopic instrumentation allowing detection of vapors well below 1ppm
concentration and application to widespread use as toxic vapor detectors for
commercial, residential, and homeland defense applications. Compared to other
technology, these detectors are temperature insensitive, rugged, and free of
interference effects with zero maintenance and zero drift. This work will
contribute towards understanding photon surface plasmon interactions within 2D
photonic crystals. The field has huge implications for the microelectronics and
optics industry as optical and electronic functions are combined onto single
chips for applications to optical computing, communications, etc.

