* 0450507
* SBIR Phase II:   Iptymer Low-k Dielectric Materials
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2007
* Lawrence Hancock, NOMADICS, INC
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 03/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
introduce new low-dielectric constant polymers as a new dielectric material for
the fabrication of interconnect systems in integrated circuits. The continuing
drive for denser integrated circuits and faster interconnects requires the
development of new interlayer dielectric materials. The proposed materials rely
on newly defined, so called Iptymer molecular design concepts, to create
intrinsic free volume within the material. This approach is distinctly different
than the current methods under investigation that introduce extrinsic pores into
a material to lower its dielectric constant. The standout thermal stability,
mechanical strength, and processability of Iptymer materials will enable facile
integration into semiconductor fabrication processes. The research objectives of
the Phase II program will introduce and supply Iptymer materials into
semiconductor fabrication process development programs. This effort builds on
Phase I results that demonstrated scaled synthesis of key Iptymer monomers and
polymers and validated the dielectric performance, mechanical strength and
processability of Iptymer polymers. The Phase II program will demonstrate pilot
production of Iptymer materials that possess a dielectric constant less than 2.0
and have superior mechanical and thermal integrity. In addition integration of
Iptymers in semiconductor fabrication processes will be
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercially, the impact of reliable low-k
dielectric materials is considerable. Higher bandwidth processing and
communication for the same cost will be possible with improved materials.
Present day microprocessors have a range of clock speeds determined from post-
fabrication testing. Superior low- dielectric materials will not only increase
the ultimate clock speeds, but will also improve the yield of the highest speed
devices. Every country, economic group, and industry will benefit from such
advances. The societal benefits realized through the extension of electronic
tools into areas where their use is now impractical or not affordable will be
tremendous. Widespread availability of computers throughout primary and
secondary education will reap tremendous gains in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;