* 0450122
* AGEP Collaborative Research Training: North Carolina Alliance To Create Opportunity Through Education
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2005,12/31/2012
* Kenneth Murray, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2012
* USD 1,672,335.00

The purpose of the North Carolina Alliance to Create Opportunity through
Education (OPT-ED) AGEP is to substantially enhance efforts in North Carolina to
increase the number of underrepresented minority (URM) students receiving PhD
degrees and ultimately entering the professoriate in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. The proposed AGEP project combines
two existing Minority Graduate Education (MGE) projects at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNCCH) and jointly at North Carolina State
University (NCSU) and North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NC A&amp;T).
Immediately after the MGE grants were awarded, the three schools formed an
alliance; one year later, formed a formal network that included all NSF-HRD
supported URM initiative projects in North Carolina: the Louis Stokes Alliance
Minority Participation Program, the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, and Centers for Research Excellence in Science and Technology, in
addition to the North Carolina Math Science Education Network, a K-12 program
with sites at college campuses across the state. Thus, OPT-ED is the formal
alliance of the three institutions under one program and the building and
strengthening of the collaborative network or alliance among NSF-supported URM
initiative projects in the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. OPT-
ED.s strength and uniqueness is its incorporation of NSF URM
initiative&lt;br/&gt;programs in North Carolina into a broader alliance to form
student pathways to the PhD degree and the professoriate. OPT-ED and its network
partners recognize that STEM PhDs are not the result of graduate programs alone,
but are fashioned from the intellectual building blocks that occur in middle and
high school. The logic behind the development of OPT-ED stems from the
conceptualization that the connecting of programs with common goals, to advance
the participation of URM students in STEM fields would strengthen this effort in
a much broader fashion. The key is the participation of programs from the
education spectrum ranging from middle school to PhD programs. This in itself is
a unique development. This framework allows a clear pathway to be evident in
that students in the middle school program can receive guidance and support all
the way through to the completion of the PhD. These connections will enhance the
possibility of students continuing to receive encouragement, reinforcement, and
expanded research experiences that will increase their successfully pursuing
STEM graduate degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Through integrating
the resources of all NSF-HRD (and ultimately other) diversity&lt;br/&gt;programs
in the state, OPT-ED will have a broad impact across several educational levels,
the state of North Carolina, the Southeast and, with the eventual production of
PhD recipients, the nation. Thus, OPTED will serve as a comprehensive project
for recruiting, mentoring, and graduating URM students in STEM PhD programs, and
to carry out strategies to identify and broadly support URM students who want to
pursue graduate studies and careers. The norms of inclusiveness at the AGEP
institutions and the relationships that have been forged in Phase I and will be
strengthened in Phase II will endure well past the termination of grant support.
Given its goals and objectives, this alliance and the expected expansion of
network programs will continue to work in partnership to provide URM students
with opportunities to pursue PhD degrees and prepare for the professoriate well
into the future.