* 0450033
* Conference: Biophysical and Biomechanical Adaptation and Bioinspired Engineering, March 28-30, 2005 at Caltech, Pasadena, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2006
* Morteza Gharib, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 01/31/2006
* USD 15,000.00

The transmission of electrical impulses among cells in the nervous system is a
fundamental aspect of neural function. The proposed studies will investigate the
molecular mechanisms underlying this important process. A major challenge at
present is to make connections between the wealth of biochemical data defining
the properties and interactions of specific proteins and the endogenous
molecular mechanisms operating in living cells and tissues. A very promising
solution is fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), a powerful imaging
method allowing protein interactions to be examined in living cells. To take
full advantage of this approach, this study combines FRET analysis with the
experimental tools available in the genetic model system, Drosophila.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include high quality
research experiences and educational opportunities for undergraduates. Several
undergraduate students have already been actively involved and contributing to
this project, including two women. The project will provide broad training
opportunities for these students ranging from Drosophila genetics and molecular
biology to live imaging. The materials and approaches developed will also be
integrated into a team-taught undergraduate/graduate laboratory course to
provide a demonstration of FRET analysis. Finally, the project will include
rigorous multidisciplinary graduate training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investment of tax dollars in this project will advance our knowledge of a
critical aspect of brain function, allowing us to better understand and control
the molecular mechanisms of neurological disease. In addition, this project will
promote the development of junior scientists who may lead us to new discoveries
in the future. &lt;br/&gt;