* 0450210
* Air Force/Army/NSF Joint Workshop on "Multifunctional Materials and Structures"; October 29-30, 2004; Monterey, CA
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2005
* Fu-Kuo Chang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 02/28/2005
* USD 9,000.00

The Stanford University is proposing to organize the Multifunctional Materials
and&lt;br/&gt;Structures Workshop on October 29-30, 2004. The workshop will be
co-sponsored by the&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation, the Air Force Office
of Scientific Research, and the Army&lt;br/&gt;Research Office. The major theme
of the workshop is focused on multifunctional composites with automomic
capabilities. Particularly, attention will be given on composite materials with
engergy storage capability, with self-diagnostic capability and self-sening
capability. The Stanford University will be providing administrative support to
this special Workshop. The total budget of $ 32,500 is proposed to a consortium
of AFOSR, ARO and NSF to cover such costs as: (a) travel and lodging subsidy for
the workshop speakers, (b) renting of a meeting room, (c) refreshments and
banquet expense for all participants; (d) staffing and the preparation of the
Workshop proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide the
research community a unique opportunity to examine the current state-of-the art
technologies in the field and to discuss urgent needs in new technology
development with industry representatives. The workshop will provide a forum to
further fertilize the development of innovative technologies in the field. The
workshop will provide a unique opportunity for researchers, educators, and
trainers to interface directly with industry representatives and government
funding agents across many application fields, ranging from civil
infrastructures and ground-space-undersea transportation systems, to bio medical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;