* 0450877
* Support for International Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS); December 5-8, 2004; Lisbon, Portugal
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2005
* James Anderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

Anderson - RTSS Workshop abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Real-
Time Systems Symposium (RTSS) is an annual symposium partially sponsored by the
IEEE Computer Society. This year's symposium will take&lt;br/&gt;place in
Lisbon, Portugal, December 5-8, 2004.&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for
student travel grants, and to partially fund the creating of an "anniversary
DVD," which will contain the first 25 RTSS proceedings, as well as the .rst 10
RTAS proceedings. RTAS - the Real-time and Embedded Technology and Application
Symposium - is a sister conference of RTSS that is also devoted to issues
involving real-time and embedded systems. Since both conferences are marking
milestone anniversaries this year, this is an appropriate time to look back at
what has been accomplished in the area of real-time and&lt;br/&gt;embedded
systems over the last 25 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The travel grants enable
approximately 20 young researchers in the ?eld of embedded and real-time systems
to attend RTSS 2004. The DVD will help in disseminating the results of this
year's symposium and will be a valuable research tool, as it will allow content
searches to be conducted over all 35 stored proceedings. The DVD will also give
young researchers direct access to many of the landmark papers in the area of
real-time and embedded computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;