* 0450385
* Collaborative Research:  Testing a Dynamical-Hortonian Scaling Theory for for Flood Events on Whitewater Basin, Kansas
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2007
* Jason Kean, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2007
* USD 360,558.00

0450385&lt;br/&gt;Gupta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to conduct a pilot
project to develop and test the physical basis of a statistical scaling theory
for peak flows for individual rainfall-runoff events in natural river basin. The
theory rests on a peak-flow-scaling hypothesis that can be stated as:
Statistical distributions of peak-flows for complete H-S streams in rainfall-
runoff events exhibit scale invariance as a fundamental organizing principle,
which can be predicted from knowledge of space-time rainfall; infiltration and
runoff generation; network topology; geometry; hydraulic geometry; channel
losses due to transpiration from riparian vegetation and/or infiltration; and
channel gains due to recharge. Scale invariance or scaling is an emergent
property of a complex nonlinear system, which is not built into the equations
representing physical processes that produce peak flows. Our objectives for a
pilot project combining both theoretical analyses and a field program will be
carried out on the 150 sq. km. Walnut Gulch basin, AZ, the 21 sq. km Goodwin
Creek basin, MS, and the 1100 sq. km. Whitewater basin, KS. Whitewater is a
carefully selected basin for investigating heavy-rainfall induced floods
resulting dominantly from overland flow. It is a tributary of the Walnut River,
which was a site for Atmospheric Boundary Layer Experiments (ABLE) during
1995-2004. Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM)/DOE Climate Research facility
(ACRF) support of our project provides use of ABLE instruments that we need, and
help with field deployment and maintenance of instruments in Whitewater.
&lt;br/&gt;Our specific objectives are: (1) Investigate physical basis of
statistical scaling in peak-flow using existing data from the two ARS basins,
(2) Test preliminary validity of mean peak flow scaling and physically
postulated change in it by installing eleven new stream flow gauges in the
Whitewater basin that can accurately measure stream flow hydrographs on the
basis of a new technology developed by us, (3) Test a new Hortonian fetch
hypothesis for transpiration losses, which states that the statistical
distributions of forested riparian fetches over which trees extract water from a
channel network vary predictably with the H-S order and yield Horton ratios for
fetch area and transpired volume. Installation of a twelfth stream flow gauge to
accurately measure flow losses in a channel link due to transpiration, (4)
Estimate good quality space-time rainfall intensity data using measurements from
existing WSR-88D NEXRAD radars and 14 new rain gage sites, (5) Conduct
statistical scaling analyses on rainfall data obtained under objective-4 and
develop a predictive understanding of rainfall scaling statistics from physical
processes, (6) Deploy and test a new network for real-time data collection,
transmission and storage from our sensors. Our cooperative interdisciplinary and
multidisciplinary project includes senior faculty, post docs, and graduate
students from the University of Colorado, Boulder, the University of Iowa, and
the University of New Mexico, and scientists from the U.S. Geological Survey.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;A physical basis of the statistical
scaling theory for peak flows for rainfall-runoff events in natural river basins
provides a key step towards solving the long-standing problem of flood
prediction from ungauged basins (PUB). It also provides a rigorous scientific
framework for detecting and predicting how anthropogenic changes in landscape
and climate variability modify biophysical processes generating floods, which
can be used for predicting flood statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Our pilot project is a major first step towards developing a
new unified network-based theory that couples hydrology, boundarylayer- and
hydro- meteorology, landscape and stream ecology, biogeochemistry, climate
variability and anthropogenic change in river basins. &lt;br/&gt;