* 0450114
* Identification of Nuclear Genes Regulated by Etioplast Differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Gregory Armstrong, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2008
* USD 330,000.00

Photosynthesis, the conversion of solar energy absorbed by chlorophyll and
carotenoid pigments into stored chemical energy, takes place in green plant
tissues within a compartment of the plant cell known as the plastid. The
chloroplast, the specific plastid type that performs photosynthesis, contains
internal membranes called thylakoids required for this process. Nongreen plant
tissues that do not photosynthesize contain other characteristic plastid types,
including the etioplast in the embryonic leaves of dark-grown angiosperm
seedlings. The hallmark of maturing etioplasts is a paracrystalline inner
membrane of unknown function termed the prolamellar body. When dark-grown
seedlings that have germinated underground emerge from the soil, light causes
etioplasts to differentiate into chloroplasts. Such seedlings begin to green and
form photosynthetically active thylakoids due to the strictly light-dependent
synthesis of chlorophyll catalyzed by the NADPH-protochlorophyllide
oxidoreductase enzyme concentrated in the prolamellar body.&lt;br/&gt;Mature
chloroplasts are thought to contain more than 3000 distinct proteins. More than
95 % of these proteins are encoded by genes specified by DNA in the nucleus and
the remainder by the genes of the much smaller plastid genome. Because nuclear-
encoded plastid proteins are synthesized in the cytosol rather than the plastid,
they must be imported into that cellular compartment. Multiple mechanisms have
evolved to help coordinate gene expression and protein production between the
nucleus and the chloroplast. For example, several distinct chloroplast-to-
nucleus signaling pathways that regulate primarily nuclear genes required for
photosynthesis have been identified and partially characterized. In contrast,
the potential for etioplast-to-nucleus signaling in the dark to regulate nuclear
gene expression before greening begins has remained virtually
unexplored.&lt;br/&gt;The research planned encompasses three main goals: (1) To
use a whole genome approach to identify all genes of Arabidopsis, as a model for
other plant species, whose expression is strongly regulated by etioplast
development in dark-grown seedlings, (2) To confirm the link between etioplast
differentiation and the regulation of these target nuclear genes using
independent assays, (3) To determine target gene expression patterns, and the
subcellular localization and function of the corresponding protein products in
dark-grown and greening seedlings. This research will provide a basis for
exploring communication within plant cells between the etioplast and the
nucleus. A thorough understanding of this process is essential because light-
dependent chloroplast maturation is required to establish photosynthetic energy
metabolism in germinating seedlings.&lt;br/&gt; An important aspect of this
project will be to provide opportunities for training scientific researchers at
the graduate, undergraduate and postdoctoral levels. Different aspects of the
research will provide exposure to contemporary molecular-genetic and biochemical
methods applicable to higher plants. The researchers involved will be encouraged
to disseminate their findings through public presentations and outreach
activities, and to actively participate in scientific meetings and professional
societies.&lt;br/&gt;