* 0450875
* RUI: The Cytochrome bf complex: Role in Redox Regulation and Function of the Quinone-reductase Site
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Toivo Kallas, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2010
* USD 366,000.00

The cytochrome bf complex of cyanobacterial, algal, and plant oxygenic
photosynthesis transfers electrons between the two photochemical reaction
centers and establishes a proton gradient for ATP synthesis. In addition, the bf
complex plays a crucial role in redox sensing and regulation of photosynthesis.
The catalytic mechanism involves plastoquinol oxidation on one side of the
membrane and plastoquinone reduction on the other side. Quinone-reductase-site
function is poorly understood but seems necessary for turnover of the bf
complex, cyclic electron flow, and has implications for oxygen radical
production. A unique, recently discovered heme (ci or x) resides in the quinone-
reductase pocket. This project will investigate the mechanism and consequences
of redox regulation by the bf complex and quinone-reductase-site function. Most
studies will be performed using the cyanobacterium Synechocystis PCC 6803, which
is amenable to genetics, time-resolved spectroscopy, and microarray analysis.
Specific objectives are: 1) To investigate available Rieske iron-sulfur protein
and low and high-potential chain mutants of the bf complex for state-transitions
(the redistribution of light harvesting antenna) and electron transport
kinetics. 2) To investigate specific mutants by microarray hybridizations, 2D
gel separations, and mass spectrometry to characterize the role of the bf
complex in gene and protein regulation. 3) To obtain additional redox-regulation
mutants by chemical mutagenesis and fluorescence screening. 4) To construct
structure-based, site-directed mutations in the cytochrome bf quinonereductase
domain to investigate its catalytic mechanism and role in cyclic electron
transport. Mutant cyanobacteria will be characterized for electron transfer
kinetics, regulation of state-transitions, oxygen radical production, and
properties of the ci (x) heme. The research is timely because of the cytochrome
bf structures and will provide important new insights into protein structure-
function and redox signaling in photosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: Research is an important component of the educational experience for
many students at UW Oshkosh. The research on redox regulation, catalytic
mechanisms, and oxygen radical production in the cytochrome bf complex of
cyanobacterial photosynthesis is multifaceted, takes full advantage of the NSF-
funded Proteomics and Functional-Genomics Core Facility at UW Oshkosh, and will
provide numerous, excellent and exciting research opportunities for students in
all aspects of the project.