* 0450894
* Complex Life-histories in Marine Benthic Invertebrates: Graduate Student Support
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2005
* Dianna Padilla, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 11/30/2005
* USD 8,000.00

Complex Life-Histories in Marine Benthic Invertebrates: Graduate Student
Support&lt;br/&gt;Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, January
2005&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dianna K. Padilla and Benjamin G.
Miner&lt;br/&gt;Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY&lt;br/&gt;University of
California, Davis, Davis CA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex life-histories are
common among plants and animals, and are evolutionarily and ecologically
important. Among animals, there is evidence that complex life-histories evolved
in species that lived in the oceans, and today much of the diversity in life-
histories occurs among marine invertebrates. The last review of the field of
marine invertebrate life-histories was approximately 10 years ago. Since then
there have been important advances in the field. For example, the ecological
forces that drive evolutionary shifts in life histories, the developmental
mechanisms that allow for these shifts, the ecological and evolutionary roles of
dispersal via larvae, and the linking of larval condition with later life-
history stages are now the center of new studies not addressed before.
Application of this information is currently relevant to a wide range of
research areas, including (i) the new field of evolution of development, (ii)
interest in phenotypic plasticity and development, and (iii) a focus on the
critical importance of dispersal phases of marine animals for the success of
marine reserve design and sustainable fisheries. To review and synthesize the
recent advances in the field, a symposium entitled "Complex Life-Histories in
Marine Benthic Invertebrates" and two associated paper sessions will be held at
the annual meetings of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology from
January 4-9, 2005 in San Diego CA. The symposium talks will be presented by
leaders in the field who will synthesize the recent advances in their respective
fields, and provide future directions and challenges. The contributed paper
sessions will include presentations by graduate students and recent graduates,
highlighting the work of student scientists, facilitating interactions and
increasing the impact of the symposium. This award will provide 16 students and
recently graduated (&lt;2 years) postdoctoral investigators with $500 travel
awards to attend the symposium and present their research in associated
sessions. The symposium will attract a large audience interested in the field of
complex life-histories in marine invertebrates and provide young scientists with
the opportunity to interact with many senior scientists in their
field.&lt;br/&gt;