* 0450482
* SBIR Phase II:  An Integrated Software Tool for Modeling and Model-Based Control of Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Jon Ebert, SC SOLUTIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 05/31/2009
* USD 930,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a commercial prototype of a novel software tool for integrated model-based
control design for Rapid Thermal Processing (RTP) systems. Semiconductor process
engineers and RTP equipment design engineers will use the tool. Currently, the
design and development of advanced process controllers is a relatively slow and
complicated process. There is no high-level tool that allows the process
engineer to design, tune and deploy advanced controllers and develop low-order,
fast physical models to be used for control. Based on customer feedback and its
own experience the company has found a strong need for an integrated modeling
and control tool that can be customized for a specific process. Phase I results
proved the feasibility of such a tool by closed-loop simulations of a generic
RTP chamber using a proof-of-concept version of the proposed tool. This Phase II
will further develop and implement relevant model-order reduction algorithms,
implement the algorithm for speeding up the Monte Carlo ray tracing
calculations, develop the user interface, and integrate the tool components. The
company will work closely with its industrial partner in testing the prototype
tool in the design of next-generation RTP equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful the proposed software package will result in a tool that will
substantially reduce the development time of RTP equipment and processes. The
tool also provides components for development of advanced techniques in virtual
sensing and fault detection. RTP is the company's initial focus, but will
leverage the modular nature of the product to extend its capabilities to other
semiconductor equipment (e.g., CMP, CVD, etch, etc.) and even equipment used in
other industries. Moreover, devices for MEMS and new nanoscale electronics
technologies (e.g. spintronic and molecular computing) are expected to be
commercialized using CMOS-like manufacturing processes. Hence, by creating a new
way of designing and developing equipment and processes efficiently, this tool
will have an impact far beyond RTP. The software will serve as a teaching and
training tool that can be used in universities and government laboratories of
NIST, DoD, DoE, etc. &lt;br/&gt;