* 0450159
* tRNA Genes and Genetic Mobility in S. cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Suzanne Sandmeyer, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/28/2009
* USD 535,461.00

Transfer RNA genes (tDNA's) are important not only for the RNA's they encode,
but also for their roles in genomic function and evolution. They have been
identified as boundaries of heterochromatic DNA, repressors of pol II
transcription, sites of genomic rearrangement and ectopic recombination, sites
of pathogenic island insertion, and targets of long terminal repeat (LTR)
retrotransposon integration. The Sandmeyer laboratory studies Ty3, a
retroviruslike element in Saccharomyces cerevisiae that inserts at RNA
polymerase III transcription initiation sites. It is known from an in vitro
system that includes viruslike particles and a plasmid-borne target, that the
pol III transcription factor TFIIIB bound to DNA is sufficient for integration
in vitro. However, much remains to be learned about the relationship between
this element, tDNA's, and their genomic contexts. This project has three goals:
1) Characterization of the Ty3 preintegration complex (PIC) and reconstitution
of a defined in vitro Ty3 integration system. A central step in the Ty3
lifecycle is conversion of the VLP into the integration-competent cDNA-
associated PIC. A PIC fraction will be isolated based on cDNA integrating
activity. It will be characterized for Ty3 and host proteins and imaged using
AFM. 2) Identification of specific interactions between the Ty3 PIC and its
target. The minimal target requirement for in vitro integration of Ty3 is
comprised of the TATA binding protein (TBP) and Brf1 bound to a RNA pol III
promoter. The domains in the PIC and target which interact will be identified by
testing for interactions between Ty3 proteins, particularly integrase, and Brf1.
If those candidates do not interact, Ty3 will be mutagenized and a genetic
screen will be used to identify mutants affected in position specificity. 3)
Characterization of features of chromosomal targets of Ty3 integration. The
relationship of in vivo chromosome-based transcriptional activity and Ty3
targeting will be addressed using a diverse subset of Pol III-transcribed genes.
TFIIIB and TFIIIC and Pol III occupancy and transposition will be monitored
using chromatin immunoprecipitation quantitative PCR, respectively. &lt;br/&gt;
Retrotransposons and genes for tRNA's are major forces affecting mobilization in
prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes yet relatively little is actually understood
about the ability of tRNA genes to act as delimiters of chromosomal regions or
why retrotransposons prefer integration in some regions over others. This
research will lead to a better understanding of these two interacting and
dynamic genomic components. It will also be used by the PI to introduce summer
high school students, undergraduate biology majors, and graduate students to the
principles of yeast molecular biology and genomic research. UCI has an active
Minority Scientist Program, and students from a wide range of educational
institutions, including community colleges and medical schools, are recruited
into this program and are eligible for this project. Data will be disseminated
by publication and by posting a database summarizing the findings at a public
website. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;