* 0450037
* CAREER: In situ Optical and Magnetotransport Studies of Organic-Ferromagnetic-Semiconductor Hybrid Structures for Spin-Based Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Roland Kawakami, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 01/31/2011
* USD 500,000.00

This project investigates spin-dependent phenomena in novel hybrid structures
that combine organic semiconductors with ferromagnetic films and semiconductor
heterostructures. This is a fascinating new direction for the field of
spintronics (spin-based electronics) and there are great opportunities to
realize new physical phenomena due to the unusual properties of organic
molecules, such as adjustable spin-orbit coupling and asymmetric spin scattering
by chiral molecules. To explore these and other possibilities, molecular beam
epitaxy synthesis is combined with in situ optical, ultrafast optical, and
magnetotransport characterization. In this manner, high quality layered
structures are fabricated in ultrahigh vacuum with atomic-scale precision, and
the evolution of the electronic and spin-dependent properties can be
investigated at different stages of fabrication. The long term technological
impact of this work is in the areas of information storage, computing,
optoelectronics, and flexible displays. The participation of graduate students,
undergraduates, high school students and teachers in this cutting-edge materials
research will provide education and training in high-technology areas which have
been previously unavailable in the Inland Empire of Southern California. This
project also leads the nascent electronic/magnetic/optical materials research
effort at the rapidly growing UC Riverside campus through new coursework and
research infrastructure development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of
electronics in the latter half of the 20th century (which is responsible for
computers, CD/DVD players, cell phones, etc.) is based on moving electrons from
one location to another in an electronic circuit. In the last 15 years,
scientific breakthroughs have enabled the "spinning" motion of electrons
(similar to the rotation of a basketball) to be exploited for new technologies
such as giant magnetoresistive read heads used in computers hard drives and
multimedia applications. This new paradigm for electronics has come to be known
as spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops new hybrid materials
that combine traditional inorganic electronic materials (gallium arsenide,
silicon, iron, etc.) with organic molecular films to take advantage of electron
spin as never before possible in purely inorganic materials. This is a
fascinating new direction for spin-based electronics research. These hybrid
structures will be created by a process called molecular beam epitaxy in which
materials are deposited atom-by-atom or molecule-by-molecule in an ultrahigh
vacuum environment for the most well-controlled, highest purity materials and
structures. The behavior of electrons and their spinning motion will be
investigated using state-of-the-art optical and electronic tools. This research
may lead to advances in computing, data storage, optoelectronics, and displays.
The participation of graduate students, undergraduates, high school students and
teachers in this cutting-edge materials research will provide education and
training in high-technology areas which have been previously unavailable in the
Inland Empire of Southern California. This project also leads the nascent
electronic/magnetic/optical materials research effort at the rapidly growing UC
Riverside campus through new coursework and research infrastructure
development.&lt;br/&gt;