* 0450203
* Biologically-Inspired Adaptive and Reconfigurable Systems: Modeling, Synthesis, and Simulation
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Andrew Goliszek, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick F. Mensah
* 03/31/2008
* USD 1,000,000.00

HRD-0450203&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biologically-inspired Adaptive and
Reconfigurable Systems: Modeling, Synthesis, and
Simulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina A&amp;T State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yong D. Song&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With NSF
support, North Carolina A&amp;T State University will establish an
interdisciplinary research and education infrastructure for Biomimetic
Autonomous Systems Engineering (BASE). A multi-disciplinary team will explore
biologically-inspired approaches to system adaptation, fault-tolerance and
reconfiguration. The project will explore the phenomena of self-adaptation and
reconfiguration/organization in natural biological systems, and develop a
theoretical framework for self-reconfigurable systems. The project will also
design and evaluate biomimetic mechanisms and algorithms for
future&lt;br/&gt;metamorphic autonomous systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will conduct three major investigations. First, the key factors
that enable biological systems to be functionally adaptive and operationally
reliable will be investigated. Second, systematic studies on how to use these
principles as a source of inspiration to design robust and fault-tolerant
systems will be conducted. These principles will be formalized as algorithms and
strategies, with explicit primitives, means of reasoning, self-learning and
organization, thus providing a framework for the design and analysis of systems
with adaptive and fault-tolerant capabilities. Finally, evaluation of the
developed methods will be conducted using the university's laboratory facilities
and those of collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
project lies not only in the identification and&lt;br/&gt;characterization of
the biologically-inspired principles and strategies related to system adaptation
and robustness, but also the ultimate incorporation of these principles into the
design of autonomous systems to achieve fault-tolerant and reconfigurable
capabilities. The broader impact of the project lies in the project's
contributions to the understanding of various problems in the study of
biocomplexity and its application to engineering.&lt;br/&gt;