* 0450551
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Chiral Fiber Polarizer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Dan Neugroschl, CHIRAL PHOTONICS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2008
* USD 653,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
new class of in-fiber chiral polarizers based upon chiral fiber gratings. A
double helix variation of the effective refractive index will be formed by
twisting fibers with a noncircular core as they pass through a miniature oven.
These chiral fiber polarizers will be created from specially prepared glass
performs in a low-cost, versatile, continuous process, which will not require
coherent irradiation of photosensitive glass commonly used to produce fiber
Bragg gratings. Chiral polarizers are true fiber devices and do not require any
substrates, bulk components, or rigid package. Their pitch profile will be
engineered to minimize insertion loss for the passing polarization and maximize
the extinction of the orthogonal polarization over a broad spectral range. The
design will implement a multi-core optical fiber to match the low numerical
aperture of standard fiber with the numerical aperture of the chiral polarizer
at its input and output while maintaining a high numerical aperture in the
polarizing zone. Chiral polarizers will have broad application in single
polarization transmission, polarization mode dispersion compensation, and test
and measurement instrumentation. Polarizers are also key elements in sensors
relying on optical interference such as gyroscopes and current
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polarization and frequency selective chiral fibers
have applications ranging from telecommunications to sensing. The use of
external modulators for high bandwidth fiber telecommunication requires that the
incident wave be linearly polarized. This necessitates use of a polarizer since
laser sources used in telecommunications generally have random polarization.
Further, any use of polarization maintaining fiber requires that polarized light
be launched into the fiber. Polarizers are also key components in polarization
mode dispersion compensation systems. Since chiral polarizers may be fabricated
from refractory or radiation resistive glasses and involve only mechanical
deformation of glass they may function in harsh environments with high levels of
radiation, high temperature, or corrosive chemicals. The fabrication techniques
developed for chiral fiber polarizers will spur the development of other devices
based on chiral fiber gratings. These devices, ranging from sensors and filters
to in-fiber lasers will become building blocks for a new platform for passive
and active in-fiber devices. The understanding of glass behavior under extreme
shear stress will push the frontier of glass forming technology and stimulate
new applications. Understanding polarization-selective light scattering within
the nonresonant band will open the way for new devices based upon
microstructured fibers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;