* 0450759
* Late Pleistocene Hunter-Gatherer Social and Spatial Organization in the Southern Rocky Mountains
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2007
* Marcel Kornfeld, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 144,862.00

Through National Science Foundation support, Drs. Nicole Waguespack, Todd
Surovell, and Marcel Kornfeld will investigate late Pleistocene social
organization and economic relationships among Folsom peoples as expressed
through the spatial configuration of artifacts and site features. Two field
seasons of archaeological excavation, subsurface reconnaissance, and spatial
analysis of the Folsom deposits at Barger Gulch, Locality B (5GA195) will be
completed. This research will focus on three primary issues: identifying site
structure and organization through the distribution and content of spatial
clustering among artifacts; detecting the presence and extent of economic
relationships between site occupants; and documenting the spatial and
technological organization of behaviors within and between different site areas
in order to identify dimensions of technological organization. Detailed spatial
investigation of the Barger Gulch site will provide insight into one, of very
few, Folsom residential sites employing rigorous methods of excavation and
analysis, and contribute to refining and developing spatial analytical
techniques applicable to archaeological interpretation of past human behavior.
The proposed research will also provide a valuable dataset from which future
comparative studies of Paleoindian site/social organization can be made and
contribute to larger issues of past and present hunter-gatherer socioeconomic
diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to explore questions of
Folsom social organization, both complimenting and expanding upon current
interpretations of Folsom lifeways. Spatial data has proved a valuable component
for discerning forager social and economic relationships in both ethnographic
and archaeological contexts. Detailed analysis and documentation of spatial
trends at Barger Gulch provides a unique opportunity to examine the social
context of prehistoric hunter-gatherer behavior. The Barger Gulch site, located
in an intermontane basin of Middle Park, Colorado, contains deposits which
document the diversity of behaviors that occurred at a 10,500 year old hunter-
gatherer residential site. Previous archaeological investigations have
established that a large area of the site remains intact, and that spatial
integrity of cultural materials is preserved. Objectives included expansion of
the excavation area to encompass a minimum of 110 m2, magnetometer survey, and
spatial analysis of cultural materials and features. Excavation will focus on
creating a large horizontal exposure to detect artifact clusters and features.
The laboratory phase of the project will involve detailed study of chipped stone
and fauna. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excavations and laboratory work at Barger Gulch
will provide opportunities to train and provide employment to students in modern
archaeological field methods, lithic analysis, and survey techniques. Members of
various amateur archaeological and historical societies are invited to visit and
participate in fieldwork in order to promote public awareness and understanding
of archaeological research. All cultural material and data from the project will
be accessible to additional researchers, and data from the project will be made
available for thesis and dissertation research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;