* 0450923
* Dissertation Research: Corporate Social Responsibility? Reconciling Competing Values for Quality in the Chilean Grape Commodity Subsector
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* Lawrence Busch, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 02/28/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Non-government organizations (NGOs) are increasingly demanding that multi-
national corporations implement Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) practices
to improve their social and environmental performance. An example of this is a
set of science-based standards developed in 2001 by EUREP, an association of
major European food retailers. EUREP requires suppliers to meet standards that
promote not only food safety and quality but also the health and well being of
labor and the environment. This shift to private, nongovernmental, and
purportedly more 'objective' systems for assuring quality and safety is one of
the most important -and least studied- changes resulting from the neoliberal
global political economy of the past two decades. How values of efficiency and
profitability, which are considered critical to the business world, are
harmonized with the public's interest in food safety, worker welfare, and
environmental protection remains largely unexplored. How do private agrifood
standards reconcile the economic goals of global supermarkets with the diverse
social, economic, and environmental concerns of citizens? How are conflicting
interests and values concerning these quality demands negotiated and settled in
the creation of such standards? How is science used to legitimate them? What are
the social and ethical implications of private standards for stakeholders in the
agrifood sector of developing countries? This Societal Dimensions of
Engineering, Science and Technology dissertation improvement grant supports
research intending to help address these questions in a project which will
examine how new private retailer-led standards for food safety and quality, as
well as the environment and labor, are reorganizing and transforming Chile's
export table grape commodity subsector. The rise of private-sector regulatory
mechanisms and problems of corporate social responsibility are emerging as key
issues within a range of fields concerned with standards, the transformation of
the global agrifood sector, international development, globalization, and
corporate social responsibility. This research will further our conceptual
understanding of how the rise of an 'economy of qualities' facilitates and
legitimates a shift from public to private regulatory institutions and systems
in the global agrifood system. This project will contribute to theoretical
debates concerning the implications of private regulation(i.e. standards) for
ostensibly social goods, such as food safety, environmental protection, and
worker welfare. In particular, this project seeks to improve our ability to
understand how potentially conflicting worlds of interests and values are
negotiated into a set of standards and how appeals to scientific values and
practices are used to settle the negotiations. In a context where many efforts
at CSR are increasingly dismissed as little more than corporate public relations
exercises, this research will make an important empirical contribution for
stakeholders (i.e. consumers, NGOs, retailers) interested in assessing the value
that purportedly scientific standards have for ensuring corporate accountability
towards stakeholders. Since standards for labor and the environment inherently
reflect ethical and social concerns this research will be of value to workers,
unions, NGOs, and community activists, concerned with understanding how science
is used to define and enforce social standards and reconcile them with standards
for food safety and quality. In analyzing the implications of EUREPGAP standards
on various stakeholders, this research can inform debates about how the health
and well-being of workers and the environment can best be protected and expanded
in the agrifood sector. Furthermore, as EUREPGAP increasingly becomes the
standard for access into the UK and European produce markets, this research will
assist producers to understand how these standards might constrain or expand
their ability to remain in the global marketplace. Finally, through identifying
the social and ethical implications of private CSR standards for actors in the
Chilean grape network, this research can inform public policy debates about
appropriate government responsibilities towards agrifood standards and
regulations. To achieve our project objectives, three complementary methods will
be used including: 1) content analysis of historical studies and technical
literature related to grape industry standards, 2) semi-structured interviews
and, 3) participant observation. All empirical data will be analyzed in light of
the ethical ideals to which they appeal, such as rights-based claims, virtue-
based claims, or utilitarian notions of costs and benefits. This information
would be valuable for a range of groups concerned with creating a global
agrifood system that is broadly seen as fair and just for all stakeholders.
These groups would include, for example, agrifood producers, exporters, national
governments, unions, NGOs, consumer groups, and development agencies.&lt;br/&gt;