* 0450010
* CAREER:    Geometric and Algebraic Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Scanlon's work integrates arithmetic, geometry and logic via a model-theoretic
study of natural mathematical structures. Specifically, Scanlon investigates the
theory of compact complex analytic manifolds from a model theoretic point of
view and extends this research to related geometric objects. In developing the
theory of jets of differential equations, Scanlon hopes to discern the fine
structure of dependence on solution sets to partial differential equations of
infinite differential dimension and to present a unified treatment of
differential Galois theory for such equations. Scanlon plans to refine the study
of enriched valued fields and to draw out the Diophantine consequences of these
results. Scanlon works, as well, on purely logical issues and will continue
developing the theory of thorn-independence with an eye towards eventual
applications.



Scanlon's work integrates arithmetic, geometry and logic. Definable sets, namely
those sets definable within a fixed formal language, are principal objects of
study in model theory and this special emphasis has been instrumental in the
success of the model-theoretic approaches to number theory, algebra and analytic
geometry. Scanlon works to tighten the connection between logical and geometric
methods and to find mathematical interpretations of theorems in logic.