* 0450619
* SBIR Phase II:  Vertical Electroabsorptive Modulated Laser (EML) Source for High-Speed Interconnects
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2008
* Majid Riaziat, OEPIC SEMICONDUCTORS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2008
* USD 668,440.00

This SBIR Phase II project aims to fabricate and commercialize a Vertical
Electro-absorptive Modulated Laser (V-EML) for high-speed (up to 40Gbps) optical
interconnects for chip-to-chip, board-to-board, and intra-rack optical
applications. Compared to current electrical data buses using copper
interconnects or conventional fiber optic links, the V-EML will enable the
fabrication of higher speed, lower cost, lower power consumption and smaller
optical transmitters for multi-channel fiber optic data buses in computer and
communication networks. This technology virtually removes the modulation speed
limit of VCSEL optical transmitters. At the same time it maintains high channel
density at low cost. The low power consumption of the V-EML (~20 mW) and its
potential low cost in volume (~$1.0) will provide a solution to the interconnect
speed and power barriers in multiprocessor computers and servers. An array
spacing of 50 to 100 microns will be possible with V-EMLs. This means that an
8x8 array with 2.5 Tbps of capacity has less than 1.0 mm2 of footprint. This
offers substantial space savings over the existing copper interconnect
technology and creates another strong incentive for
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology could provide societal benefits
from the commercialization of this technology by enabling faster and more
widespread deployment of broadband services. The potential for ultra-fast
delivery of audiovisual information is enormous as the V-EML technology helps to
remove data-com bottlenecks. Educational and scientific benefits of the V-EML
development arise in the area of supercomputers with sufficient computing power
for complex scientific simulations. Applications include climate modeling for
better predictions, molecular level modeling such as protein folding in
medicine, ecosystem modeling in agriculture, and large-scale analysis of
business information and economic statistics. These computers could then operate
much faster and much more efficiently when interconnect speed limits are
increased.&lt;br/&gt;