* 0450360
* Minority Access/Graduate Networking in the Sciences, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (MAGNET-STEM II
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2013
* Neville Parker, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 5,999,999.00

The CUNY AGEP Program, MAGNET-STEM, was launched in 1999 to produce a
significant &lt;br/&gt;number of underrepresented minority doctoral students in
science and engineering fields and to &lt;br/&gt;prepare them for academic
careers. The major goal of this project, MAGNET-STEM II, is to &lt;br/&gt;build
on previous gains and institutionalize effective practices by strengthening the
alliance's &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate-to-graduate- to- post graduate
infrastructure. This goal is in accord with the NSF &lt;br/&gt;priority to
"catalyze changes in institutional, departmental and organizational culture and
&lt;br/&gt;practices that will result in significant increases in the
recruitment, retention, degree conferral and &lt;br/&gt;STEM career (especially
academic) entry of minority students." Activities will include: &lt;br/&gt;(1)
undergraduate /graduate summer research and internships; (2) mentoring and
mentoring &lt;br/&gt;training; (3) conference presentations; (4) colloquia and
seminars on teaching, science and &lt;br/&gt;mathematics education, and on
communication technologies. MAGNET-STEM II will comprise &lt;br/&gt;an inclusive
scholarly community of STEM faculty and students from diverse ethnic, racial,
and &lt;br/&gt;geographic backgrounds, as well as persons with disabilities.
Students will be guided by experts &lt;br/&gt;in their scientific field to
engage in research activities that enable them to master the knowledge
&lt;br/&gt;and investigative approaches in their chosen areas of specialization.
The project will promote the &lt;br/&gt;social as well as academic integration
of all AGEP students within departments and the &lt;br/&gt;improvement of
advisement, in addition to offering financial support. Informal and formal
&lt;br/&gt;interaction between faculty and students to socialize AGEP scholars
to the academic profession &lt;br/&gt;increases the likelihood that they will
graduate and move into postdoctoral and faculty positions. &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of MAGNET-STEM II derives from the acquisition by AGEP
&lt;br/&gt;scholars of a broad background of knowledge that enables them to
relate issues in science, &lt;br/&gt;mathematics, and technology education to
one another and to specialize in one of these areas. To &lt;br/&gt;increase the
knowledge base and to develop further their research interests, AGEP scholars
will &lt;br/&gt;have access to affiliated institutions such as Bell
Laboratories, Brookhaven National Laboratory, &lt;br/&gt;Institute for Basic
Research in Developmental Disabilities, the Albert Einstein College of
&lt;br/&gt;Medicine, and the Center for the Analysis and Research of Spatial
Information (CARSI), a large &lt;br/&gt;state-of-the-art GIS and Remote Sensing
Laboratory considered to be one of the finest on the East &lt;br/&gt;Coast. The
City University of New York Graduate Center offers to AGEP scholars training in
&lt;br/&gt;mentoring, and enrollment in the Colloquium on College Teaching and
in the Science, &lt;br/&gt;Mathematics, and Technology (SMT) in Education
Seminars, which focus on college teaching &lt;br/&gt;and STEM education from
K-12. SMT seminars address contemporary research issues in the &lt;br/&gt;fields
of mathematics, science and technology in education. This includes the education
of &lt;br/&gt;students about technology in society and its relations to science
and mathematics. The CUNY &lt;br/&gt;Graduate Center, as lead institution,
conducted the prior AGEP research project, MAGNET-&lt;br/&gt;STEM I (1999-2004),
which resulted in increases in the number of minority applicants,
&lt;br/&gt;enrollments and degree conferrals. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
MAGNET-STEM II will occur through the production of an &lt;br/&gt;increased
number of doctoral students from underrepresented populations trained in their
&lt;br/&gt;academic specialties working in our nation's laboratories and
classrooms and who have developed &lt;br/&gt;mentoring experience. Moreover, as
a result of participation in the Science, Mathematics, and &lt;br/&gt;Technology
in Education Seminars offered by the CUNY Graduate Center's Ph.D. Program in
&lt;br/&gt;Urban Education, AGEP graduates will have knowledge of effective
forms of curriculum &lt;br/&gt;articulation and partnerships in STEM education
that extend to university, school, community, &lt;br/&gt;and corporate
partnerships, and that move along the urban-education K-16 continuum. In this
&lt;br/&gt;connection, AGEP scholars will work to prepare teachers of STEM
education, leading to an &lt;br/&gt;improvement of student achievement in STEM
education within culturally diverse urban &lt;br/&gt;populations and, hence, to
systemic reform.