* 0450941
* Resource Depletion and Effort-Related Cardiovascular Response
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2005,08/31/2010
* Rex Wright, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 295,000.00

This research is concerned with the influence of fatigue on effort and
associated cardiovascular (CV) responses in people confronted with challenges.
The work assumes that behavior is sustained by energy and other performance
resources that are temporarily depleted the longer and more vigorously people
perform. The more resource-depleted (i.e., fatigued) people become with respect
to a particular type of activity (e.g., math), the less capable they should feel
in relation to relevant challenges (e.g., balancing a checkbook) and the more
difficult those challenges should appear to be. Based on intuition, one might
expect that perceptions of difficulty that result from fatigue would lead people
to lower their effort and display reduced CV arousal as a result. However, a
recent formal analysis of effort intensity suggests something different.
Specifically, it suggests that the perceptions should have a different impact
depending on (1) the difficulty of the challenge at hand, and (2) the importance
of meeting that challenge. In theory, the key is whether fatigue causes people
to move from a point of believing success is possible and worthwhile to a point
of believing it is not. If difficulty and importance conditions are such that
success appears possible and worthwhile to a non-fatigued group, but impossible
or excessively difficult to a fatigued group, effort and associated CV responses
should be greater in the non-fatigued group. The reason is because those in the
non-fatigued group should exert the required amount of effort, whereas those in
the fatigued group should withhold their effort. If difficulty and importance
conditions are such that success seems possible and worthwhile to a fatigued
group as well as to a non-fatigued group, effort and associated CV responses
should be greater in the fatigued group. The reason in this case is because
those in the fatigued group should have to exert extra effort to compensate for
their relative lack of performance resources (i.e., for their fatigue). Finally,
if difficulty and importance conditions are such that success appears impossible
or excessively difficult to a non-fatigued group as well as to a fatigued group,
effort and associated CV responses should be equivalent for the groups as they
both should withhold effort. This somewhat counterintuitive perspective on
fatigue influence is noteworthy in part because it offers insight into when
fatigue should and should not impair performance in real world (e.g., education,
work) settings. It also is noteworthy because it highlights a condition under
which chronic fatigue may pose a health risk. Specifically, chronic fatigue may
pose a health risk when it leads people to strive especially hard and, as a
consequence, manifest exaggerated CV responses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five
studies will be conducted over four years. The central purpose will be to
evaluate the possibility that the influence of fatigue on effort and CV response
to challenge varies depending on the difficulty and importance of success. It
will be achieved by manipulating difficulty and importance variables and
assessing the impact of those manipulations on responses of people who have been
fatigued to different degrees. A further purpose of the studies will be to
evaluate the idea that fatigue influence extends only to tasks relevant to the
performance system that has been depleted. This will be achieved by assessing
responses to tasks strongly and weakly related to the activity used to induce
fatigue. To the degree that fatigue effects are task specific, they should be
found only on the strongly related tasks. Because investigators have
hypothesized recently that self-regulatory (i.e., restraint or inhibitory)
activity may draw on a special performance resource that is not involved in
sustaining other behavior, special attention will be devoted to comparing
responses obtained in relation to tasks involving strong regulatory components
with responses obtained in relation to tasks involving weak regulatory
components. &lt;br/&gt;