* 0450524
* SBIR Phase II:    Multi-Frequency Low-Multipath Small Antennas for High Accuracy GPS
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2005,08/31/2007
* Francesca Scire-Scappuzzo, Physical Sciences Incorporated (PSI)
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2007
* USD 511,250.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project will
consist of the design, development, and manufacturing of a novel low-multipath
GPS antenna for high accuracy applications. This antenna prototype utilizes two
key technologies: (1) a new design of GPS antennas using high-technology
materials and manufacturing methodologies, that enables low-multipath, gain
control, multi-frequency, tunability, and size reduction; and ( 2) a novel
geometry of the metal ground plane to further rejects multipath interference. At
the end of Phase II the anticipated results include, multipath error mitigation
uniformly at L-Band, gain improvement at low elevation angles up to 10 dB with
respect to choke ring antennas, multi-frequency operation at GPS and GALILEO
frequencies, and at least 33% smaller size than other commercial low multipath
antennas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because multipath interference reduction
significantly improves GPS accuracy, the proposed multi-frequency GPS antenna
will benefit the international scientific community that relies on high
precision GPS for new advances in Earth and atmospheric sciences. In particular,
the novel substrate antenna will allow accurate real-time GPS measurements,
otherwise impossible, in support of the NSF funded EarthScope program, that is
intended for the study of the structure and evolution of the North America
continent using a network of GPS receivers. &lt;br/&gt;