* 0450916
* Structure and Corresponding Receptors of Atypical Steroids in Sea Lamprey
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Weiming Li, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 02/28/2009
* USD 405,117.00

Lampreys represent a key group of vertebrate animals in which many hypotheses
concerning the evolution of steroid hormones and their receptors can be tested.
This study will begin to test these hypotheses through determination of the
structures, receptors, and functionality of unusual steroids in the sea lamprey
(Petromyzon marinus). The gonads of the lamprey, one of only two groups of
jawless fishes still alive today, are morphologically similar and undergo the
same developmental processes as those of teleost (bony) fish. However, unlike
teleosts, no steroids in lamprey have been linked to specific physiological
functions. It has been hypothesized that androgens, a class of steroids normally
associated with male reproduction, are not functional hormones in lampreys, and
that vertebrate androgen receptors evolved from an ancestral estrogen receptor
only after jawless vertebrates diverged from jawed vertebrates. However, the
lack of evidence for the functionality of conventional androgens and the
presence of their corresponding receptors may be explained by the alternative
hypothesis that sea lampreys utilize unusual androgens and other unusual forms
of sex steroids. This proposed study would focus the search for functional sex
steroids in lamprey on those with an additional hydroxyl group on carbon 15 of
the four-ring steroid structure, and not on typical mammalian or teleost
steroids. The ultimate goal is to determine whether steroids with a 15a-hydroxyl
group are functional sex hormones in the sea lamprey. In particular, this
hypothesis will be tested by: (1) Confirming that sea lamprey gonads produce
15a-hydroxylated steroids; (2) Documenting changes in circulatory
15a-hydroxylated steroids in response to natural maturation; (3) Determining how
plasma concentrations of 15a-hydroxylated steroids change in response to
administration of lamprey GnRH I and GnRH III, which are known to stimulate
maturation; and (4) Characterizing the binding properties of hypothesized
receptors for 15a-hydroxylated steroids. Anticipated results from this study may
also have significant implications in management and conservation of the sea
lamprey, which is both a highly destructive pest species in the Great Lakes and
an endangered species prized as a delicacy in Europe. The PI will promote
teaching and training by involving a post-doctoral fellow, a Native American
graduate student, several undergraduate students, and will include high-school
students from an economically disadvantaged region.