* 0450511
* US-India NEES Workshop at IIT Bombay
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Subhash Goel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 07/31/2009
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purpose and Objectives: The purpose of this
proposal is to seek NSF funding ($20,000) for travel support of a group of 8-10
invited US side participants to attend a US-INDIA NEES Workshop to be held at
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Bombay in January, 2005. The objectives of
the workshop are (1) to develop plans to link a few leading research facilities
in India with the global NEES network and (2) to discuss opportunities and
development of joint research proposals for carrying out collaborative research
within the NEES Research Program of the NSF. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: With available modern IT tools such as tele-presence and networking it is
possible to extend the NEES Collaboratory to include participation from other
countries where earthquake threat, and excellent research personnel as well as
facilities exist. Thus, global participation and networking has been identified
as an important component of the NSF-NEES vision. Attendance of US group of
participants in the proposed workshop will help develop a number of state-of-
the-art research facilities in India as international partners in the NEES
&lt;br/&gt;Collaboratory. It will also lay the groundwork for developing joint
collaborative research projects. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research Plan: The
workshop will be held during January 2005 at and hosted by the Indian Institute
of Technology, Bombay. It will be attended by 10-15 invited participants from
selected Indian research institutions and 8-10 US researchers. The workshop
agenda will include the following main items: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1.
Presentations by US participants on NSF-NEES Facilities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;2. Presentations by Indian participants about existing research
facilities and current upgrading plans, as well as ongoing research projects.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;3. Firm up plans to link facilities at selected
institutions in India with the NEES Network. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;4. Discuss
plans for developing appropriate joint proposals to conduct collaborative
research to be performed under the framework of Global NEES Collaboratory. It is
intended that the proposals will be fully developed and submitted during the
year 2005 to appropriate funding agencies in India and US. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - Research: Attendance of the US group of participants
in the proposed workshop will help develop a number of state-of-the-art research
facilities in India as international partners in the NEES Collaboratory. It will
also lay the groundwork for developing joint collaborative research projects. At
a broader level the development of international NEES collaboration will
accelerate earthquake hazard reduction at a global scale. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact . Educational and International
Cooperation: The project will provide great &lt;br/&gt;opportunity for
international cooperation. The proposed activity will also encourage diverse
groups of researchers to conduct research work of international caliber through
collaboration, sharing of information and ideas, and exchange of personnel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;