* 0450111
* Nations in Time and Space: State Learning and International Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Mark Crescenzi, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2006
* USD 71,547.00

&lt;br/&gt;When two nations interact, they do so within the context of history
as well as their peers in the international system. Too often we isolate the
direct interactions (dyadic behavior) between two nations from this broader
context (extra-dyadic behavior). In doing so, we ignore important information
about the beliefs and motivations of these nations that may play a role in the
direct relationship. This claim that governments observe the behavior of their
peers is easy enough to make. What remains puzzling is the role this information
plays in foreign policy decision-making. How do state leaders interpret the
actions of their friends and foes? More generally, do nations alter their
behavior with other states based on what those states are doing elsewhere?
&lt;br/&gt;The investigator develops a model of relational interdependence in
interstate politics that reflects the way states learn from the extra-dyadic
behavior of their dyadic partners. I present a dynamic model of this learning
process and then operationalize the concept into a publicly available data set.
The model represents a learning mechanism states use to process relational
interdependence. This learning mechanism is defined as experiential and
diagnostic (Jervis, 1976; Leng, 1983; Levy,1994), and it draws from the logic
that underpins attitude formation and cognitive balance theories(Heider, 1946;
Harary, 1959; Harary and Cartwright, 1965; Newcomb, 1953, 1961). The
operationalization of this model is complex but customizable, and the researcher
provides an "open source" program of the specification for future scholarship.
This product will make it easy for scholars to represent relational spatial
interdependence in their current research whether at the state, dyadic, or
directed-dyadic levels of analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will make
available data on relational interdependence that is theoretically motivated yet
adaptable by current empirical scholars of conflict processes and international
relations more broadly. This data will be easily incorporated into current
research designs at the state, dyadic, and directed-dyadic levels of analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;A second dimension of this
research project is a determination of the impact of relational interdependence
on the phenomena of war and violence in international politics. This research
indicates that when nations determine their courses of action in times of
crisis, they rely upon the information produced through relational
interdependence. Countries are more likely to get into militarized disputes and
wars when their opponents have conflictual histories with other, similar
countries in the system. The implications of this research are important for
current scholarship in the study of conflict in international relations. They
are also relevant to foreign policy considerations, as these results indicate
that rather than being deterred by violence, the reputation effects of using
force encourage opponents to prepare for war. &lt;br/&gt;