* 0450148
* SGER: Regional Climate Modeling Coordination for the United States
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2006
* Eugene Takle, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/2006
* USD 137,127.00

The need for regional modeling to assess climate impacts is recognized in the
U.S. Climate Change Science Program Strategic Plan (CCSP) and was emphasized
even more strongly in the National Research Council's review of the CCSP plan.
Under this grant, the Iowa State University regional climate research group will
coordinate a team of scientists from North America and Europe to collaborate for
establishing a baseline for regional climate prediction over the continental
U.S. and Canada using regional climate models nested within atmospheric
reanalyses (the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP)- Department
of Energy (DOE) Reanalysis 2 and the European Center for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts (ECMWF) reanalysis). The objective of this project is to establish a
cooperative framework within the regional climate modeling community that
advances substantially the responsiveness of U.S. regional climate research to
national priorities. The significance of this research is that it will advance
the status of regional climate modeling in the US in support of understanding
the basic science of regional climate and to provide state-of-the-art
information on regional climate for impacts studies. This project constitutes
Phase I of the proposed North American Regional Climate Change Assessment
Program (NARCCAP). The goals of NARCCAP are to explore the combined uncertainty
in climate change scenarios that results from using multiple atmosphere-ocean
general circulation models to provide boundary conditions for multiple regional
climate models (RCMs), and ultimately to provide regionally resolved data sets
suitable for examining the impacts of climate change. A critical first step
toward these goals is to establish a baseline of RCM accuracy by evaluating the
participating RCMs when driven by reanalysis (loosely, "observed") boundary
conditions. The research is a natural extension of the PI's experience in the
Project to Intercompare Regional Climate Simulations (PIRCS), which coordinated
short-term climate simulations involving up to16 RCMs and presently is
coordinating multi-year runs with many of the same models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Use of data and information acquired
under this project will follow the successful strategy in use under PIRCS, which
includes making information accessible from the ISU Regional Climate Modeling
Laboratory website (http://rcmlab.agron.iastate.edu/), using data for graduate
research dissertations and undergraduate theses, providing data for use in the
ISU McNair (minorities) undergraduate program research projects, and partnering
with The University Corporation for Atmospheric Research on the Significant
Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science program.