* 0450457
* SBIR Phase II:  Cheminformatics Teaching Tools for the Cheminformatics Virtual Classroom
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2007
* Norah MacCuish, Mesa Analytics & Computing, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 08/31/2007
* USD 733,583.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the
development of virtual classroom software tools for cheminformatics training in
academia and industry. Mesa Analytics & Computing, LLC provides a commercial,
integrated suite of the leading-edge cheminformatics software tools for the
pharmaceutical and biotech industry. However, these tools, incorporating the
most recent research in cheminformatics by Mesa, and integrated with other
leading cheminformatics vendors` software (OpenEye, eduSoft, ChemAxon, and
AccuSoft), are for use in large-scale research and industrial applications,
where the users already have experience in cheminformatics software, most often
obtained through on-the-job training. The research goals of this project are to
develop an easy to use, comprehensive, and competitively priced cheminformatics
virtual classroom. This project will further the advanced research and
development of software tools for interactive distance learning in
cheminformatics topics, such as finding compound substructure commonalities,
generation and use of structural and property compound descriptors, similarity
searching, cluster analysis, compound library design, 3D drug design, compound
databases, and Quantitative Structure Activity Relationship (QSAR). The project
will produce a beta version of the cheminformatics virtual classroom ready for
testing and marketing to the academic and industry markets.

There are a growing number of university departments worldwide offering courses
and degrees in cheminformatics, across a range of life science disciplines.
However, there is no comprehensive cheminformatics virtual classroom product.
Software products used in the pharmaceutical and biotech industry are expensive,
difficult to install, and of limited utility for introductory training.
Converting Mesa`s tools and other vendors` software into a coherent set of Web-
based training tools for concept learning, with the help of six diverse academic
testing sites, will provide the necessary training tools for academia and
industry. Web delivered training software is a cost effective means to provide
distance learning for rural and urban academic institutions and industry sites
here and abroad. The virtual classroom will help to lower the cost of on-the-job
training for early phase drug discovery research efforts found in the
pharmaceutical and biotech industries. The long term goal is to increase the
quality and quantity of new researchers, with the potential benefit of
increasing the number of drug leads, thereby improving the chances of finding
more effective drugs for a wider range of serious diseases, and possibly
lowering the cost to consumers.