* 0450470
* SBIR Phase II:    Thick Film Planar Magnetooptic Garnet Faraday Rotators
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2007
* Vincent Fratello, INTEGRATED PHOTONICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 08/31/2007
* USD 449,775.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project
addresses the device and market opportunity for thick magnetooptic garnet
Faraday rotator films with planar anisotropy to be operated in the near
infrared. Magnetic and electromagnetic field sensors could be developed at a
variety of near-infrared wavelengths including the 800 nm, 1310 nm and 1550 nm
bands. These sensors can be made much less expensively, in much smaller sizes
and with much less weight than current technologies such as current
transformers. They have a potential for immediate impact in reliability of
electric power distribution through failure anticipation and prevention and
conservation of electric power through monitoring and control. Planar materials
have much higher switching speeds than conventional perpendicular Faraday
rotators and as such would permit a magnetooptical approach to packet switching.
Such films are an innovative solution to device problems that require high-
speed, continuously-varying polarization rotation with applied field. The
project will work on improving properties and performance of such thick planar
films and incorporate them into devices. Specific materials tasks are directed
to improving sensitivity, linearity and temperature range of operation.

If successful these sensors will have applications such as wheel and turbine
rotation, electric power distribution, monitoring, metering and control, and
battlefield sensors. The electric power application in particular has potential
to revolutionize catastrophic failure prevention in the power grid and reduce
power costs at a variety of levels by enabling autonomous reconfiguration. The
lack of electrical connectors in fiber optic sensors for explosive, flammable
and high-voltage environments represent a significant improvement in safety. New
photonic devices not currently realizable will be enabled for telecommunications
and military applications such as variable optical attenuators, polarization
controllers and increased speed magnetooptic switches. Photonic devices include
polarization controllers, variable optical attenuators, switches and new
innovative devices. Smart ships and buildings would find utility both for
conservation and efficiency.

