* 0450363
* AGEP-- Rice-Houston ALLIANCE FOR GRADUATE EDUCATION AND THE PROFESSORIATE
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2012
* Bobby Wilson, William Marsh Rice University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2012
* USD 5,290,293.00

Rice-Houston ALLIANCE FOR GRADUATE EDUCATION AND THE PROFESSORIATE
&lt;br/&gt;(Rice-Houston AGEP) &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Project Summary
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Rice University, the University of Houston, Texas
Southern University, the University of Houston-Downtown, Texas State University,
Houston Community College, and San Jacinto Junior College, propose an exciting
new alliance, the Rice-Houston Alliance for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (Rice-Houston AGEP). Situated in one of the nation's largest, most
culturally diverse cities, the proposed Rice-Houston AGEP unites many of the
city's research and teaching universities and community colleges in the common
mission of significantly increasing the number of underrepresented minority
students earning Ph.D.s and positioning them to become leaders in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields. The proposed Rice-Houston
AGEP builds on and leverages the strengths of two highly successful programs -
the Rice AGEP and the Houston Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(H-LSAMP) - to build a unified, multi-level, long-range alliance deeply
committed to this cause. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to accomplish its
mission, the Rice-Houston AGEP has established the following goals: &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Increase minority undergraduate retention in STEM majors to the B.S.;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Promote and motivate more minority STEM undergraduates to
pursue the Ph.D.; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increase minority STEM graduate
admissions; and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increase minority STEM graduate retention
to the Ph.D. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Program Strategies. The Rice-Houston AGEP
will accomplish its goals by building a strong &lt;br/&gt;community of scholars
across the Alliance institutions creating unique opportunities for all
&lt;br/&gt;participating students including those from community colleges and
other minority serving institutions, exposing them to the excitement of research
and a career in the professoriate that they would never experience otherwise.
Through the Rice-Houston AGEP community, students will develop personal and
professional relationships with peers and professors and enjoy a supportive
network where they are welcomed, encouraged, and supported to pursue Ph.D.s,
while mentoring others as they attain their own goals. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Activities. Main activities within the Rice-Houston AGEP community
include yearly: university faculty workshops, integrated undergraduate and
graduate summer research and mentoring programs, student research/professional
development conferences, extensive student/faculty conference attendance, and
multi-institutional national and local graduate student recruitment. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The Rice-Houston AGEP will test several new or
adapted components of its &lt;br/&gt;program. It will examine the effects of
intensive and sustained faculty workshops on faculty &lt;br/&gt;commitment to
the promotion of STEM diversity; it will evaluate the effectiveness of a
university-wide, faculty-led model of program direction; it will assess program
effects on broader faculty and institutional culture, and it will assess the
impact of multi-institutional community activities to encourage and promote STEM
graduate education. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The Rice-Houston AGEP
has the potential to impact hundreds of underrepresented minority students -
encouraging, preparing, and retaining them as they pursue STEM Ph.D.s. The Rice-
Houston AGEP will provide a model for undergraduate and graduate education that
effectively promotes careers in science and sustains students as they pursue
careers as scientists.