* 0450082
* Seismic Observations from the Random Wavefield: A New Tool for High-Resolution Seismology in the Context of EarthScope
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Nikolai Shapiro, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 04/30/2008
* USD 245,856.00

0450082&lt;br/&gt;Ritzwoller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will advance and apply a new method of surface-wave tomography based on
measurements of surface wave dispersion that are independent of earthquake
occurrence. The method is based on the extraction of surface-wave Green
functions by cross-correlating sequences of ambient or background seismic noise
that form part of the random seismic wavefield. Proof-of-concept experiments for
stations separated by various distances within the US demonstrate that
dispersion measurements made with this method are repeatable and reproduce
information provided by traditional measurements obtained on ballistic waves
following earthquakes. Noise-based surface- wave measurements allow us to
construct tomographic images of the principal geological units beneath
California, with low-speed anomalies corresponding to the main sedimentary
basins and high-speed anomalies corresponding to the igneous cores of the major
mountain ranges. This method can improve the resolution and fidelity of crustal
images obtained from surface-wave analyses, in particular, in the context of a
continental scale array such as the USARRAY component of EarthScope, where
numerous inter-station surface-wave measurements promise to focus seismic images
and models of the crust and upper mantle beneath the US. The proposed work has
two principal objectives. The first is to improve understanding of background
seismic noise and to continue to develop a robust method to measure surface-wave
dispersion from two-station cross-correlation. The second objective is to apply
the method to analog and emerging USARRAY data. Analysis will concentrate on
three spatial scales: (1) continental-scale, analogous to the permanent
component of USARRAY, using data from the US National Seismic Network (USNSN)
and the Global Seismic Network (GSN), as well as the broad-band component of the
emerging Advanced National Seismic System (ANSS); (2) regional-scale, analogous
to the transportable component of USARRAY, using data from broad-band arrays in
California and the Rocky Mountains; and (3) local-scale, analogous to
deployments of the flexible component of USARRAY and PASSCAL experiments, using
data from arrays in Southern California and the Yellowstone areas.