* 0450085
* New Molecular Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* W. Billups, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Tyrone D. Mitchell
* 04/30/2009
* USD 384,000.00

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the
work of Professor W. E. Billups, of the Chemistry Department at William Marsh
Rice University. The research will extend the PI's investigations of strained
reactive intermediates, single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs), and fullerenes.
Highly strained organic molecules of current theoretical interest will be
prepared. Since these compounds will be unstable at room temperature, their
structure will be determined by low temperature x-ray crystallography. Although
the extraordinary electronic and mechanical properties of SWNTs suggest
important applications, progress has been limited due to the insolubility of
these substances in organic solvents. In order to circumvent this problem an
efficient and scalable route to solublized SWNTs will be developed. In addition,
a series of fullerene investigations will be initiated. Included will be studies
of highly reduced fullerenes as vehicles for storage of dihydrogen, the
isolation of large fullerenes that are formed during the synthesis of carbon
nanotubes, and investigations of fullerenes found in meteorites.

In addition to providing fundamental information on the chemistry of energetic
molecules and advanced materials, these studies will provide important
interdisciplinary training for undergraduate and graduate students. The
involvement of these students in international collaborations will be especially
valuable.