* 0450696
* Pierre Auger Project
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* James Cronin, Universities Research Association Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2009
* USD 1,277,723.00

This proposal requests funds to complete the construction of the Pierre Auger
Observatory (PAO). The objective of the PAO is to measure, with full sky
coverage, the energy, direction and composition of the cosmic rays with energies
above 10^19 eV. Large aperture cosmic ray observatories are opening a new window
to the universe. To address this opportunity a broad based international
collaboration has come together to build a very large air shower observatory
that will make an all-sky study of cosmic rays at the highest energies. A number
of cosmic rays with energies near and beyond 10^20 eV have been reported. Yet
neither the origin of these cosmic rays nor the acceleration mechanism
responsible for their enormous energies is known. The direct search for sources
as well as the behavior of the energy spectrum above 5*10^19 eV will provide
important clues to these mysteries. The PAO, located in Mendoza, Argentina, has
completed the engineering phase and construction is underway and is expected to
be complete by about the end of 2005 and to have a 20-year lifetime.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the PAO has already gone well beyond the
construction work and the capture of the first cosmic ray events. Close ties
have been developed with branches of the National Technical University in
Argentina where a number of students are involved, not only in building and
testing equipment but in data taking tasks as well. In terms of outreach, the
Visitor Center on the Auger campus has attracted more than 10,000 visitors from
26 countries. The collaboration sponsors a popular on-going lecture series for
the public in the host city of Malargue and nearby communities. A particularly
close relationship has been established with the people of Malargue. In the US,
the PAO works closely with the CROP project based at the University of Nebraska
that helps high school students install cosmic ray detectors on their schools.
&lt;br/&gt;