* 0450898
* Acquisition of a DGC Maceral Separation Laboratory: The Key to Maceral-specific Isotopic and Geochemical Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2005,08/31/2007
* Susan Rimmer, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 82,661.00

0450898&lt;br/&gt;Rimmer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides support for
the establishment of a density-gradient centrifugation (DGC) facility at the
University of Kentucky, Department of Geological Sciences. The facility would
enable investigators Susan Rimmer, Ana Carmo, Harold Rowe and their students to
separate relatively pure (&gt;95%) organic constituents from coals and kerogens
for subsequent geochemical and isotopic analysis. In combination with optical
petrography, the DGC technique allows for determination of the relative
proportions of marine and terrestrial organic matter that make up individual
coal and kerogen macerals and, when coupled with mass spectrometry, evaluation
of maceral-specific stable isotopic ratios. The DGC facility will support
investigations of Devonian-Mississippian black shales and will allow for maceral
specific isotopic determinations in order to better evaluate organic matter
sources and degree of preservation. Specific equipment that will be purchased
includes a centrifuge capable of 20,000 RPM and multiple rotors designed to
allow centrifugation at specific cut-point densities. Additional equipment will
include a micronizer for fine grinding of demineralized organic materials and
various glassware supplies and reagents. The DGC facility will serve the PI's
efforts to train students from traditionally underrepresented groups and will be
available as multi-user facility for organic geochemists across the country
interested in coal petrology and petroleum geochemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;