* 0450807
* A Coevolutionary Theory of Male and Female Alternative Reproductive Behaviors: Combining Phenotypic and Genetic Aapproaches
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Suzanne Alonzo, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 06/30/2008
* USD 296,033.00

A Coevolutionary Theory of Male and Female Alternative Reproductive Behaviors:
Combining Phenotypic and Genetic Approaches&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suzanne H.
Alonzo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive research has focused on explaining
diversity within and between species. Male alternative reproductive behaviors
are one of the most striking and well-studied examples of individual variation
within a population. However, debate still exists regarding how this kind of
discrete variation is maintained in populations. Two critical factors exist that
have received little attention but need to be considered. First, it is generally
assumed that competition between males usually leads to the evolution of
discrete variation in male behavior. However, female behavior and interactions
between the sexes can also affect male reproductive behavior. Second, discrete
variation in female reproductive patterns is observed, but currently no theory
exists predicting when female alternative reproductive behaviors are expected to
evolve and what patterns are expected. This research will develop a general
theoretical approach and generate new theory that examines how interactions
within and between the sexes affect patterns of diversity within a sex. An
increased understanding of individual variation in reproductive behavior has
broad application to conservation, fisheries and management. This research will
also involve training two undergraduate students and one graduate student in the
use of various modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;