* 0450373
* Midwest Crossroads AGEP
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2013
* Sally Mason, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Leddy
* 03/31/2013
* USD 7,599,829.00

Midwest Crossroads AGEP Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the
Midwest Crossroads AGEP, which is an alliance between Purdue University
West&lt;br/&gt;Lafayette, Indiana University Bloomington, and Northwestern
University, is to triple the number of&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minorities
receiving doctoral degrees in STEM fields. Purdue, Indiana University (IU), and
Northwestern have proposed a strategic plan to increase enrollments, improve
retention, and prepare and encourage students to enter the academy. The key
elements of the proposed plan are as follows Recruiting Linkages and
partnerships with the Indiana LSAMP (based at Purdue), regional
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;institutions, and predominantly minority serving
institutions nationwide will be developed and enhanced; offcampus visits by AGEP
faculty, staff, and students will be organized to disseminate information on
graduate&lt;br/&gt;school opportunities at Purdue, IU, and Northwestern; and
undergraduate summer research programs for&lt;br/&gt;graduate school recruitment
will be coordinated and expanded. Retention: Minority student organizations will
be utilized to ensure that incoming graduate students have an instant peer
network; a network of AGEP professors who are committed to graduating minority
PhD students will be developed; selective jump-start summer transition
experiences to acclimate new students academically to graduate school will be
developed; and organized group study models will be developed and expanded.
Enrichment: A special student enrichment session will be organized at the
Crossroads Conference, a joint venture between AGEP and the Indiana LSAMP
programs; college pedagogy courses and seminars and Preparing Future Faculty
programs will be reorganized, marketed, and promoted on each campus; the Midwest
Crossroads AGEP will keep current andleverage the faculty preparation activities
of GEM and the National Preparing Future Faculty organization to maintain
awareness of best practices and innovation in faculty preparation; and
postdoctoral partnerships with will be developed with U.S. National Laboratories
to provide exposure and prepare graduates for faculty positions. An
administrative network will be developed to drive continuous improvement in the
efforts listed above and to provide monitoring of progress. Intellectual Merit:
The programmatic activities of the Alliance are built on proven models. However,
a number of innovations are present with respect to implementation. A case in
point is the strategy of giving ownership of minority student graduation to the
department heads and the faculty. This in effect will allow diversity to be
recognized in the reward system and thus lead to real institutionalization of
the AGEP mission. Another novel aspect of the proposal is leveraging the post-
doctoral programs at the U.S. National Laboratories to create a training ground
for minority PhDs to enter the professoriate. This could help place many
minority PhD graduates in top universities throughout the country. A third
novelty we will explore (in conjunction with the conventional approaches) is
keep ahead group study led by a paid student scholar. Rather than have the group
study focus on review of lecture material, students in the session receive an
advance previous of the lectures and thus are able to assimilate much more in
lecture. This intermix of novelty with proven methodologies is anticipated to
help the alliance triple its&lt;br/&gt;current PhD graduation numbers. Broader
Impacts: The Indiana LSAMP has already doubled its enrollment numbers in two
years under the leadership of Purdue Provost Sally Mason. The Midwest Crossroads
AGEP will build on the success of the Indiana LSAMP and create new pathways from
undergraduate programs, both regionally and nationally, to the professoriate.
The recruitment programs that we will initiate will span the Midwest and beyond
through the involvement of a growing list of regional and national partners.
Collectively, the efforts of the Midwest Crossroads AGEP will change the
cultures at Purdue, IU, and Northwestern from diversity-passive to diversity-
proactive.