* 0450314
* SBIR Phase II:  Microdisplays Based on III-Nitride Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Zhaoyang Fan, III-N TECHNOLOGY, INC
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 01/31/2007
* USD 479,672.00

The goal of this SBIR Phase II project is to bring the demonstrated Gallium
Nitride (GaN) microdisplay technology to industrial maturity and to final
commercialization levels. The project's goal will be accomplished by further
optimizing the microdisplay device structural design and fabrication process
based on the demonstrative results obtained in Phase I. Based on high-efficiency
semiconductor micro-light-emitting diode (microLED) array technology, the GaN
microdisplay is the first of its kind based on semiconductor LEDs. Specifically,
by the hybrid integration of GaN microLED arrays with Si CMOS driver circuits
through flip-chip bonding, active matrix addressable GaN microdisplays will have
a compact size and will be able to support more information content and movie
display due to their high pixel filling factor, uniformity, luminance, and power
efficiency. The unique intrinsic properties of GaN microLEDs - high brightness
(> 10 microwatt optical output power for microLEDs of 18 micrometer in
diameter), wide viewing angle (~ 160 degrees), fast response time (< 1 ns), and
high thermal and vibrational resistance, make GaN microdisplays a perfect
solution for environmentally demanding applications such as head-up displays
(HUD) in modern vehicles and aircrafts, head-mounted displays (HMD) for
firefighters and other rescue operatives, and hand-held mini-projectors for
field applications.

Microdisplays have a small size (typically less than 1 inch diagonal) with a
resolution from low end to above XVGA format. They are magnified by optics to
form enlarged virtual or projected images for viewing by a user. Microdisplays
can be used in a variety of devices such as head-mounted displays, video
headsets, camcorder viewfinders, projection TV, head-up displays, etc. and have
many commercial applications. GaN microdisplay, with its superior performance
over other microdisplay technologies, is especially suitable for environmentally
demanding applications that require high brightness, high reliability, and wide
operating temperature range. With a slight modification of the material
composition, GaN microLED arrays developed here can vary the emitted wavelength
from the green to the ultraviolet range, which is very suitable for fluorescence
analysis used in new type chemical-biology agent detector array or DNA/protein
microchips. The GaN microLED array also has the potential for applications such
as optical links and parallel computing. Other applications also include
spatially resolved optical studies of biological, medical, and health care
systems. The research will also enrich the general knowledge of wide bandgap
semiconductor micro- and nano-photonics.

