* 0450493
* SBIR Phase II:     2D Transducer Array for 3D High-Resolution Ultrasound Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Collin Rich, SONETICS ULTRASOUND, INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,028,109.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop Micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) based, fully populated two-
dimensional (2D) ultrasonic transducer array for three dimensional (3D) imaging
in real time. Current 2D ultrasound systems employ a linear array of transducers
to accumulate images. A planar array is universally acknowledged as the ideal
approach for 3D image acquisition; however, multiple challenges must be overcome
to make this practical, including: limitations in existing piezoelectric
transducer technology, connecting an array with many elements (e.g., &gt;
16,000) to front-end electronics, and processing large amounts of image data in
real-time. The highly collaborative Phase II effort will build upon design and
simulation results from the The system architecture will provide substantial
flexibility in applying digital processing techniques, including adaptive
beamforming, synthetic apertures, and phase aberration
correction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed technology could bring many new
capabilities to medical imaging, including volumetric flow, and real-time 3D
imaging for tumor evaluation, image-guided surgery, and fetal echocardiography.
Some of these include a breakthrough planar array technology overcomes a key
bottleneck in the state-of-the-art in ultrasound, with spillover contributions
to non-ultrasound fields (e.g. other MEMS, sonar, other medical imaging,
nondestructive testing).&lt;br/&gt;