* 0450162
* SBIR Phase II:   Developing Crop Plants with Wide-Spectrum Disease Resistance
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Jules Ade, Mendel Biotechnology Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 08/31/2009
* USD 962,138.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on
developing genetically engineered, broad -spectrum disease resistance in plants.
An Aribdopsis transcription factor, TDR1, has been identified that causes
resistance to three pathogens when overexpressed in transgenic plants. However,
constitutive expression of TDR1 or any of three related genes causes growth
retardation. Phase I research demonstrated that using tissue specific or
inducible promoters to drive the TDR1 genes confers resistance with reduced
side-effects. The research objectives of the Phase II project are to test the
limits of TDR technology by assaying a broad range of pathogens, optimize the
TDR phenotype by mutagenesis, demonstrate TDR function in a crop plant (tomato),
and use microarray analysis to correlate gene expression patterns with specific
pathogen resistance spectra in Arabidopsis. The results will establish the
commercial utility of TDR technology.

The commercial application of this research will be to engineer wide-spectrum
disease resistance in crops such as soybean and maize. Chemically based disease
management is expensive, harmful to people and the environment, and not always
effective. Breeding has long been used for developing resistant cultivars, but
the gene pool is limited by reproductive barriers, the technique is slow, and
the resistance is generally narrow in scope and often not durable. There clearly
is a market for genetically-engineered, durable disease resistance. The main
societal benefit of this project is expected to be a decrease in the use of
toxic fungicides, which will positively impact the environment and human health.