* 0450504
* SBIR Phase II:    A Decision Support System for the Railroad Blocking Problem
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Ravindra Ahuja, Innovative Scheduling Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2010
* USD 1,437,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase II project entails
developing a decision support system for the railroad-blocking problem, one of
freight railroad transportation's most significant optimization problems. The
mathematical complexity of railroad transportation problems has precluded the
development of optimization algorithms for solving them preventing railroads
from benefiting from the advances taking place in the field of optimization;
they still rely on manual decision-making processes for most of their planning
and scheduling needs. During Phase I, the company developed prototype software
for the railroad blocking problem and tested it on the data provided by three
major US railroads: CSX Transportation, BNSF Railway, and Norfolk Southern
Corporation. In this Phase II project the company will develop a prototype for a
commercial decision support system for the railroad-blocking problem by
combining state-of-the-art operations research techniques with latest
information technology tools. This project will enhance core optimization
engines and algorithms using cutting-edge ideas in network optimization,
heuristic optimization, data structures, and software engineering. Database
connectivity will also be provided. This Phase II project will extend algorithms
for the railroad-blocking problem to similar problems arising in postal/package
delivery service design and developing prototype software.

Currently, railroads takes months of team effort to determine a blocking plan
and undertake this exercise once in several years with intermittent periods of
minor adjustments to account for seasonal variations in the traffic pattern. The
proposed decision support system would allow a railroad to determine a blocking
plan in a matter of a few hours and produce solutions far superior than those
obtained manually. The proposed solution will enable a large freight railroad to
optimize its blocking plans frequently and reduce cost by at least $10 million
annually and hundreds of millions of dollars for railroads companies in the USA
and Canada over a few years. The research will establish the efficacy of network
optimization and heuristic methodology in solving railroad planning and
scheduling problems. The success of this product will lead to a greater
acceptance of optimization models and optimization-based software in the
railroad industry.