* 0450650
* SBIR Phase II:    Digital Microscopy with Collaborative Learning
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2007
* Timothy Hall, Digital Blue Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 03/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

This SBIR Phase II project seeks to provide a model for integrating digital
microscopy and web-based on-line collaborative learning in order to improve
science education. In Phase I, Digital Blue developed a collaborative worksite,
www.planetmicro.com and enrolled +400 students. In Phase II Digital Blue
proposes to further this inquiry by building, in conjunction with the Concord
Consortium, a state-of-the-art website where students use common digital
microscopes and engage in a true collaborative educational experience. Digital
Blue will undertake this work by scaffolding the website to improve interaction
between members; improving the work flow in which users "tag" their digital
images thus optimizing search engine productivity; developing common curriculum
modules; developing an online professional development utility to empower
teachers to use this technology in their coursework; and adding thousands of
members to foster an innovative and successful collaborative community.

Digital Blue proffers an innovative product and service for the education
market, namely Planetmicro.net, a collaborative workspace that is fully
integrated with a proprietary digital microscope. The site would be the first
collaborative workspace that interacts seamlessly with affordable digital
laboratory equipment in each classroom. Other collaborative learning
environments offer common methods and processes but fail to integrate uniform
tools, creating a gap between the hands-on activity of the lab and the virtual
activity. In contrast, Planetmicro.net would make it easy to integrate
collaborative learning with traditional science pedagogy.