* 0450366
* UC Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate Phase II
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2011
* Ellen Switkes, University of California, Office of the President, Oakland
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2011
* USD 10,200,008.00

The UC Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (UC AGEP) is
uniquely poised to &lt;br/&gt;increase the number of underrepresented minority
(URM) students who enter the professoriate in &lt;br/&gt;science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM). In Phase II of UC AGEP, the broader
&lt;br/&gt;impact of this program will be to increase the number of URM STEM
students earning PhDs and &lt;br/&gt;becoming optimally prepared for the
professoriate. Its intellectual merit lies in its production of new
&lt;br/&gt;model programs for recruiting, retaining, and graduating URM STEM
PhDs and assisting with &lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral placements. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The UC system currently produces approximately 10% of the nation.s
URM PhDs in the Life Sciences, &lt;br/&gt;Engineering and Computer Sciences,
Physical Sciences, and Mathematics. In Phase I of its AGEP &lt;br/&gt;program,
UC AGEP increased URM new STEM enrollment both in real numbers and as a percent
of &lt;br/&gt;total enrollment. To sustain this gain and increase representation
of URMs in the professoriate, UC &lt;br/&gt;AGEP Phase II will expand its
recruitment and admission efforts while addressing key later components
&lt;br/&gt;from retention through postdoctoral placements. Specifically, UC AGEP
II will implement a six-step &lt;br/&gt;program designed to: &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;1. Increase the number of URM STEM students aware of and prepared for
graduate study through &lt;br/&gt;dissemination of information about UC AGEP
activities and summer enrichment opportunities &lt;br/&gt;for undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;2. Increase the number of URM students who apply to UC
campuses and who are considered for &lt;br/&gt;admission to the University
through pre-application events, partnerships with minority serving
&lt;br/&gt;institutions (MSIs) such as Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), partnerships &lt;br/&gt;with California State Universities
and summer programs for masters students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;3. Increase
both the number of URM students who are admitted, and the number who choose to
&lt;br/&gt;accept offers through: 1) targeting interactions and assistance to
admission committees; 2) &lt;br/&gt;increasing opportunities for campus visits;
3) increasing communication with admitted students; &lt;br/&gt;and 4) providing
summer enrichment opportunities for newly admitted students. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;4. Impact the early academic experience of URM graduate students and
improve their retention by &lt;br/&gt;creating community networks, improving
faculty mentoring, and enhancing students. skills for &lt;br/&gt;coping with
academic hurdles such as the qualifying exam. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;5. Support
continuing URM graduate students through programs that improve their
professional &lt;br/&gt;and academic skills, and prepare them for postdoctoral
positions and the academic job market. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;6. Create new
models for increasing URM access to and participation in postdoctoral scholar
&lt;br/&gt;positions, thereby ensuring their competitiveness for academic
positions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;UC AGEP Phase II expects project outcomes to
include increased URM awareness of UC STEM fields, &lt;br/&gt;better preparation
of applicants, increased URM numbers (and percentages) for application and
&lt;br/&gt;matriculation, increased retention, a decreased time to degree, and
better access to postdoctoral positions. &lt;br/&gt;Thus, over the next five
years, UC AGEP II should result in a significant increase in URM PhDs who
&lt;br/&gt;graduate from UC programs and enter the professoriate. Also, by
comparison of best practices, the UC &lt;br/&gt;AGEP infrastructure will foster
the building of networks and models for diversity interventions that will
&lt;br/&gt;persist after the grant period ends.