* 0450528
* SBIR Phase II:      Scalable and Reliable Storage Infrastructure for Network Storage Environments
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2007
* M.Firas Malouhi, Data Reliability Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will build a
scalable and reliable storage system for network storage environments. This
outcome of this project is a revolutionary system that employs a combination of
unique ideas to address the main challenges encountered in today's demanding
storage environments namely scalability, availability, performance, and
manageability. The ideas of this proposed solution are applied as a disk-based
solution for the time-consuming network backup/restore problem. With the rapid
growth of data-driven network services, traditional storage solutions are not
able to keep pace with the rapidly expanding storage requirements. Unlike
traditional solutions the proposed solution employs a new architecture that
allows for independent and practically unlimited scalability of capacity, file
access performance, and namespace access performance. The proposed product
utilizes a unique, very fast coding technique called PND to ensure fast,
reliable, and highly available access to data. It offers the opportunity of
applying a more effective block-level edge caching technique, which enhances the
performance and achieves better utilization of the valuable cache memory. It
takes advantage of Data Reliability, Inc.'s innovative RAISTM storage engine to
cost-effectively aggregate distributed islands of independent storage resources
into a single virtual shared pool of storage. Project Phase I has clearly
demonstrated the above advantages.

Many applications will exploit the competitive advantages of the proposed
product including Web server farms; multimedia network services, content
management, document storage and delivery, digital imaging, and file transfer
services. In addition, the expected solution's ideas can be expanded to build
general-purpose file servers that are not subject to performance bottlenecks and
capacity limitations. Therefore, these ideas will have an important impact on
building next generation NAS devices. The PND technique, pioneered by this
project, provides a new class of codes that are expected to result in scientific
advances in coding theory. In addition, the PND technique will contribute to
enhanced performance and architectures of disk arrays. Applications of PND
coding in areas other than data storage include mobile communications, reliable
multicasting, audio/video streaming, and digital fountain systems. The company
is partnering with Jackson State University (JSU) and will offer JSU students a
tremendous educational experience. Since Jackson State University is an HBCU
(Historically Black College and University) in the underrepresented state of
Mississippi, the project will foster continuous collaboration and will increase
the participation of underrepresented and minority groups in science and
technology.