* 0450740
* Doctoral Dissertation:  From the Private to the Public:  Investigating the Structural Determinants of Domestic Violence in a Slum in Mumbai
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* David Kertzer, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Economically disadvantaged women are particularly vulnerable to suffer violence
because of their poverty, low rates of literacy and their overall marginality.
This dissertation research project by a cultural anthropologist at Brown
University will examine the structural determinants of domestic violence in an
urban slum in northeastern Mumbai (Bombay) in the western state of Maharashtra,
India using interviews, observations and analysis of secondary data. This
research will investigate the ways in which women articulate and understand
domestic violence in the specific cultural context; the degree to which economic
empowerment of women decreases women's susceptibility to domestic violence; the
role of women's natal and marital families in perpetuating or mitigating
domestic violence; the specific dynamics of the marital relationship which may
predispose some women to wife-beating and not others; the capacities of macro
institutions and social networks at the community level to prevent domestic
violence and finally the ways in which national, state, and municipal systems
are addressing issues of domestic violence. This project will add to the
existing literature on gender and health and women's empowerment in developing
countries and will call attention to women's perceptions of violence and
strategies used to cope with it which may differ markedly from those employed by
women in western settings. The intellectual merit of this project stems from its
examination of an understudied population; from its ability to add to the
theoretical underpinnings of women's empowerment in a marginal setting; and from
its use of an innovative research methodology integrating statistical analysis
with qualitative research. Broader impacts include the interest of social
agencies in understanding the contextual determinants of gender-based violence
in India. Women's empowerment is integral to the nation's development and also
has significant effects on major demographic outcomes such as fertility, child
health and reproductive health as well as other social indices. The evidence
gathered through this research can be utilized by social service agencies to
design and implement intervention programs that will prevent and mitigate
domestic violence by using community-based initiatives.