* 0450264
* Collaborative Proposal: WCR - Hydrologic Regulation of Dissolved Organic Matter Biogeochemistry from Forests through River Networks
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,01/31/2009
* George Hornberger, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2009
* USD 152,309.00

Proposal ID: 0450264&lt;br/&gt;PI/Institute: Hornberger/University of
Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Proposal: Hydrologic Regulation of
Dissolved Organic Matter Biogeochemistry from Forests through River
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Louis A. Kaplan, Anthony K., Aufdenkampe, Charles
L. Dow, J. Denis Newbold, and George M.
Hornberger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, massive amounts of organic
carbon, in the form of dissolved molecules, are transported to the oceans of the
world by rivers. The source of most of that carbon is the upper layer of soils
within small watersheds, and the movement of water through soils controls
organic carbon delivery from the landscape to streams. Standing on the
streambank, the investigators look both upslope and downstream, focusing on the
interactions of water movement and organic carbon supply, investigating
processes within the hillslope soils, individual stream reaches, and the entire
river network. This proposal will integrate dynamic mathematical models that
describe organic carbon movement, transformation, quantity and quality in
terrestrial and aquatic environments and will generate the first model that
links the water cycle and the carbon cycle of river catchments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have important outcomes for the
management of drinking water resources, where watersheds are recognized as the
first stage of treatment. Additionally, an increased understanding of the
dynamics of organic molecules in water will provide valuable information about
the fate and transport of potentially harmful anthropogenic compounds that stick
to and are transported with those naturally occurring molecules. Lastly, in
developing an understanding of the cumulative role of small streams in the
carbon cycle of large rivers, the researchers will contribute information
concerning the value of headwater streams to society. &lt;br/&gt;