* 0451102
* Reciprocal Signaling in Animal-Bacteria Development
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Edward Ruby, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 06/30/2006
* USD 213,066.00

0211673 McFall

The light organ symbiosis between the squid Euprymna scolopes and the luminous
bacterium Vibrio fischeri represents the most common type of animal-bacterial
interaction; i.e., an association of extracellular bacteria with polarized
epithelial cells that begins anew each generation. In this two-partner model
both the host and symbiont can be raised in the laboratory, and genetic
approaches in V. fischeri have been developed to study not only bacterial
differentiation, but also how the normal program of host gene expression is
affected by genetically altered symbionts. Many of the developmental effects of
symbiosis on the host and symbiont, as well as the reciprocal signals that
trigger development of the partners, have already been defined. We propose to
characterize the individual stages of the signaling process, and to begin to
generate ways to model the process of bacteria-induced host development as a
whole.

The proposal will address the following specific objectives and questions: I.
Describe the signals, signaling targets and pathways that control the bacteria-
induced development of two tissues critical in the specific initiation of
symbiosis - What is the role of nitric oxide in the specificity and development
of the light organ? - Is the NF-kB/Rel family involved in symbiont-induced
signaling and, if so, how? II. Determine the role of stage-specific bacterial
structures and activities in development - Are activities of the symbiont's
flagellar apparatus essential for host signaling? - What changes in symbiont
gene expression are a response to interaction with the host? III. Understand why
bacterial bioluminescence is essential to host tissue development - Is a host
cryptochrome the photoreceptor in luminescence-induced crypt-cell swelling?

To understand the dynamics of animal-bacterial associations, experimental
approaches must be interwoven and coordinated. The two research groups
collaborating in this proposal strive to achieve this integration. Execution of
most of the experiments outlined in the proposal will rely on microscopic,
molecular genetic, and biochemical techniques that have been developed for the
study of this system. The proposal builds on past results within productive
areas, such as studies of the role of nitric oxide in symbiotic development. In
addition, questions of a more exploratory nature will be asked with the aim of
opening new experimental paradigms, such as how host NF-kB functions in both
tissue development and response to bacterial colonization.

