* 0451018
* Role of Sensory Experience in Parcellation of Sensory Neocortex
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Sarah Pallas, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Karen A. Mesce
* 02/28/2011
* USD 524,460.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Cerebral cortex in mammals is composed of multiple
specialized subdivisions called "areas", but how they arise during either
development or evolution is not known. An understanding of this process is
important for our ability to understand how human cortex functions. The major
hypothesis guiding this work is that sensory information received by a cortical
area plays a significant role in defining its identity and organizing its
circuitry. The function of a cortical area would thus be automatically designed
for optimal processing of its inputs, even if inputs change over evolutionary
time or as a response to injury. In contrast to a preprogrammed blueprint, this
input-dependent organization would allow an optimal response to changes in
sensory inputs. The continuing goal is to examine how developmental mechanisms
could facilitate evolution of sensory cortex into its functionally specialized
areas. &lt;br/&gt; Two paradigms will be used to investigate the role of sensory
experience in cortical development in ferrets, using electrophysiological and
neuroanatomical approaches. In one model, neonatal deafening produces errors in
targeting such that visual thalamus innervates primary auditory cortex (AI). An
investigation into the functional result of the deafness-induced rewiring is
proposed here. In the other paradigm, immature retinal axons are encouraged to
invade the auditory thalamus, providing visual input to A1 via the auditory
pathway. Physiological study showed that as a result of the procedure, auditory
cortex comes to resemble visual cortex in its mapping, response properties, and
perceptual capability. Thus it appears that supplying AI with early visual input
can nearly transform it into visual cortex from a functional standpoint. This
apparently occurs through alterations in connectivity and in structure of a
class of inhibitory cortical neurons. The objectives for this model are to
continue to define the functional implications of the changes in connectivity
and neuronal morphology believed to underlie cortical plasticity. This
information will demonstrate what types of changes in circuitry would be
sufficient for a sensory cortical area to acquire unique properties during
evolution. The possibility that changing afferent activity and/or genetic
identity can induce a new cortical area will be explored. The findings will be
applied to models of developmental processes that act as a basis for brain
evolution, and in particular models of how the number and specialization of
sensory cortical areas increased during mammalian
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Over 30% of Georgia State
University students are African-American, facilitating recruitment of minority
students into biological research. In addition to ongoing activities in
undergraduate and graduate education, community outreach activities have and
will include development of elementary and middle school lesson plans in brain
development and evolution. These lessons will be adapted for use by teachers and
in the NSF-funded "Bio-Bus" that travels to metro Atlanta area schools,
providing hands-on biology lessons particularly for under-funded public schools
with a majority African-American student population. In the context of the NSF
Center for Behavioral Neuroscience, the P.I. will continue to recruit minority
undergraduate students for summer research experiences with the goal of
encouraging them toward graduate school. The PI has also worked to defend
evolution education in Georgia through articles for the lay press, radio and TV,
and through educational outreach and networking between K-12 and university
faculty. See http://www.georgiascience/org.&lt;br/&gt;