* 0451490
* Synthetic Methodology Development, Utilizing the Physical and Chemical Manipulation of Discrete Nanoscale Objects
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Karen Wooley, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2010
* USD 646,133.00

The intellectual merit of the proposed research centers upon the preparation of
unique nanostructured materials, and the development of processes to do so.
Rigorous characterization techniques will be applied at each stage of the
syntheses. Supramolecular assembly, applied in an iterative fashion, along with
templating strategies and covalent stabilization, will be utilized for the
development of new synthetic methodologies for the preparation of materials
having high orders of complexity. The research efforts will build from the past
accomplishments and will focus upon the development of new synthetic
methodologies, involving primarily iterative physical and chemical manipulation
of nanostructures that originate from supramolecular assemblies to increase the
degrees to which the structures can deviate from the thermodynamically-derived
materials. The preparation of amphiphilic block copolymers via living radical
polymerizations, in conjunction with protecting group strategies, will be
followed by their self assembly into polymer micelles or inverse micelles,
covalent stabilization through shell crosslinking, and then manipulation of the
shell crosslinked nanostructures. Thus, the foundational component will be shell
crosslinked polymer micelles or inverse micelles and the proposed work will
include: (1) syntheses of inverse structures having hydrophilic cores contained
within hydrophobic shells that are stabilized via the development of living
radical crosslinking polymerizations; (2) studies of the inversion of pre-
established shell crosslinked nanostructures, the reversibility of such a
process and the surface properties of the inverted nanostructures; (3) studies
aiming toward the development of thermoplastic and thermosetting methodologies
for the complex shaping of preestablished shell crosslinked nanostructures
beyond thermodynamically accessible spheres, discs, rods, vesicles, toroids,
etc.; (4) syntheses of hollowed shell crosslinked nanostructures and the
development of synthetic methodologies for chemical differentiation of the
external and internal surfaces of the resulting nanocages, including the living
polymer brush growth within the nanocages to generate backfilled core domains.
These materials will be rich with fundamental properties investigations of the
effects of surface attachment and nanoconfinement upon polymer chains, as
advanced shaped materials, which can be tuned in terms of the incorporation and
growth of composite core domain polymer chains, and as those that present unique
amphiphilic surface profiles that can approximate protein surfaces. The broader
impacts from the proposed activity will include interdisciplinary training of
students at multiple levels, and the continued development of significant
societal education and outreach programs. Educational activities will be
directed at multiple levels from kindergarten students to teachers, graduate
students and postdoctoral associates. Rigorous research studies will provide the
foundation for higher education, whereas formal courses utilizing hands-on
activities supplemented with the background curriculum will be continued and
enhanced as outreach activities. The hands-on outreach, Matter and Energy,
Education 6009 course will be offered every two years, for K-8 teachers, and a
more intensive summer institute course will be developed to provide for a
stronger foundation of chemistry principles. Educational demonstration-based and
activities-filled visits to elementary schools will be continued. Assessment
plans will be developed to increase the impact that these activities can
provide, by evaluating attitudinal and conceptual data pre- and post-completion
of the formal courses or school visits.