* 0451443
* Crystal Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Michael O'Keeffe, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 12/31/2008
* USD 424,673.00

&lt;br/&gt;A program of theoretical and experimental research into the
structure, formation and properties of microporous materials will be undertaken.
The theoretical work will include the enumeration and classification of periodic
topologies and evaluation of strategies for their realization in designed
chemical synthesis. This will provide the conceptual basis for design and
realization of materials with targeted properties such as sorption and
catalysis. Experimental work will be aimed at the synthesis of oxide materials
of novel chemical compositions using templated synthetic methods, and to the
development of new methods, using X-ray and electron diffraction, of determining
problem structures, including those of very porous materials containing a large
fraction of disordered guest materials. Essentially, all the research will be
performed by undergraduate and graduate students pursuing degrees in chmistry or
materials research and will be an essential component of their education in
those disciplines. Advanced web-based educational materials in chemical topology
and crystal chemistry will be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project is
aimed at developing the theory of design and developing synthetic methods for
preparation of porous materials. Porous materials of this sort (zeolites) are
now of very great importance for catalysis and are an key component of the
petrochemical industry. There is a continual need for new materials with
specific properties to effect specific reactions converting raw petroleum
products to desired chemical compositions. Microporous materials are also now
becoming of prime importance for applications such as sequestration of
greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide and for mobile storage media for light fuel
gases, such as methane and hydrogen in the next generation power supplies for
automobiles and portable electronic devices. The research will particulrly focus
on (a) describing the underlying geometry of such materials (b) developing
strategies for designed synthesis of materials with targeted properties, and (c)
preparation of materials with novel chemical composition. Essentially all the
research will be performed by undergraduate and graduate students pursuing
degrees in chmistry or materials research and will be an essential component of
their education in those disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;