* 0451464
* US-China Cooperative Research in Integrated Health Monitoring with Emphasis on Earthquake and Natural Hazard Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* ming wang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2008
* USD 120,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0451464&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ming L.Wang&lt;br/&gt;University of
Illinois-Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to formulate a US-China
Joint Task Force to develop a 5-year collaborative research program in
Integrated Structural Health Monitoring comprising of sensors, integrated data
acquisition and processing systems and countermeasure decision making system
with emphasis on Earthquake and Natural Hazards. Integrated health monitoring of
structures, based on advanced sensor technology, will improve structural
reliability, longevity, enhance system performance, and improve safety against
natural hazards including earthquakes and intentional attacks. The current
technology is past the embryonic stage and is now at par to meet the challenges
of health monitoring. US has been leading the research and development of new
sensor technology and in turn China has been leading in application of sensor
technology for monitoring real structures. The task force will integrate the
research efforts through strategic collaborated research proposals by both China
and US researchers to identify the challenges and key research topics. The final
outcome will be a comprehensive plan to accelerate development of integrated
health monitoring for civil infrastructure for earthquake engineering. The task
force will interface conventional engineering with new technology-based
research, educational impact, commercial application of the technology and the
expected benefits. This venture will facilitate international student exchange,
technology transfer through complimentary research and exchange of research
data, educational courses for students and training sessions for engineers, and
will actively involve the related industry and government agencies in the
activities of integrated health monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;