* 0451494
* Applications of Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy to Novel Electrochemical Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Allen Bard, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2009
* USD 613,500.00

Professor Allen J. Bard of the University of Texas at Austin is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry program to further applications of the scanning
electrochemical microscope (SECM). One area of study is focusing on the
development of SECM systems that integrate a micropipet dispensing tip. The
integrated system is enabling SECM tip capabilities, such as detection, probe
positioning and reagent generation, to be combined with localized picoliter
dispensing of solutions. Advances are broadening the scope of SECM applications
to include surface patterning, combinatorial electrocatalyst discovery and
spatial mapping of biologically active species. Another area of investigation
involves probing electrocatalysts in the 1-20 nm range at the level of a single
particle. Emphasis is on oxygen reduction and hydrogen oxidation and carrying
out measurements of heterogeneous electron transfer rates as functions of
particle size. Additional areas of study include fast electron transfer through
monolayers on electrodes, charge transport in thin layer films of enzyme "wired"
by polymer containing redox active groups that serve as electron transport
relays and screening of enzyme biomimetic catalysts for oxygen reduction. For
the former, DNA and molecular systems that provide models for molecular wires
are of special interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances being made by the Bard
group through applications of the scanning electrochemical microscope are
impacting areas of technological importance, such as the field of energy
resources through the discovery of new electrocatalysts that can be used in fuel
cells and air batteries. The research is also applicable to the development of
sensors and new approaches to studies of biological cells at the single cell
level.&lt;br/&gt;