* 0451971
* Survey of Terrestrial Arthropods of French Polynesia
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Rosemary Gillespie, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 01/31/2010
* USD 556,000.00

0451971&lt;br/&gt;Gillespie and Roderick&lt;br/&gt; The islands of French
Polynesia include some of the most isolated archipelagos in the world. In common
with other isolated islands, those of French Polynesia are known for having many
unique species which are generally confined to small areas and are vulnerable to
extinction primarily from the impacts posed by numerous invasive species.
Although French Polynesia has been largely protected from excessive development
and tourism that have plagued other tropical islands, it is not protected from
invasive species that are becoming a more serious threat as the global trend of
increasing transportation and accessibility reaches even the most remote
archipelagoes. The project by Drs. Gillespie and Roderick at University of
California-Berkeley, with colleagues from Cornell University, the Bishop Museum,
and the Smithsonian, is to survey the arthropod fauna of the high islands, with
emphasis on the native species which are generally confined to middle and high
elevations. The project has 4 elements: (1) diversity assessment of presumed
native species and levels of endemism; (2) databasing and mapping to allow the
data on species distributions to be overlaid on topographic maps of different
islands; (3) local information dissemination through a workshop in French
Polynesia for the participating scientists and local trainees as well as French
Polynesian educators and government officials; and (4) development of the
entomology (including spiders) collection in Tahiti in conjunction with
government officials in French Polynesia, in order to establish an Entomology
Collection at the Musee de Tahiti et ses Iles in Tahiti.&lt;br/&gt;A major
emphasis of the proposal is to harness a growing interest in (and concern about)
the biological heritage of the islands among the people of French Polynesia.
This growing local interest, coupled with the current cooperation between UC
Berkeley's Gump South Pacific Research Station on Moorea and the Territorial
Government of French Polynesia, present a timely opportunity to build an
understanding of the arthropod biodiversity of these islands. In addition to
field collecting opportunities provided U.S. students, the study promotes
capacity building of the local Polynesian community within the islands: (i)
local trainees will be recruited broadly from throughout French Polynesia to
participate with US investigators and their graduate students in the survey;
(ii) near the end of the project a workshop will be held to communicate the
results and conservation implications of the survey; and (iii) assistance will
be provided for setting up an entomological collection in the Musee de Tahiti et
ses Iles on the island of Tahiti.&lt;br/&gt;