* 0451639
* Numerical Modeling Studies of Storm Electrification and Lightning
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Jerry Straka, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2011
* USD 556,990.00

This project investigates the electrification and lightning production in
mesoscale convective systems (MCSs), using a sophisticated three-dimensional
numerical model with advanced microphysical, electrical and lightning
parameterizations. The primary motivation for this numerical study is to gain
physical understanding of the processes affecting electrification and lighting
production from field observations of electrical storms by testing hypotheses
derived from those observations. The principal investigators utilize
improvements made to the model to study the time evolution of the
horizontal/vertical charge structure of MCSs, those factors contributing to, and
the lighting resulting from that structure. The ability to simulate the full
life cycle of systems generates more robust correlations between lighting and
storm properties. Specifically, they are comparing the relative contributions of
local (stratiform region) charge separation processes versus advection of charge
from the convective region, and testing the hypothesis that an inductive
melting-fragmentation charge scheme is responsible for the near 273 K charge
layers found in stratiform regions. Furthermore, they are studying the impact of
the storm's evolution on its lighting production, focusing on the impact of
merger or proximity of cells in the convective region, and ways in which the
evolving charge structures in convective and stratiform regions interact to
produce the often-observed cloud-to-ground lightning dipole (negative flashes
near the convective region, positive from the stratiform region) and long
horizontal flashes between the regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this work are its contribution to our understanding of the processes leading
to storm electrification and lightning production, and high potential to resolve
the current debate in the literature of the origins of charge in mesoscale
convective systems. It aids in the interpretation of existing field
observations, and will guide the design of future experiments. Two graduate
students are funded under this work, and aspects of the research will find its
way into a graduate course on atmospheric electricity at the University of
Oklahoma, thus impacting many more students.