* 0451597
* Carbon Monoxide Based Ecological Interactions Between Legumes and Their Rhizobial Symbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2005,10/31/2007
* Gary King, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Saran Twombly
* 10/31/2007
* USD 308,000.00

Leguminous plants provide an important protein source for about one-third of the
world's population. Nitrogen-fixing nodules on the roots of these plants produce
relative large amounts of carbon monoxide (CO). Although CO plays important and
well-known roles in the chemistry of the troposphere and in cellular biology,
the roles of CO in ecological interactions between legumes and their microbial
symbionts are poorly known. Preliminary results suggest that use of CO by many
legume symbionts (including strains of agriculturally important nitrogen-fixing
bacteria) may promote their survival and viability in soils. Symbiont survival
and viability in turn can affect plant performance and ultimately impact the
role of legumes in a variety of ecosystems. To test this concept, we will use
pairs of legume symbionts. One strain in each pair will be manipulated
genetically to eliminate the capacity for CO utilization. We will monitor
relative and absolute survival of each member of these pairs singly and in mixed
populations with and without added CO. We also propose that bacterial CO
oxidation controls in part net CO emission by nodules and overall plant
performance. We will test this notion using pairs of legumes inoculated with CO-
oxidizing symbionts or mutants that do not oxidize CO. Finally, we will use
cultivation methods and our recently developed molecular tools to determine
relationships between the distribution of CO-oxidizing rhizobia in soil and root
and nodule CO production. We will focus on bulk soil, the rhizosphere and the
rhizoplane in greenhouse and field studies. In order to expand the impact of our
work, we will incorporate appropriate aspects of our research into modules that
will be used in science education programs at a K-8 school in South Bristol,
Maine.