* 0451239
* Health Monitoring of Critical Civil Infrastructure for Safety and Security
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Peter Romine, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 03/31/2008
* USD 277,122.00

EEC-0451239 PI- Mohamed Saafi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an REU
site with the theme, "Health Monitoring of Critical Civil Infrastructure for
Safety and Security", at Alabama A&amp;M University (AAMU). Undergraduate
students enrolled in engineering and technology programs in traditional African-
American institutions (HBCUs) such as AAMU face major challenges arising from
the rapid change of technology in the work environment. Because of limited
exposure to research activities these engineering and technology students are
not up-to date with today's technologies, and this presents serious handicaps in
their careers compared to their peers at other research-oriented universities.
In addition, while the number of African-American students is increasing
relatively in undergraduate engineering and technology programs, there are few
students (1%) who pursue graduate- level study, and this is mainly because these
students are never exposed to research activities during their studies. To
address the above issues, AAMU established a research center "Center for
Transportation Infrastructure Safety and Security (TIS2)" with a main objective
of providing hands-on research experiences for undergraduate students. The TIS2
is a multidisciplinary research center that undertakes research dealing with
safety and security of critical civil infrastructure and transportation systems
for homeland security. With support from the NSF, US Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA) and the Alabama Department of Transportation, an active
research program was established to address critical research issues in the
application of nanotechnology, microtechnology, and micro-optical technology in
monitoring the health of civil infrastructure for safety and security.
Therefore, the objective of the proposed REU site is to provide training
activities through innovative research projects in health monitoring of civil
infrastructure, especially for talented African-American students long deprived
of research and hands-on engineering experience. Three students will be
recruited from the host institution (AAMU), and seven students will be recruited
from other institutions, mainly Tennessee State University, Jacksonville State
University in Mississippi, Florida A&amp;M University, Southern University in
Louisiana, and Savanna State University in Georgia. The students will be
recruited from relevant engineering programs (civil, electrical and mechanical
engineering) and will be engaged in a ten-week multidisciplinary research
program conducted at the TIS2 Center relating to health monitoring of critical
civil infrastructure for safety and security and focusing on the use of
nanotechnology-based devices such as NanoElectromechnical,
MicroElectroMechanical, and MicroOpticalElectroMechanical Systems (NEMS, MEMS
and MOEMS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each student will work on an individual
project. Each project will be structured to challenge the student and to ensure
the development of student-faculty interactions and student-student
communication. In addition to providing research experience, the proposed
program will seek to provide an integrated learning experience that will
emphasize the formation of a strong sense of a multicultural community through
social and cultural interactions. Additional enrichment and professional-
development activities planned for the students include seminars and workshops.
The students will be engaged in innovative and cutting-edge research projects
related to monitoring of critical civil infrastructure health for safety and
security. The students will take advantage of recent advancements in
nanotechnology to develop a completely new class of devices for civil
infrastructure. These novel sensors can be extremely cheap, wireless, and
durable, and can greatly enhance the information available during the routine
inspection of civil infrastructure. Due to their extremely low cost, the
proposed nanotechnology-based sensors can be embedded or attached in the
thousands and interrogated wirelessly with a minimum of time and effort. Such an
approach enables better understanding of damage mechanisms in civil
infrastructure and particularly of how certain key parameters affecting the
durability of these structures progress. This information can be used to develop
more efficient designs for future structures. This REU program enhances the
technical and educational backgrounds of minority students by offering more
collaborative research activities and improves the students' critical thinking,
communication skills, research skills and ability to conduct unsupervised
research work. The student participants are encouraged to publish the findings
of their projects in journals, to present them at conferences, and to
disseminate them at meetings to benefit the research community and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;