* 0451438
* Quantifying Solar Magnetic Field Evolution and Its Relation to Eruptions
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Yan Li, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 12/31/2008
* USD 297,371.00

The PI proposes to explore the relationship between solar eruptive phenomena,
e.g., coronal mass ejections (CMEs), and flows and evolution in active region
photospheric magnetic fields. Predicting the onset of these eruptive events is
one of the major remaining challenges in space weather research. Many observers
have reported that rotational and shearing flows, which can contribute energy to
the coronal magnetic field, are present in eruptive active regions. Further,
recent numerical simulations suggest that converging flows and magnetic flux
cancellation in active regions containing twisted or sheared magnetic fields can
initiate eruptions. However, rotation, shearing motions, and flux cancellation,
as with active region flows in general, have only been quantitatively
investigated in a few case studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will measure
flows, rotation, shear, convergence, and cancellation in at least 30 active
regions, to systematically explore relationships between field evolution and
eruptive behavior. Her sample, chosen over the course of the solar cycle, will
consist of regions that exhibit different types of behavior, from flares and
CMEs, to filament disappearances, to low activity. By applying local correlation
tracking (LCT) to SOHO/MDI and GONG+ line-of-sight (LOS) photospheric
magnetograms, she will derive active region flows, and measure rotation,
shearing, and convergence. The proposer will also apply LCT to SOLIS
chromospheric LOS magnetograms when they become available, which will provide
new perspectives and further constraints on the processes driving solar
eruptions. She will apply inductive local correlation tracking (ILCT), a
recently developed technique using LCT and the magnetic induction equation, to
determine three-component photospheric velocity fields from SOLIS vector
magnetograms. Using Cartesian-to-polar transformations, she will measure the
rotational velocities of active region magnetic features, and compare them with
LCT results. In addition, the PI will quantify flux cancellation rates, and
study their variation around the time of eruptive events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to maintain and enhance the existing GONG+
related website at UC Berkeley. This study will also complement CME modeling
efforts by others in the space weather community. Further, this investigation
may enhance our capability to predict CMEs, the most powerful drivers of space
weather, which play a unique role in the coupled Sun-Earth system. In addition,
techniques developed here will be useful in analysis of data from current and
future solar magnetographs.