* 0451685
* Solid-State NMR Analysis of Chain Packing and Dynamics in Polycarbonates
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2005,08/31/2009
* Jacob Schaefer, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2009
* USD 420,000.00

Rotational-echo double resonance (REDOR) solid-state NMR will be used to
determine the local packing of chains in polycarbonates typical of those
currently used in engineering applications. Ten polycarbonates are on hand with
differently positioned 2H, 13C, and 19F labels. REDOR will be used to measure
specific heteronuclear distances in a variety of homogeneous blends of these
labeled polycarbonates. These REDOR experiments will allow the rings and
sidechains of one polycarbonate to be located relative to the rings,
isopropylidenes, and carbonates of its neighbors. Preliminary REDOR experiments
have confirmed the feasibility of this approach for the determination of local
order in polycarbonate chain packing.

Centerband-only detection of exchange (CODEX) will be used to characterize the
molecular details of motion in the mechanically important 1-100 Hz frequency
regime at 300 K for the same polycarbonates examined by REDOR. In the standard
CODEX experiment, spin coherence is created by rotor-synchronized pulses acting
on a 13C chemical shift tensor. If the coherence is instead created by pulses
acting on a heteronuclear dipolar tensor, then the results of REDOR and CODEX
experiments are directly correlated.

Intellectual Merit. Rotational-echo double resonance (REDOR) measures accurately
heteronuclear distances between dipolar-coupled spin pairs under magic-angle
spinning conditions. If two miscible polymers are specifically labeled with
different stable isotopes (2H and 13C, for example), then 13C{2H} REDOR can be
used to determine interchain distances and orientation, which define local chain
packing. The blending is done with the observed nucleus at high concentration
and the dephasing nucleus at low concentration so that the REDOR results are
interpreted in terms of simple sums of pair-wise couplings. Distributions of
distances are required but not specific packing models. The mechanically
important slow motions in a polycarbonate glass are identified as belonging to a
specific type of packing arrangement using a combination of REDOR and CODEX in
the same experiment. This new approach will be an important step in reaching the
long-term goal of connecting the molecular properties of glassy polymers with
their macroscopic behavior.

Broader Impact. High-Tg amorphous polyesters containing azobenzene sidechains
are being examined in several materials laboratories for use in (eraseable)
holographic optical data storage. These polyesters have dichroic (anisotropic
absorption) and birefringent (anisotropic refraction) properties when
illuminated by linearly polarized light. The ease of ordering of sidechains and
the observation of biaxial birefringence suggest that prior local order in
mainchain packing is important. Polycarbonates are good candidates for data-
storage thin films. They are mechanically tough, have high Tg's, can be
synthesized with photosensitive sidechains, and show local order in mainchain
packing. The characterization of their packing and dynamics by REDOR and CODEX
should help in the development of new data-storage materials.

Polymers and materials science are good topics to use in reaching out to inform
the community about modern technology. Polymers are intuitive and do not require
the background necessary to understand structural biology, for example. The PI
is an active participant in a formal education training program for St. Louis
K-8 science teachers and plans to continue this effort for the next four years.
He applies the basic ideas of mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance
to familiar objects like plastics (especially impact-resistant polycarbonates!).
Materials science is also attractive to undergraduates and graduates. The PI
will include undergraduates in the proposed polymer work, and will train both
graduate students and postdoctoral students using polycarbonate-NMR problems to
provide a rich mix of instrumentation, theory, and experience in practical
applications of modern solid-state NMR.