* 0451828
* Dissertation Research:  On Interdisciplinary Strategies at Research-Intensive Universities
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Roger Geiger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* stephen zehr
* 12/31/2006
* USD 8,000.00

This Societal Dimensions of Engineering, Science, and Technology Program
Dissertation Improvement Grant will enable a dissertation student to conduct
case studies at four major research institutions in order to move closer to
completing his Ph.D. dissertation. The dissertation focuses on
interdisciplinarity in university-based research. Fostering interdisciplinarity
has become a laudable goal for federal agencies and research-intensive
universities alike. The National Science Foundation (NSF) has supported
interdisciplinarity for a number of years, through center programs and other
initiatives (Brint, forthcoming; Hackett, 2000; Lattuca, 2001). In the early
2000s, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) made an explicit commitment to
interdisciplinarity in the "NIH Roadmap" (National Institutes of Health, 2003).
At about the same time, strategic plans of research universities have
increasingly emphasized interdisciplinary scholarship (Feller, 2002,
forthcoming). Universities, however, ground their basic organizational
frameworks in the nexus between disciplines and academic departments (Blau,
1994; Clark, 1983, 1987, 1993, 1995; Geiger, 1986; Veysey, 1965). Both external
sponsorship and university leadership commitment to fostering
interdisciplinarity therefore suggest the need to induce change in the way
scientists work. Whether universities choose to respond to calls for
interdisciplinarity is partly a matter of institutional strategy, local culture,
and organizational climates (Brint, forthcoming; Feller, 2002, forthcoming).
Presently, little is known about which institutions are more likely to organize
for interdisciplinary efforts and what organizational strategies they have
employed. Previous studies of interdisciplinarity have focused on individual
faculty members as the unit of analysis (Klein, 1990; Lattuca, 2001), on the
work patterns or effectiveness of interdisciplinary research centers (Ailes,
Roessner, &amp; Coward, 2000; Newell, Saxberg, &amp; Birnbaum, 1975; Rhoten,
2003), or purported paradigmatic shifts in the production of knowledge (Gibbons
et al., 1994; Weingart &amp; Stehr, 2000). Scattered findings on institutions
that support interdisciplinarity (Brint, forthcoming; Feller, 2002, forthcoming)
do not allow for understanding of general patterns of organizational change and
adaptation. Is there a relationship between a university's official commitment
to interdisciplinarity and the amount of sponsored interdisciplinary research it
carries out? What are some of the organizational strategies that universities
have employed to foster interdisciplinary science? This study will address these
questions through a content analysis of universities' strategic plans and an
analysis of the distribution of NSF interdisciplinary research grants. The
content analysis will reveal the nature and extent of official institutional
commitments to interdisciplinarity, and the analysis of NSF-funded projects will
provide an objective measure of universities' boundary-spanning work. Together,
these analyses will serve as an index of institutional emphasis on
interdisciplinary or disciplinary-specialization strategies. To provide an in-
depth understanding of organizational commitments and arrangements for
interdisciplinary science, the researcher will also conduct case studies of
selected universities that are making institutional commitments to
interdisciplinary strategies. The case studies will be central to the proposed
investigation, revealing potentially new structures that are altering the usual
settings for faculty work. In its totality, the study will elucidate how the
university system and selected institutions have reacted to sponsorship to
interdisciplinarity, in what seems to be a salient trend for future research
funding in the U.S. and internationally (Weingart &amp; Stehr, 2000). Findings
will be useful for higher education scholars and administrators dedicated to the
study and the management of research-intensive universities, informing both
practice and theory-building on adaptations of traditional academic structures
to promote interdisciplinary modes of research. If the current support for
interdisciplinary science is sustained - or perhaps increased - in the future,
the relevance of organizational structures for boundary-spanning work will be
heightened for universities that wish to participate effectively in the research
economy. Results of the proposed investigation will be disseminated through
presentations and publications in the field of higher education administration,
and will also be included in a graduate-level course of a leading program in the
field.