* 0451010
* ALPS Implementation Conference
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2007
* Mary Perry, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2007
* USD 42,225.00

0451010

Intellectual Merit: A diverse suite of autonomous mobile platforms - including
drifters, floats, underwater gliders and AUVs (autonomous underwater vehicles),
and the small sensors they carry - have collectively become known as ALPS, i.e.,
"Autonomous and Lagrangian Platforms and Sensors". A small interdisciplinary
workshop is proposed as a follow-on to the Spring 2003 ALPS workshop. The first
ALPS workshop convened a group of scientists and engineering, representing
diverse backgrounds and interests, who met to identify new science that could
best be done with ALPS alone or in conjunction with other platforms; to address
technological developments needed to improve the capabilities of ALPS; to
elucidate models for making the technologies more accessible to the broader
community; and to assess training, education and outreach efforts. Until the
first ALPS workshop, there had been no focused plan that outlined how ALPS could
enable new opportunities in cross-disciplinary ocean studies. The ALPS workshop
produced a report that detailed the capabilities of these mobile platforms and
outlined the exciting, new scientific opportunities for using ALPS for
interdisciplinary studies of the ocean; the report is available one line at
www.geo-prose.com/ALPS. The follow-on workshop, to be held in Winter 2005 will
focus on the details of how ALPS can be used in specific types of studies that
are best suited to mobile technologies. Secondary goals are a) to outline a
future scientific conference to bring together a diverse community of present
and potential users of Lagrangian and autonomous platforms and b) to plan a
framework for exploring implementation models to make ALPS technologies more
accessible to the broader scientific community. The proposed ALPS workshop will
be small, with about 20 participants representing a diverse cross section of the
ocean community. A draft report will be vetted and community comment
incorporated in the document; the final report will be published in Spring 2005.

Broader Impacts: The primary goal of the proposed workshop is to continue
advancements in ocean observations and hypothesis testing made possible by
mobile platforms. The full potential for using ALPS testing has not yet been
fully explored; the workshop will detail mechanisms to do that. A scientific
conference will help disseminate knowledge about using ALPS and results of ALPS
experiments. An increasing number of investigators wish to use ALPS, but
presently have no access to the technology; the workshop will address models to
facilitate access to these tools and data by a broader community. The research
resulting from ALPS technologies will contribute to a more powerful capacity to
observe the oceans and to address issues of major societal concern, including
climate change and ocean ecosystem health.

