* 0451103
* Molecular Level Effects for Simple Electrode Reactions at Well Defined Polarizable Electrodes
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* W. Ronald Fawcett, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 02/29/2008
* USD 438,400.00

Professor W. Ronald Fawcett of the University of California-Davis is performing
experimental work to elucidate molecular effects in interfacial
electrochemistry. His project is developing new methods for the growth and
isolation of micron-scale single crystal surfaces that are enabling the study of
double layer effects on very fast electron transfer reactions whose kinetics may
not be measured at electrodes of macroscale dimensions. High frequency
voltammetry techniques are being applied to investigate limitations to electron
transfer related to interfacial structure and charge and reorganization of
solvent. Reactions involving complex ions in solution and underpotential
deposition processes are emphasized. In addition, quantum chemical calculations
are being performed to evaluate the charge distribution within polyatomic
reactants for improved assessment of the magnitude of double layer corrections.
Other areas under study include double layer structure in the presence of
divalent ions and diffuse layer properties at self assembled monolayer modified
electrodes.

Advances being made by the Fawcett group are contributing new techniques to
support investigations of heterogeneous electron transfer. These reactions
impact a broad range of processes, including corrosion, metal deposition, energy
conversion and the operation of chemical sensors.