* 0451781
* Copper Speciation in Seawater: Structure and Function of Novel Chelators
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Beth Ahner, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 01/31/2010
* USD 319,430.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0451781

Little is known about the chemical composition of the ligands that reduce free
copper (Cu) ion concentrations from toxic to nutritive levels or what their
source is. Recently, a scientist from Cornell University identified two novel
thiols exuded by Emiliania huxleyi in response to Cu. Using laboratory based
continuous cultures, the principal investigator proposes to determine how
environmental conditions influence the composition of the ligands exuded by E.
huxleyi and assess the biochemical role of the recently identified novel thiols.
In addition, the chemical stability of dithiol-Cu(I) complexes and the
mechanisms that form thiol-Cu(I) complexes will be established. Stable Cu
isotopes will be used to evaluate how thiol ligands alter the bioavailability of
Cu and whether complexes can be taken up by algae when Cu concentrations are
low.

Two distinct mass spectroscopy techniques will be used to identify additional
ligands synthesized and exuded by Synechococcus and Amphidinium carterae in
response to Cu. A fluorescent probe and high pressure liquid chromatography
coupled to ion trap mass spectroscopy will be used to determine the structure of
thiol ligands. The second analytical approach, inductively coupled plasma mass
spectroscopy detection in parallel with a quadropole mass spectrometer
downstream of a high pressure liquid chromatography, will characterize ligands
regardless of the functional group responsible for Cu chelation.

As regards broader impacts, this project is a cutting edge metal speciation
study utilizing two relatively new mass spectroscopy approaches to further our
knowledge of the biogeochemistry of copper. The PI will continue her
participation in Curie Academy, a program aimed at high school girls to
introduce the excitement of science and engineering, as well as in "Chemistry
Day", an event held at a local mall aimed at exposing local children in K-12 to
the field of chemical oceanography.