* 0451430
* RUI:  Molecular Phylogenetic Analysis and Biogeography of Spiroplasmas
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Laura Regassa, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/28/2009
* USD 110,972.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laura Regassa&lt;br/&gt;DEB
0451430&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spiroplasmas may be one of the most abundant groups
of microbes on earth due to their association with a wide variety of insects.
Traditional strain classification divided the genus Spiroplasma into 34 groups
based on serology, and recent molecular analysis of 36 strains from North
America and Europe suggests a strong correlation between the molecular phylogeny
and the serological groups. The current project will expand upon this initial
study to include more geographically diverse spiroplasma isolates. The results
will address questions concerning geographical diversification, spiroplasma-host
specificity, and the correlation between serological classification and
molecular phylogeny. Specifically, the research will examine the molecular
phylogenetic relationships of a geographically and serologically diverse sample
set of novel spiroplasma isolates from tabanid flies. Tabanid-associated
spiroplasmas were chosen because they are the most thoroughly studied group to
date based on serology. The spiroplasma isolates for this study were obtained
from tabanid flies in North America, Meso-America, South America and Australia;
and were placed into 24 independent serogroups. Isolates from each serogroup
will be subjected to molecular analysis and molecular phylogenetic relationships
will be determined.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will move the
spiroplasma field forward to greater reliance on DNA sequence data for strain
classification and help to bridge the gap between traditional serology and
molecular phylogeny. This has important implications for the spiroplasma field,
because a correlation between serology and phylogeny would allow for tentative
placement of hundreds of strains that have only been classified serologically.
In addition, understanding the biodiversity and biogeography of spiroplasmas has
important practical applications in agricultural production, as pathogenic
species are responsible for citrus stubborn disease, corn stunt disease and
honeybee mortality. Assignment of geographical ranges and distribution patterns
for spiroplasmas may help with disease management strategies. Finally, this
research provides numerous opportunities for the career development of
undergraduate students, graduate students (M.S.), and the Principal
Investigator. This project will broadly impact participation of underrepresented
groups as over 80% of the Principal Investigator's undergraduate research
students have been from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;