* 0451562
* SCI:   ETF Early Operations:   CACR/CIT
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2007
* James Pool, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Abani K. Patra
* 02/28/2007
* USD 500,000.00

The Extensible Terascale Facility (ETF), or TeraGrid, involves nine resource
providers operating high-performance computing, information, and visualization
facilities, interconnected with a dedicated optical network and integrated with
a set of common software that presents the user community with a cohesive set of
resources and services. On October 1, 2004, the TeraGrid will conclude a three-
year construction effort to create this distributed environment and will
transition into an operational state. This proposal outlines a set of services
to be provided at the Center for Advanced Computing Research (CACR) of the
California Institute of Technology (CIT) as part of the TeraGrid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CACR will support the TeraGrid through a science-based
approach focused on data-intensive applications, initially from a small set of
national research communities sharing the following features: &lt;br/&gt;o there
is a strong related scientific research group at CIT; &lt;br/&gt;o there is
participation by leaders of related scientific research groups at other
institutions; and &lt;br/&gt;o each reflects a priority direction for NSF or
other federal research agencies, primarily multi-agency areas of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;These areas will also share the following technical attributes:
&lt;br/&gt;o large quantities of experimental and/or computational data are
maintained in several local and remote heterogeneous collections; &lt;br/&gt;o
there are requirements for new analysis approaches to extract information from
the experimental data and/or interact with computational modeling; &lt;br/&gt;o
there is an ongoing effort to create unified, interoperable services; and
&lt;br/&gt;o the communities are building persistent virtual organizations that
exploit and federate information resources. The proposed initial primary
research communities are astronomy and high energy physics. Both areas offer
opportunities for collaboration with other TeraGrid sites and each community has
significant funding to develop domain specific cyberinfrastructure. CACR will
assist these groups in deploying and tuning their software on the TeraGrid and
provide support to facilitate their TeraGrid usage. In addition, we will
initiate efforts with the geodynamics modeling and neutron physics communities.
Since the problems faced by these user communities have common features, we
anticipate identifying requirements for shared cyberinfrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CACR will operate an Itanium2 cluster consisting of 72
dual processor nodes (.8 TF). This cluster is tightly coupled via Myrinet and
Gigabit Ethernet to DataWulf clusters, which will provide approximately 170 TB
of online disk storage. These resources will be utilized primarily for
application development and for on-demand and interactive computation and data
analysis. Because CACR has a focused role, it can be responsive to the initial
research communities requirements for on-demand and interactive computation and
data analysis. Inherent flexibility will allow experimentation with novel
approaches to scheduling and, in general, resource management. For the past two
decades, CACR and its predecessors have demonstrated an ability to work closely
with relatively sophisticated user groups to explore innovative approaches to
supporting scientists on the frontier of computational science. We propose to
continue this mode of collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;