* 0451969
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Taxonomic Implications of Basicranial Variation in Australopithecus africanus
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2006
* Osbjorn Pearson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 02/28/2006
* USD 8,665.00

Despite earlier near-consensus, the taxonomy of the fossil hominin
Australopithecus africanus has become controversial. Many researchers now argue
that this group of fossils may contain more than one species. If this is the
case, it will have substantial implications for our understanding of hominin
phylogeny. In order to address the question of multiple species within A.
africanus, the co-PI will visit six museums in Africa, Europe, and the United
States in order to gather 3D morphometric (shape) data from the skulls of A.
africanus fossils, modern bonobos, and three subspecies of modern common
chimpanzees. &lt;br/&gt; Bonobo and chimpanzee variation will be used to model
the limits of interspecific variability in the hominin fossil record. With these
limits, the researcher will undertake a two-stage analysis of the hypothesis
that there are multiple species within A. africanus. In the first stage, he will
apply the shape data in an attempt to identify subgroups within A. africanus.
For the second stage, he will use traditional morphological characters to
determine whether these subgroups merit distinction as separate species. The
combination of 3D morphometrics and traditional morphological analysis has not
yet been applied to A. africanus. If the results suggest that A. africanus
should be split, the proposed subgroups will be compared to those suggested by
other researchers in order to understand the temporal and geographical basis of
the variation. This will allow the development of a well-supported argument for
or against multiple taxa.&lt;br/&gt; This project's intellectual merit centers
on its development of a novel two-stage technique for testing taxonomic
hypotheses. While applied here to A. africanus, it would be useful in many areas
of paleontology, and is not necessarily limited to paleoanthropology. The
conclusions generated by this project will have direct implications for hominin
taxonomy and lay the groundwork for a reassessment and clarification of hominin
phylogeny. If the results of this project suggest a split, that argument will be
considerably strengthened by the synthesis with others' proposals for splitting
A. africanus.&lt;br/&gt; This project also has broad impacts with respect to
education and research. It will provide the co-PI with an international research
experience and new skills and knowledge. This will in turn enhance his ability
to teach and mentor future students as well as to inform the general public
about the richness of biological variation and the value of understanding our
own species' heritage. Findings will be broadly disseminated in publications,
presentations at professional association meetings, and a dissertation. This
project will also foster valuable research collaborations between the University
of New Mexico and six other universities and museums, both domestic and
international. &lt;br/&gt;