* 0451842
* Weak and Electromagnetic Radiative Corrections in Atomic Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2008
* Jonathan Sapirstein, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 04/30/2008
* USD 150,000.00

Radiative corrections have played a central role in the development of
theoretical physics since the original successes of Quantum Electrodynamics
(QED) in the late 1940's. Their calculation in atoms and ions is technically
challenging because of the complexity of the electron propagator in bound
states. Two theoretical tools will be used in this project to attack this
problem. The first, S-matrix theory, is most applicable to highly charged ions.
QED effects are highly enhanced in these ions, and recent advances in experiment
provide a wealth of data sensitive to this physics. S-matrix theory can be used
to systematically calculate radiative corrections in these ions, provide tests
of QED, and possibly uncover new physics through the comparison of theory and
experiment. The existence of an expansion parameter, 1/Z, leads to the
simplification of having to deal with a limited set of Feynman diagrams. A major
part of this work involves the calculation of these diagrams, which should allow
the above-mentioned tests.

In neutral atoms the 1/Z expansion parameter is not available, and precision
tests are much more difficult. A major development of recent years has been the
application of non-relativistic QED (NRQED) to few-electron systems. This
technique allows one to start with the Schroedinger equation, which can be
solved with high accuracy for few-electron atoms. NRQED provides a systematic
method to account for relativistic and QED corrections. Another major component
of the proposed research is applica- tion of this method to the fine structure
of helium, where comparison of sufficiently advanced theory with already
existent experiments should allow a determination of the fine structure constant
with high accuracy.

Finally, the evaluation of radiative corrections to parity nonconserving (PNC)
processes in heavy neutral atoms is proposed. The earliest particle physics
evaluations of this radiative correction, which involved free propagators, are
significantly changed when bound propagators are used. A full calculation has
not yet been carried out, but work carried out under the previous grant should
be generalizable to this complex task, which has important particle physics
implications.