* 0451046
* Dissertation Research:  The Politics of Game Theory: Mathematics and Cold War Culture, 1944-1984
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Gregg Mitman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 11,500.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant will provide
funds to enable the doctoral student to collect needed data with the purpose of
bringing the student to closer completion of the Ph.D. Funds will support travel
to conduct archival research in Washington D.C., Michigan, and London, and to
conduct interviews at these locations. The project focuses on a history of game
theory as it was developed and imported into many fields of application during
the Cold War. It will focus on four contexts that were central to game theory's
development during this period and that have profoundly shaped the field of game
theory as it exists today: applied mathematics, behavioral science, peace
research and conflict resolution, and biology. An examination of game theory in
these different contexts will contribute to growing literatures on the history
of science during the Cold War, and on the sociology of mathematics and
scientific theory. While historians of postwar science have done much to suggest
how the conduct and content of ostensibly "pure" science was shaped by the
context of the Cold War (and especially military funding), this dissertation
will seek to explore the finer texture of Cold War culture and its influence on
game theory's development. In understanding these processes, this dissertation
will both draw upon and contribute to a growing literature that seeks to
understand the relationship between theory, mathematical models, and cultural
values and styles of reasoning. Game theory has developed dramatically since
John von Neumann and Oskar Morganstern published their seminal Theory of Games
and Economic Behavior in 1944. Starting in the late 1940s, mathematicians funded
by the U.S. military very rapidly developed the formal structure of game theory
and its connections to other ideas in mathematics, such as information theory,
cybernetics, and linear programming. In this same period, behavioral scientists
began to test game theory's predictions against observed human behavior, thereby
leading to a rich tradition of critiques of formal game theoretic and decision-
theoretic models in practical contexts. Given game theory's military roots, the
early 1960s saw the creation of the closely related specialties of "peace
studies" and "conflict resolution" that further developed (especially) non-zero-
sum game theory and psychological studies of game-playing behavior. Finally, in
the 1960s and 1970s, biologists concerned with animal aggression developed a
startling new set of concepts associated with "evolutionary games," an area of
research that continues to grow in importance today. This dissertation will
argue that game theory developed in these directions because of the cultural and
political conditions that characterized the Cold War. Mathematicians crafted a
game theory that was responsive to the tactical and logistical problems of their
military patrons. For behavioral scientists, game-theoretic investigations of
conflict and cooperation were often performed in the context of a broader effort
to mathematize human behavior and to lay the foundations for a stable yet
democratic Cold War society. The progenitors of peace research turned to game
theory in an effort to provide a "scientific" peace-oriented alternative to
conventional military-strategic studies, which they often attacked for its
alleged misuse of game theory. And finally, for biologists, game theory
permitted a neo-Darwinian explanation of puzzling phenomena of animal behavior,
such as altruism, that were also important in the peace studies agenda. By
examining these episodes, the researcher will shed light on the relationship
between scientific theories and the political context of this era. A perspective
will be gained on the formation of several schools of game theory that continue
to shape scientific knowledge and practical decision-making today, as well as a
broader understanding of the relationship between mathematical models and human
values. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;