* 0451488
* Functional Group Interactions in DNA - Protein Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2011
* Larry McLaughlin, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2011
* USD 975,387.00

Macromolecular recognition, such as sequence-specific recognition, occurring
between proteins and DNA sequences, is critical to gene expression and to the
development of organisms. One way to view this recognition phenomenon is that
the DNA target sequence and the recognizing protein contain a set of
complementary and specifically placed functional groups capable of forming (i)
hydrogen-bonding interactions, (ii) ionic interactions and (iii) hydrophobic
interactions. Probing these weak contacts between proteins and nucleic acids in
such sequence-specific complexes, and understanding the contributions of such
contacts to overall complex stability, will involve the use of isosteric
nucleoside analogues employed to introduce incremental changes into the DNA
recognition site, by what amounts to "atomic mutagenesis" of the functional
group character. In this approach, a DNA target sequence is prepared in which
one or more functional groups have been excised. If the lost function group is
involved in a critical interaction that contributes to the recognition
phenomenon, then an incremental response in the ability to form that complex
should result. Differences in binding effectiveness can be energetically
quantitated such that the contribution of a single interaction arising from a
single function group can be assessed for its contribution to sequence-specific
binding. Correspondingly, if the functional group is not involved in a critical
intermolecular interaction, then no change in complex stability should be
observed. Multiple substitutions into a given recognition site will determine
whether such effects are additive or cooperative. The project focuses on the
functional groups present in the DNA minor groove and a variety of analogue
residues are described that maintain normal Watson-Crick hydrogen bonding but
alter the nature of the functional groups in the minor groove. The project
involves the synthesis of specific analogue nucleosides, their incorporation
into DNA sequences and the use of those incrementally modified sequences in
binding assays to probe the details of sequence-specific
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project provides
excellent opportunities for broad training of students and post-doctoral fellows
who will conduct research at the interface of organic chemistry, biophysics, and
biochemistry. In addition, a non-survey course for non-scientists will be
developed. This course will cover topics drawn from popular press and, in part,
from concepts described in this project. Finally, the project will continue to
involve outreach to children through a series of scientific demonstrations that
capture their imaginations as well as teach a lesson on the difference between
science and what they perceive as magic.