* 0451479
* Exploratory Research on the Causes of Salinity Errors in the CCSM Coupled Climate Models with Focus on the Subpolar North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2006
* LuAnne Thompson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 11/30/2006
* USD 99,694.00

0451479&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Tremendous advances in coupled climate
models have been made in the last 10 years and they are being used both for both
region and global predictions of climate. As such, there is an urgent need to
evaluate their performance critically. The Community Climate System Model (CCSM
version 2) developed at National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) with
help from the scientific community shows significant errors in sea surface
salinity in the sub-polar North Pacific where the sea surface salinity (SSS) is
too high. Preliminary investigation indicates that similar errors occur in the
most recent version of the model. Related to the SSS errors are far too deep
mixed-layers is the western sub-polar North Pacific. This project will analyze
the fully coupled ocean-atmosphere model and a mixed-layer ocean coupled to an
atmospheric general circulation model when it becomes available. In particular,
the research will focus on what is causing the errors and what the consequences
for the errors on the ocean model.&lt;br/&gt;The expected results include a
better understanding of the role that SSS plays in the coupled climate system.
How errors in the upper ocean salinity budget act to break the fresh water
dominated stratification in the subpolar North Pacific will be established. The
importance of evaporation, precipitation, and runoff errors, as well as errors
owing to sea-ice and ocean transport and mixing processes will be addressed.
Tthe heat and fresh water transport in the ocean, with focus on the North
Pacific and how mode and intermediate water form in the coupled model will also
be examined. This study will lead to improved understanding on how the CCSM
model works and what improvements need to be made in the
model.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed research will add a significant
contribution to the evaluation and development of the Community Climate System
Modeling (CCSM) effort at NCAR by members of the academic oceanographic
community. The lead investigator is also a participant in a community effort to
establish petascale computing needs for the geosciences. Direct involvement with
the CCSM model will help in this effort. Both PI's are from an under-represented
group in oceanography and the collaboration with CCSM scientists at NCAR will
enable them to further develop their careers. The lead PI is also actively
involved in the planning of a workshop to establish a mentoring network for
women in physical oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;