* 0451688
* U.S.-China Planning Visit:  Development of Computer-Aided Design (CAD) Tools for Physical Design and Verification for Low Power Nanometer VLSI Designs
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2007
* Sheldon Tan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 04/30/2007
* USD 10,890.00

0451688&lt;br/&gt;Tan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a planning visit
to enable Professor Xiang-Dong Tan at the University of California in Riverside
to meet with Professor Xianglong Hong at Tsinghua University in Beijing, China.
The visit will help develop a collaborative plan for the development of
computer-aided design (CAD) tools for physical design and verification of low
power nanometer VLSI designs. The PI will finalize many details regarding the
collaborative research and partnerships by: 1) preparing a number of joint
funding proposals based on the research objectives and scopes; 2) holding a
number of meetings with some semiconductor and electronic design automation
(EDA) companies' technical representatives to discuss the sponsored research
projects; and 3) present seminars to the faculty and students in the Design
Automation Lab at Tsinghua University in order for the group to brainstorm new
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Tan has many years of experience on VLSI
circuit verification and optimization and Professor Hong is a world-renowned
expert on physical design. The expertise and experience of the two faculty
members are complementary for the proposed collaborative project, and they
expect to collaborate through a coordinated division of labor. In addition to
adding significantly to the core knowledge of simulation and optimization for
nanometer billion-transistor VLSI designs, the anticipated research will provide
unique training and educational opportunities for U.S. graduate students and
undergraduate students by enabling them to obtain a global experience. It is
anticipated that these early collaborations between the scientists and students
from each country will lead to long-term collaborations that will benefit both
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;