* 0451209
* Policing Racial Bias Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Jennifer Eberhardt, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 02/28/2009
* USD 118,900.00

The primary goal of the Policing Racial Bias project will be to develop
partnerships among social psychologists and law enforcement agencies to share
information and generate new knowledge on the influence of racial bias in
policing. This two-year project will involve multiple steps. At Step 1, an
initial conference will convene with researchers and agency representatives
participating. Researchers will present data on recent studies of race and
policing as well as propose new studies to be conducted with police officers as
participants. At Step 2, a second conference will convene to share the results
of these new studies. At Step 3, an edited volume will be produced on race,
crime and policing. At Step 4, knowledge generated from the project will be
disseminated broadly and the edited volume will be distributed. The proposed
project is unprecedented and equivalent results cannot be obtained using
structures already in place at annual conferences and other professional
meetings. The proposed project places researchers (25% of whom are African
American, an under-represented group in the sciences) in direct partnership with
leaders in the law enforcement community (who generally are not represented at
all in scientific research, even as such research affects their profession). The
proposed project has the potential for serving as a national model on race and
policing. It offers a unique structure under which researchers and law
enforcement agencies can work together to proactively address some of the race
issues that plague us all.