* 0451379
* Collaborative Research: Assessment of Groundwater Inputs into Coastal Waters of Hawaii via Natural Tracers and Aerial Imagery
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Craig Glenn, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 01/31/2010
* USD 277,383.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0451379&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past few
years, some methods have been developed to assess submarine groundwater
discharge (SGD) on a local scale. However, methodologies for regional scale
evaluations (i.e., &gt;100 km) have not occurred. For this reason, a scientist
from the University of Hawaii, in collaboration with a scientist from Florida
State University, plan to develop a three tiered approach to assess SGD into the
sea at regional scales using the following methods: (1) high resolution,
temperature calibrated (&lt;0.1'C) geo-corrected aerial infrared surveys; (2)
ground-truthing selected sites via natural geochemical tracers (223Ra, 224Ra,
227Th, 228Th); and (3) upscaling the results via typology. The PIs have selected
the Kona coast for their study site because of its high apparent SGD, focused
nature of the discharge, and lack of surface drainage. Once discharge is
established, fluxes of nitrogen species, total phosphorus, inorganic phosphorus,
silica, and total chlorophyll will be calculated for the Kona coast and placed
within a regional and global context by comparison to stream fluxes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts, this study will provide
scientists with a new method to assess submarine groundwater discharge on a
regional scale, as well as yield new insights into the impact of submarine
groundwater discharge on water budgets and biogeochemical cycles in the coastal
ocean. The benefits of this study will extend from oceanographers to hydrologist
to coastal and water resource managers. Students from both the University of
Hawaii and Florida State University will participate in the research study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;