* 0451042
* Dissertation Research: Spiritist Psychiatry and the Meaning of Mental Illness in Contemporary Brazil
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2006
* Stefania Pandolfo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 04/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

This Societal Dimensions of Engineering, Science, and Technology Dissertation
Improvement Grant will provide research funding for a Ph.D. student to help
complete her dissertation on the intersection of psychiatry and religious
cultural systems, in particular Spiritist psychiatry in contemporary Brazil. The
dissertation analyses Spiritist psychiatric practice and spiritual practice by
providing case studies of two Spiritist Psychiatric hospitals, using
phenomenological and qualitative analysis of ethnographic observation and expert
interviews. These case studies are contextualized within a bibliographical
research and a general survey of psychiatry in Brazil. Spiritist psychiatry is a
professional psychiatric system that has developed distinctly different from
Euro-American psychiatry by bolstering standard neuro-scientific practice with
spiritual treatment modalities. This work focuses on moral and cultural
interpretations of mental illness by health care professionals, and how their
beliefs interact with psychiatric knowledge and practice. It raises the issue of
how mental illness is understood as a diagnosis or disease and as a set of local
and contingent practices rooted in culture and political economy. It addresses
the neglected vector of cultural meanings in the construction of psychiatric
intervention. Spiritism, a religious movement with Euro-American origins, could
be called a "modern spirit possession religion," since its practices involve
systematic and regular contact with the dead. Spiritists administer about a
third of private psychiatric hospitals in Brazil and claim to not only treat
mental illness more successfully and effectively, but to also explain the causes
of mental illness. In their view most mental illness is originally caused by
"obsessing spirits," and they conceptualize mental illness as ultimately
originating from the moral failure of the mentally ill person, attributing
individual responsibility to the patient. This spiritual etiology is in marked
contrast to contemporary neuroscientific psychiatry, which locates mental
illness in the body, i.e. as a physiological malfunction, and psychoanalysis,
which locates mental illness in the mind, i.e. an emotional malformation. The
Spiritist psychiatric hospital then is a site of contradiction, in which
multiple competing and opposed epistemologies intersect, clash and ultimately
coexist. This dissertation analyzes the following: 1) how Spiritist
psychiatrists conceptualize, treat, and the meaning they attribute to mental
illness, and 2) how they negotiate their professional psychiatric knowledge with
their religious moral beliefs about madness. This dissertation makes several
important theoretical contributions and intersects with several theoretical
fields, such as the anthropology of religion and religious healing,
transcultural psychiatry, and ethical dimensions of science and technology. This
project further provides one of the rare discussions of the religiosity of
psychiatrists and its influence on patient treatment. It provides a
complementary and missing piece to the emergent investigation of modernity and
subjectivity at the intersection of psychiatric institutions, religious cultural
systems and modernity. This dissertation addresses both psychiatric and
anthropological concerns. It illuminates the history and practice of psychiatry
and its relationship to religion and cultural identity in contemporary Brazil.
The theoretical and practical investigation of the cultural. construction of
psychiatric intervention will further the understanding of the cultural
adaptations of professional psychiatries in non-western contexts and is both
timely and important in addressing neglected vectors in mental health with
possible application in public policy, specifically, the negotiation of
morality; professional values and ethics; and prejudice, stigma and
stereotyping.

