* 0451455
* UMEB: Travel to Estuarine Research Federation Conferences to be held in 2005 and 2007
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Randolph Chambers, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2008
* USD 51,120.00

This UMEB program will fund 15 students each year to travel to the Fall 2005 and
2007 Estuarine Research Federation (ERF) biennial conferences to be held in
Norfolk, VA, and Providence, RI, respectively. Funding will be used for
participation of undergraduate students who are involved in estuarine or coastal
marine research, particularly those students from groups under-represented in
the sciences. In addition to their own poster presentations and to attending
oral and poster sessions throughout the week, participating students will attend
scheduled events including a pre-conference workshop, an initial meet-and-greet
session with distinguished ERF representatives, a mixer with graduate students
and scientists from the coastal NSF Long Term Ecological Research (LTER)
programs, and an end-of-conference evaluation session. Through each day's
events, the students and their mentors will have structured times to gather as a
group and/or in individual pairs to discuss, share and ensure an educationally
distinctive and rewarding learning experience. The goal is to use the ERF
conference as a gateway to increase minority involvement in estuarine research,
management and policy through early attraction and retention of undergraduate
students into these fields. The PI (Randy Chambers), as chair of the ERF
Education Committee, and his staff at the College of William and Mary will
coordinate the UMEB/ERF program. For more information, students may contact
Randy Chambers at (757) 221-2331 or rmcham@wm.edu, or visit the ERF website at
http://www.erf.org.