* 0451559
* Collaborative Research: Boundary Conflicts, Collective Choice Institutions, and Conflict Resolution Mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Edella Schlager, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2009
* USD 143,691.00

&lt;br/&gt;The federal system of government in the United States requires
national, state and local governments, as well as public and private
organizations, to interact to collectively resolve shared problems. In the case
of natural resources, such as forests, rivers, and air-sheds, a single
government cannot resolve problems that extend beyond its borders. Consequently,
many governments and organizations become involved in natural resource
management. The goal of this project is to explore and explain how linkages and
relationships among governments and organizations relate to resource management
conflicts and attempts to resolve them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study's
research setting is interstate river compacts in the western United States.
Compacts are institutional arrangements devised and adopted by states to govern
the states' uses of a shared river. Interstate river basin compacts provide an
excellent research setting because they operate within an intergovernmental
setting, highlighting cross-scale linkages between states and local water
organizations and water users. In studying compacts the researchers will first
examine how conflicts over different types of water uses arise in these
intergovernmental settings. Then theyl compare how compacts' management
processes and conflict resolution procedures facilitate the resolution of these
conflicts. They also explore how the relations between local water users and
state agencies affect the ability of states to follow through with the
commitments they made to one another in the river compacts.&lt;br/&gt;One of the
major contributions of this study will be the further development of theories of
natural resources governance. The interactions and relationships among factors
widely considered to be central to the sustainable governance of resources have
not been adequately tested empirically. Exploring and empirically testing how
collective choice processes and conflict resolution mechanisms interact to
address resource conflicts will provide a greater understanding of the problem
solving capabilities of different institutional forms. Also, whereas many
studies of natural resource governance focus on one level of governance, we will
advance the literature by looking at these institutional forms within an
intergovernmental context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Social Value: From a
practical standpoint, this study will be of value to water management
professionals, such as state water rights administrators, and local, state and
federal policymakers. First, this research will provide a relatively complete,
detailed, and systematic database of western interstate river compacts, which
does not currently exist. Second, our analysis and evaluation of interstate
river compacts will provide federal, state, and local water managers and users
with important and timely information. The western United States is currently
facing a sixth consecutive year of severe drought. Interstate compacts are under
increasing strain. Over the next few years, western states may be faced with
tough decisions about how to redesign compacts so that they better fit present
circumstances. This study will provide decision makers with some of the
information they will need to make those difficult decisions.&lt;br/&gt;