* 0451814
* Ownership and Innovation: Corporate Ownership and Strategy Formation During China's Transition
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2005,02/28/2007
* Randy Hodson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 02/28/2007
* USD 86,355.00

Ownership and Innovation:: Corporate Ownership and Strategy Formation During
China's Transition&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores the relationship
between firm ownership and the adoption of innovative corporate strategies. We
also study the related relationship between innovation and firm financial
performance. Innovation and resulting financial outcomes are critical to
organizational survival and competitive advantage, particularly during rapid
environmental change. We take advantage of China's economic transition to study
the role that ownership plays in the innovation process. We ask three
fundamental questions about ownership and innovation:&lt;br/&gt;1. How does
ownership structure affect the adoption of an innovative, general firm
&lt;br/&gt;strategy?&lt;br/&gt;2. What were the predominant strategic clusters
that emerged during China's transition? &lt;br/&gt;3. What effect does the
firm's general strategy have on financial performance and efficiency?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirically, we investigate differences between Chinese
state owned enterprises (SOEs) and collective enterprises and other nonstate
firms (CNFs) in the adoption of a general firm strategy during transition. We
are analyzing data from 1994-1999 on 800 firms to test our hypotheses. Our
research findings will improve scholarly understanding of the process by which
firms adopt innovative strategies during a fundamental transformation of
institutional constraints, and it will provide insight into the effect that
innovation has on firm outcomes. This research will also inform organizational
decision making regarding innovation, particularly during periods of significant
environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;