* 0451671
* Exchange Rates, Asset Markets, and Monetary Policy
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Charles Engel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 207,477.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prop ID: SES-0451671 &lt;br/&gt;P I: Engel,
Charles &lt;br/&gt;Organization: University of Wisconsin-Madison
&lt;br/&gt;Title: Exchange Rates, Asset Markets, and Monetary Policy
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the project description proposes
building an open-economy general equilibrium model that incorporates some
important features that are consistent with empirical evidence on international
pricing behavior, and investigating the implications for monetary policy.
Specifically, the model will incorporate the low pass-through of exchange rates
to consumer prices and the higher passthrough to import prices in the short run.
The next part investigates a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) open-
economy model, with sticky nominal prices and trade in equities that can
potentially explain part of the "home-bias puzzle." The model incorporates
monetary and productivity shocks, with equities and nominal forward foreign
exchange contracts. Conditional on productivity shocks, there is a negative
correlation between home equity returns and returns to human capital, thus
generating a home bias. The last part explores results derived by the
investigator for present value models of exchange rates to measure the
contribution of observed "fundamentals" to the changes in (logs of) exchange
rates. The statistic proposed measures the contribution of these fundamentals to
changes in asset prices when there are unobserved driving variables. The
usefulness of the statistic under various circumstances will be explored. The
three major areas of proposed work all involve applied general equilibrium
modeling of open economies. All are motivated by empirical work, and all three
sections propose empirical work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any work such as this
will ultimately have broader impact in terms of promoting better understanding
of the workings of the macroeconomy, and hence better policy making. The first
part is directly related to monetary policy making in open economies. The second
and third parts propose new methods for examining open economies in very applied
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;