* 0451354
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Community Formation, Migration, and Social Transformation in Ancestral Puebloan Society
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Keith Kintigh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Keith Kintigh, Gregson Schachner will conduct a
research project aimed at understanding the formation of ancestral Puebloan
villages in the El Morro Valley of west-central New Mexico during the AD 1200s.
Prior to the thirteenth century, the El Morro Valley was used by nearby Puebloan
populations as a resource gathering area and for sporadic, short-term
habitation. However, by the late AD 1200s, thousands of migrant Puebloan farmers
founded a series of villages and transformed the El Morro Valley into one of the
largest population centers on the Colorado Plateau. Schachner's research will
utilize analyses of regional settlement patterns and ceramic exchange in order
to understand the process of migration and its resulting effects on community
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of social networks that structure
social interaction on a local level is one of the key processes ensuring
successful human settlements. The ubiquity of these networks in daily life makes
their appearance seem unproblematic and timeless. However, it is during the
formation of these networks that dramatic changes in community structure and
traditions may occur. Schachner's research will examine the process of community
formation during a period following the movement of migrant groups into an
uninhabited area where few aspects of community or place had been previously
defined. By focusing on the variety of ways in which communities formed under
these circumstances, this project will explore how local social networks emerge,
function, and are transformed through human
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Schachner's study will employ a two-pronged,
comparative methodology focused on ancient El Morro Valley settlement patterns
and ceramic exchange. Settlement pattern analyses will highlight the chronology,
patterns of growth, and social scale of community formation in multiple
villages. This project will also employ instrumental neutron activation analysis
to track the exchange of two different ceramic types in order to assess the
geographic origins of migrant populations, social diversity within newly founded
communities, and the maintenance of external social ties that are often key
channels of population movement and continuing social support. By utilizing a
variety of methods and types of data, Schachner's study will contribute to a
growing body of scholarship that focuses on the interplay between population
movement, community formation, and pan-regional social transformations in small-
scale societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is a key component of the
training of a young scholar and will contribute to an ongoing project that
integrates graduate and undergraduate researchers. Site and ceramic data from
this project will be available to other scholars in the New Mexico Cultural
Resource Information System and the University of Missouri Archaeometry Lab
ceramic compositional database, respectively. This project will form the basis
of a Ph.D. dissertation, be summarized in professional articles, and presented
in public formats. This study also focuses on a key period of ancestral Puebloan
history and may be of interest to local tribal peoples. In addition, fieldwork
for this research has been largely conducted on private lands and ongoing
cooperation with local landowners provides an important avenue for encouraging
archaeological site preservation in a rapidly developing area.&lt;br/&gt;