* 0451024
* Political Cycling and Early Complex Society in Pacific Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Michael Love, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2008
* USD 257,796.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Love and a team of
colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological excavations on the
Pacific Coast of Guatemala. The project will study the impact of increasing
social complexity and greater political centralization on the economic and
ritual activities of the household. The project will, in effect, study how the
development of civilization impacts the daily lives of people. The development
of social complexity and civilization is one of the enduring central interests
of anthropological archaeology. Developing and testing models of how small
groups of egalitarian hunters and gatherers were transformed into socially
stratified urban dwelling consumers of domesticated foodstuffs still provides
the fodder for productive and lively discourse among scholars of different
theoretical orientations. The development of social complexity was a multi-
faceted phenomenon, involving population growth, political centralization,
increasing social complexity, and economic intensification. Traditionally,
archaeologists looked to ostentatious changes in material culture to signal
complexity, such as the appearance of monumental architecture, public art, or
even large scale urbanism. More recently, however, they have also incorporated
more subtle transformations in social and cultural life as basic aspects of
complexity. Many of these shifts took place at the household level, such as
reorganization of the domestic economy, changes in household ritual, shifts in
gender relationships, and new uses of social space. Examination of household
economies and ritual activities opens up many theoretical possibilities,
especially when they can be analyzed in the context of data from regional survey
and the more traditional examination of monumental art and architecture. The
Mesoamerican case is generally regarded as one of the relatively few instances
in the world in which civilization developed sui generis. Research on the
Pacific coast of Guatemala and Chiapas over the past fifteen years has
established that zone as critical to understanding the development of social
complexity in Mesoamerica during the Formative period (ca 1500 BCE - 250 CE).
From the Early Formative villages in the Mazatan region of Chiapas to the Late
Formative centers of Ujuxte, Izapa, and Abaj Takalik, this region has sites and
polities as large as those anywhere else in Mesoamerica and a dataset unmatched
elsewhere for this time period. For that reason, it can provide key insights to
a phenomenon of very broad anthropological interest. The research by Love and
his colleagues at La Blanca will provide much needed information. Focusing on
the large Middle Formative (900-600 B.C.) site of La Blanca, Love's project will
excavate at least one dozen residences and collect information on the
subsistence practices, economic activities, and ritual activities of those
households. The data collected will be compared to those collected from the Late
Formative (ca 600 B.C. - A.D. 100) city of El Ujuxte, which Love and his team
studied from 1993 to 2000. That comparison will tell us how domestic life
changed after the development of a state-level government at El Ujuxte. The
broader impacts of the study are that it will contribute significant information
on a region of the world vital to understanding how civilizations develop and
impact the lives of people who live in them. The project will provide a
substantial increase in knowledge about an important topic and will provide the
basis for major revisions in the scientific understanding of the development of
ancient civilizations. International cooperation and understanding will also be
enhanced, as Guatemalan and U.S. students will participate in the project
jointly and collaborate in developing theses to obtain undergraduate and
advanced degrees.