* 0451077
* Dissertation Research:  History of Scientific Instruments and Practices in India: A study of select particle accelerator facilities in India (1938-1970)
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2007
* John Krige, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2007
* USD 11,857.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant dissertation
project is an empirical investigation into the history of physics in mid-
twentieth century India. The period 1938 to 1970 makes for an interesting study
for at least three reasons. First, this is the period of India's transition and
transformation from a colony to an independent nation-state. Second, this is the
period of the rising international prominence of big-science - especially
nuclear physics - building upon cosmic ray physics among other fields, which was
particularly exemplified in the United States of America through research
leading up to and within the Manhattan Project. Third, this period overlaps with
the Second World War and the Cold War and the gradual decline of Europe shadowed
by the rising prominence of United States of America (USA) in both science
research and international politics. This is an attempt to anchor a narrative
weaving through the nature of scientific internationalism led by the USA, post-
colonial state formation and modernity in India, and Cold War geopolitics
manifested in aid programs, through the specific stories of acquisition/
donation of four particle accelerators. This will be a history of four particle
accelerators that were located in the Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Kolkata
(Calcutta), the Tata Institute for Fundamental Research, Mumbai (Bombay), the
Department of Physics, Panjab University, Chandigarh, and the Indian Institute
of Technology, Kanpur. Particle accelerators had become the state-of-art
equipment to train young scientists and conduct nuclear physics research in the
mid -twentieth century. History of modern scientific practices in India is a
young field, and there is no other study that deals with this topic or takes
this approach of history writing through instrumental platforms. The history of
American scientific internationalism and leadership is incomplete without
including within the same analytic frame, a discussion of its specific instances
and configurations. Thus even while this study aims to add to the field of
history of science by bringing in a specific history of physics in India. It
also aims to enrich existing studies by extending the boundaries of inclusion
within the history of American science during the Cold War. This study can
provide an illustration for donor agencies to understand the constraints under
which scientists have to work in developing countries, and thus contribute to
informed decision-making on scientific and technical assistance to India in
particular and developing countries in general. In addition, the research will
inform governmental reflection on policy and inclination towards support for
precision equipment manufacturing industry in India. The narratives should
provide strength of argument for scientists planning and requesting funding
necessary to construct experimental facilities in the present-day. Thus, this
research should be able to reinforce the importance of investing in fundamental
research in a developing country.

