* 0451320
* Symposium Support -- Structure Property Relationships in Solid State Chemistry, SE Regional Meeting of the ACS, Research Triangle Park, November 12 &amp; 13, 2004
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2005
* James Martin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 10/31/2005
* USD 6,640.00

Research in solid state chemistry and materials is undergoing tremendous growth
while at the same time the character of the research is changing due in large
part from the need to explore new classes of technologically important materials
made possible by the advent of new tools for characterization and novel solid
state synthetic strategies. This meeting will bring together experts in area
related to designing, synthesizing, and optimizing the properties of advanced
materials that exhibit specific properties such as magnetic, optical/electronic,
and reactivity/catalytic properties. The use of current techniques for studying
structure-property relationships will be emphasized. A broad range of inorganic,
solid-state and materials chemists will be informed about the latest advances in
these fields.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;New materials classes of high
technological importance are emerging at a rapid rate due in large part to the
development of new solid-state synthetic strategies and novel ways to
characterize properties and structure-property relationships. Specific materials
that are high priority currently include magnetic, optical/electronic, and
reactive compounds exhibiting catalytic properties. They are of high to
industrial firms searching for new catalysts, semiconductors and
superconductors. Complementary to these synthetic efforts, and an integral part
of solid-state chemistry is the development of powerful structure determining
tools for the characterization of structure-property relationships exhibited by
new classes of materials.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;