* 0451716
* Hemispheric-Scale Changes in Air-Temperature Probability Distributions
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Scott Robeson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2008
* USD 119,963.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Analyzing air-temperature probability
distributions provides considerable insight into recent climatic change. Past
work by the principal investigator has shown that the analysis of time-varying
percentiles is a useful extension of traditional methods for detecting climatic
change, particularly those that focus solely on mean air temperature. This
research will use hemispheric-scale daily data to estimate time-varying
percentiles and other parameters of air-temperature probability distributions
that can evaluate recent climatic change in innovative ways. In addition to
time-varying percentiles, resistant measures of variability, skewness, and
kurtosis, as well as the persistence of air temperature, will be derived from
historical air-temperature data over the Northern Hemisphere. Time-dependent
changes in percentiles, variance, shape measures, and persistence are apparent
only in daily air-temperature records, which have recently become available over
large spatial scales. Functional relationships between parameters will be used
to evaluate how changes in the shape of the distribution and persistence respond
to a changing mean climate. Extensive mapping combined with cluster analysis
will be used to identify cohesive spatial patterns that can be analyzed further.
Null hypotheses that climatic change occurs equally throughout the air-
temperature distribution and that shape and persistence parameters will not
change with changes in the mean will be evaluated. This research will
demonstrate that variability estimated within daily air-temperature probability
distributions can be far different and more illuminating than those drawn from
mean air temperature alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluating the nature of
changes in air-temperature probability distributions is critical to gaining a
complete understanding recent climatic change. When determining the ecological,
economic, and social dimensions of climatic change, the concurrent changes in
mean, variability, and persistence of air temperature have wide-ranging impacts.
Results from this project will help national and international agencies to
better understand the past and to plan for future climatic changes. The broader
impacts of this research also will include (i) wide dissemination of results at
professional meetings and in scientific journals, (ii) the support of graduate
research assistants, and (iii) the enhancement of graduate and undergraduate
teaching. In addition to dissemination of results at professional meetings and
journals, data and graphics from the researcher's findings will be made
available from the project's website.&lt;br/&gt;