* 0451762
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Screening, Sorting, and Selecting in Products Liability Cases: How Lawyers Mediate Access to the Civil Justice System
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* Sarah Soule, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 02/28/2006
* USD 11,974.00

How do products liability lawyers screen cases and clients? Socio-legal scholars
have long been interested in the ways in which lawyers mediate citizens' access
to the civil justice system. In previous work, sociolegal scholars have focused
on the influence of costs and benefits, status differences between clients and
their attorneys, and firm- and state-level legal cultures on such decisions.
This project assesses four theoretical approaches to the phenomenon of
litigation in products liability cases. This comparative study, based on in-
depth qualitative interviews and ethnographic field observations of 80 products
liability lawyers in four U.S. states, representing two types of state-level
legal cultures. The PI will conduct interviews with 20 products liability
lawyers in each of four states to capture lawyers' reasons, practices, decision-
making processes, attitudes, and beliefs about the screening process, juries,
tort reforms, and legal cultures. In addition, lawyers' interactions with
clients will be observed in order to understand screening as a process that is
interactional, negotiated, and dynamic. The proposed project is the first
systematic investigation of cultural influences on the screening process. It
will also be the first study to employ a multi-method qualitative, comparative
analysis to the study of legal professionals, and it is notable in its focus on
products liability lawyers, a specialty of personal injury lawyers that has not
previously been the explicit focus of significant empirical research.