* 0451374
* Collaborative Research: Inhibition of Snowfall by Pollution Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2005,10/31/2009
* Douglas Lowenthal, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 10/31/2009
* USD 513,958.00

This is a collaborative project to study the effect of air pollution on snowfall
rates and amounts. Previous work by two of the investigators (Borys and
Lowenthal) developed evidence suggesting that the particles in polluted air
decrease snowfall rates and amounts. The mechanism, not fully documented but
clearly suggested by earlier work, is that the higher particle concentrations
associated with air pollution contain increased numbers of cloud condensation
nuclei (CCN), the particles on which cloud droplets form. Pollution thus
increases the concentration of cloud droplets but decreases their average size,
and so decreases the efficiency with which falling ice crystals grow by
collision with the supercooled droplets. Pollution therefore reduces
precipitation by reducing the amount of supercooled water collected from clouds
and deposited in snowfall. The study will take additional steps toward
determining how snowfall from winter orographic clouds, observed at the Desert
Research Institute's Storm Peak Laboratory, is reduced by the high concentration
of aerosol particles associated with pollution. This extension of previous work
will include direct measurement of the CCN, continued observations of snowfall
and precipitation, and modeling to establish the physical links between
pollution and snowfall amount. The project will use a mesoscale model that has
demonstrated skill in predicting precipitation rates and amounts. Key objectives
are these: * To determine the relationship between pollution-aerosol loading and
snowfall rate; * To determine the relative importance of riming, snow crystal
size, crystal habit, and large-scale meteorological features in determining the
snowfall rate; * To conduct sensitivity studies of effects including the above
using the RAMS mesoscale model with bin-emulating microphysics; and * To
estimate the quantitative effect of pollution aerosol on snowfall rate and
amount in the study region through use of the mesoscale model.

The anticipated result is a new ability to predict how air pollution affects
snowfall in pristine mountainous areas and so changes the watershed in areas
where water resources are critically important. The project should also lead to
improved understanding of how to represent the effects of air pollution in
models of weather and climate, especially as they influence precipitation.