* 0451352
* EITM: Dynamic General Equilibrium Models of Community Formation: Theory and Empirical Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Patrick Bajari, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2005
* USD 96,278.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0339328&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: EMPIRICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THEORETICAL
MODELS&lt;br/&gt;PI: Bajari, Patrick&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Dynamic General
Equilibrium Models of Community Formation: Theory and Empirical
Analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop a dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium model of the housing market, community formation,
and the intergenerational transmission of human capital that allows for
externalities through peer group effects. The model will be solved numerically,
a challenging methodological task because of the high dimensionality of the
equilibrium housing price vector and associated fixed point problem. The
research will also develop new methods for estimating consumer preferences for
peer groups and housing by extending recent work in the analysis of demand for
differentiated products. This is necessary to solve the housing model because in
the demand model, a home is a bundle of three types of characteristics: physical
characteristics of the home, characteristics of the community and a
characteristic of the home observed by the agents in the economy, but not by the
econometrician. A rich and flexible consumer preferences function, which depends
on observable demographic characteristics and consumer specific tastes for
product characteristics, is specified and estimated. The parametric distribution
for the random&lt;br/&gt;Coefficients is not specified a priori but recovered
non-parametrically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will then use the estimated
dynamic general equilibrium model as a social laboratory to study the
assimilation of immigrants into different communities via the housing market
over time. The model will be used to quantify the consequences of several policy
experiments on the distribution of housing prices, the structure of communities
and the long-run distribution of human capital and welfare. The policy reforms
that will be studied include a liberalization of immigration laws between
the&lt;br/&gt;U.S. and Mexico (which would lead to a substantial inflow of new
Spanish speaking&lt;br/&gt;households into the housing market) and the
introduction of housing subsidies for the poor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result
of this research will provide policy makers about the effectiveness of housing
market policies in shaping the formation and structure of communities. The
computational model that will be developed will be used as an investigative toll
in a wide variety of social policies, including whether housing subsidies for
the poor is an appropriate tool to reduce long-run segregation of communities,
long-run income and thus welfare inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;