* 0451049
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Patterns of Infant Vulnerability and Caregiver-Infant Interaction in a Northern Tanzanian Community
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2006
* Clark Larsen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2006
* USD 3,050.00

This dissertation research examines the practical and evolutionary implications
of child health patterns among settled Datoga households in northern Tanzania.
The project should augment both biocultural and evolutionary understandings of
child health and caretaking on a theoretical level while developing infant
health initiatives that are useful for Datoga women on a practical level. The
cultural anthropology student will identify which developmental periods during
infancy have increased risk for illness, examine how female Datoga caregivers
use perceptions of infant vulnerability to make decisions about the allocation
of care, and study how changing household production demands affect maternal
care giving strategies. Data to test hypotheses concerning infant health and
caretaking will be collected using focus groups, individual structured
interviews, behavioral observations, and infant health evaluations. Hypotheses
about the relationship between household production demands and caregiver-infant
interaction will be tested. The broader impacts of the research involve sharing
findings with the local clinics/hospitals, district health officials, and the
Tanzanian Ministry of Health. By sharing research results, working closely with
local clinics and hospitals, and incorporating the local Datoga community into
the research implementation, the project will help to foster international
collaboration and research while remaining sensitive to local concerns.