* 0451962
* Phylogenetic Analysis of Fagaceae: A Study of the Pattern and  Process of Woody Plant Diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2010
* Paul Manos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rafael O. de Sa
* 01/31/2010
* USD 299,999.00

The flowering plant family Fagaceae (ca. 1000 species, including the beeches,
oaks, and chestnuts) plays a major ecological role in several broadly
distributed ecosystems of the Northern Hemisphere. Duke University researchers
Paul Manos and Sang-Hun Oh propose to conduct a thorough evolutionary
investigation of this remarkable diversification of woody species. Ideally, the
study of the pattern and process of species diversification or speciation
requires a robust estimate of species relationships, accurate knowledge of
species numbers, and a rich fossil record. In the oak family (Fagaceae), these
conditions are nearly in place, making it a premier group for the research
proposed. Research completed to date establishes a robust platform to produce a
genealogy of Fagaceae using several DNA regions, specifically alternative low-
copy nuclear genes across 75 species. The resulting genealogy will be used to
address long-standing classical questions regarding the evolution of
reproductive structures and traits, and independently to assess traditionally
described genera. A second goal requires the use of fossils to calibrate the
evolutionary history of the family. Within this chronicle of evolution,
hypotheses of key innovation or critical factors linked to increases in the
speciation rate, will be tested using established methods that test for shifts
in species richness. Measures of phylogenetic diversity or the amount of DNA
variation also will be compared among groups to test for significant differences
that may correlate with shifts in the rate of diversification. The proposed
research aims to link several aspects of macroevolutionary analysis to produce
an explicit account of this ecologically significant diversification. While the
family Fagaceae is well-studied, the synthesis proposed here has not been
attempted before, and its implications reach beyond systematic biology and into
emerging investigations of the causes of diversification and its consequences to
molecular and genealogical diversity. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
integrate training at several levels. Dr. Sang-Hun Oh will train and benefit
from a range of evolutionary activities present at Duke University. A graduate
student will receive training in the methods proposed, and the research team
will include two undergraduate students to be recruited through a Duke summer
program funded through the NSF REU-Sites program. Proposed outreach activities
include the development of a website dedicated to Fagaceae research at Duke,
which will form the basis for an expanded contribution to the Tree of Life
Project.&lt;br/&gt;