* 0451029
* Distinguishing Between Fragile and Secure High Self-Esteem
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Michael Kernis, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 05/31/2009
* USD 252,150.00

Considerable theory and research on self-esteem reveals that high self-esteem
confers many benefits to individuals and that it relates to many positive
psychological outcomes. Increasingly, however, it has become clear that high
self-esteem also has a dark side, as it sometimes relates to maladaptive
outcomes such as heightened aggressive behavior. Therefore, it is extremely
important to determine when high self-esteem relates to positive psychological
functioning and outcomes and when it does not. One critical factor may be the
extent to which high self-esteem is fragile or secure. Individuals with fragile
high self-esteem appear willing to go to great lengths to preserve, maintain,
and enhance their positive feelings of self-worth. Defensiveness and other
maladaptive processes appear to characterize these individuals. In contrast,
individuals with secure high self-esteem have well-anchored feelings of self-
worth that relate to healthy psychological functioning and positive outcomes.
Past research on stability of self-esteem indicates that one way to distinguish
between fragile and secure high self-esteem is to determine the extent to which
individuals' self-esteem is stable over time; the more unstable self-esteem is,
the more fragile it is. The proposed research will promote understanding of
self-esteem processes by focusing on multiple representations of this fragile-
secure distinction. Specifically, research is proposed to examine (a)
discrepancies between individuals' implicit (i.e., automatic, highly efficient,
and largely nonconscious) and explicit (i.e., deliberate and conscious) self-
esteem; (b) contingent self-esteem, (i.e., the extent to which feelings of self-
worth are dependent upon the achievement of specific outcomes or evaluations);
(c) stability of self-esteem (i.e., the magnitude of short-term fluctuations
that people experience in their contextually-based feelings of self-worth); (d)
narcissism; and (e) defensiveness. Though different in their particulars, each
of these constructs reflects a component of self-esteem that is distinct from
its level (i.e., general or typical feelings of self-worth). Six proposed
studies examine individual differences in these markers of fragile versus secure
self-esteem, in the context of their implications for pressing societal
problems, namely aggression and prejudice, as well as for everyday social
conflicts, verbal defensiveness, and close relationship functioning, quality and
satisfaction. Study 1 focuses on defensive verbalizations in response to self-
threat. Study 2 focuses on aggression following interpersonal rejection. Study 3
focuses on prejudice, Study 4 focuses on the occurrence of conflict within
everyday interactions, and Studies 5-6 focuses on reactions to threats and close
relationship functioning. A common thread in each of these studies is to examine
the role of verbal defensiveness, which is a relatively direct index of people's
tendencies to process threatening experiences defensively (Feldman Barrett et
al., 2002). Taken as a whole, these studies allow for a comprehensive
examination of the processes associated with fragile versus secure high self-
esteem in a range of interpersonal contexts. The long-range objectives are to
understand better the nature of high self-esteem and its role in psychological
functioning and interpersonal relations.