* 0451605
* Spectroscopic and Local Magnetic Measurements in High-Spin Molecular Nanomagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2012
* Myriam Sarachik, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 12/31/2012
* USD 854,500.00

Molecular magnets contain a large number of (nearly) identical magnetic clusters
of total spin on the order of 10. Borderline between classical and quantum
magnetism, these nanomagnets hold promise for high-density information storage
and, possibly, quantum computation. The goal of the present project is to gain a
deeper understanding of Mn-12, a prototypical member of the class. (1) High
resolution spectroscopic measurements will be performed using synchrotron
radiation over a very broad range of frequencies; the aim is to investigate the
internal degrees of freedom of the magnetic clusters and to study the line-
widths and line shapes which will yield information regarding disorder, internal
magnetic fields and electron-phonon coupling strengths; magnetic avalanches will
be studied to determine whether they are accompanied by coherent super-radiant
emission, as has been recently suggested; (2) Micro-Hall bar detectors will be
used to investigate the local spatial and temporal evolution of spin reversal
inside the material as the magnetization relaxes toward equilibrium under
controlled conditions and during magnetic avalanches. Participation in forefront
research in the laboratory provides high-level education and training for both
graduate and undergraduate students. It should be noted that City College draws
its undergraduate student population from every economic stratum and from
diverse ethnic and racial backgrounds. %%%

Molecular nanomagnets, sometimes referred to as "single molecule magnets" are
potential candidates for high-density information storage and quantum
computation. Quantum computation is a new and entirely different computing
paradigm based on quantum phenomena. Rather than having two possible "classical"
values, 0 or 1, the quantum mechanical elements of quantum computers, called
"qubits", represent a far broader set of possibilities, enabling much greater
computing power. The goal of the current proposal is to gain a deeper
understanding of a prototypical member of this class of materials, Mn12-acetate,
which consists of a very large number of identical clusters of 12 manganese
atoms that form magnetic molecules regularly arranged in an organic crystal;
each molecule is a little magnet that is equivalent to 20 times the magnetism of
a single electron. Spectroscopic studies will be performed at low temperatures
at the synchrotron light source at Brookhaven, and measurements will be taken at
City College of New York of the local magnetization at low temperatures on a
length scale of microns using very small Hall bars. Participation in forefront
research in the laboratory provides high-level education and training for both
graduate and undergraduate students. It should be noted that City College draws
its undergraduate student population from every economic stratum and from very
diverse ethnic and racial backgrounds