* 0451788
* Shape-Controlled Nanostructures of Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Younan Xia, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 04/30/2008
* USD 375,000.00

This project will develop a scientific base for the large-scale synthesis of
metallic nanostructures with well-controlled shapes and properties. The
synthetic approach will be based on the polyol process, where a polyol such as
ethylene glycol serves as both solvent and reducing agent and an organic polymer
such as poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) acts as the capping agent. A series of new
experiments will be designed and performed to specifically address various
fundamental issues that include, for example, a deeper understanding and better
control of nucleation and growth in the solution phase; rapid screening and
selection of a suitable capping agent for the formation of a specific shape, and
elucidation of the role(s) played by the capping agents. This research will also
fully examine the functions of some anions (e.g., chloride and bromide) in
controlling the shape and crystallinity of seeds formed in the nucleation step.
In addition, this project will investigate some intriguing applications
associated with these metallic nanostructures including, for example, surface
plasmonics, optical sensing, contrast-enhanced optical imaging, and
heterogeneous catalysis. The project will enhance the education of both graduate
and undergraduate students through multidisciplinary research and collaboration.
It will also provide a platform for the PI to engage undergraduate students (in
particular, those from community colleges and minority institutions) and high
school students to conduct research in his
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a generic approach to the large-scale synthesis of metallic
nanostructures with a broad range of controllable shapes (e.g., cubes, rods,
wires, quasi-spheres, and thin plates). Such control will enable us to tailor
the electronic, optical, and catalytic properties of nanostructures. The
research will also provide a better understanding of the nucleation and growth
mechanisms associated with solution-phase synthesis of nanostructured materials,
as well as new tools for the rapid screening of experimental conditions required
for the evolution of a specific shape. More importantly, the research will
provide a class of nanostructured materials that can serve as a new platform to
radically change the way cancer is diagnosed, imaged, and treated. For example,
the silver and gold nanostructures can be used in a number of different
configurations for the detection of cancer-related molecules with extremely high
sensitivities. Due to their tunable and extremely high extinction coefficients
in the near-IR region (the transparent window of soft tissues), they also have
great potential in biomedical applications such as photothermal therapy of
cancer and contrast-enhanced optical imaging of tumor cells. The education of
both graduate and undergraduate students will be enhanced through
multidisciplinary research and collaborations. It will also provide a natural
vehicle for the PI to engage undergraduate students (in particular, those from
community colleges and minority institutions) and high school students to
conduct research in his laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;