* 0451122
* Collaborative Research: Adding Extrinsic Goals to the QALY Model (with Gordon Hazen)
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Alan Schwartz, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 12/31/2009
* USD 204,101.00

Methods for evaluating health quality are central to medical cost-effectiveness
analyses. The most important such method is the quality-adjusted life year (or
QALY), in which a patient's length of life is given weight proportional to
quality of health. However, numerous studies have demonstrated that the
correlation between measured QALYs and a patient's current health is at best
modest. Moreover, it is known that individuals may trade lifetime for improved
health quality when remaining lifetime is long, but not when it is short; and
that those with poor health quality may prefer to survive only until important
life milestones are achieved and no longer. Current QALY models do not
accomodate these sorts of phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these
concerns, the investigators will examine methods for incorporating life goals
into health preference models. The QALY model already addresses "ongoing goals"
that have impact proportional to length of life, such as minimizing chronic pain
or maintaining physical mobility. Other goals, termed "extrinsic goals," such as
completing an important project or seeing a child graduate from college, are
qualitatively different; their achievement has impact independent of length of
life. These are not addressed by QALYs. The investigators have generalized the
QALY model to incorporate both ongoing goals and extrinsic goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by this model, the investigators will conduct
empirical studies to characterize the kinds of extrinsic goals that are
important for the general public and medical patients. They will conduct
theoretical studies investigating potential preference models for extrinsic
goals, methods for including multiple extrinsic goals, and impacts on published
medical decision analyses when extrinsic goals are added. They will determine if
extrinsic goals can help explain plausible behavior forbidden by the QALY model
or yield better correlation of measured preferences with current health than
does QALY. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite its limitations, the QALY model has
become the standard for modeling patient preferences in medical cost-
effectiveness analyses. The investigators' extrinsic-goal model constitutes a
fundamental and original augmentation of this standard. It has the potential to
benefit society by substantially broadening the types of patient and community
preferences included in these analyses.