* 0451865
* SGER:  Convex Optimization of Lyapunov Certificates for Software Behavior Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Eric Feron, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

CNS 0451865 MIT Eric M. Feron Title: SGER: Convex Optimization of Lyapunov
Certificates for Software Behavior Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory
research project is transferring innovative concepts and associated
computational techniques from the control systems analysis arena to software
engineering for embedded systems. The project seeks safer embedded systems by
applying computational methods to obtain thoroughly tested software; better
software certification methods (e.g. for aviation and medical applications); and
new techniques for real-time applications. Specifically, the research brings
concepts of Lyapunov invariance and associated computational procedures, widely
applied in control theory, to the context of real-time, embedded software. The
goal is to provide behavior certificates, in the form of numerical Lyapunov
invariants, that the software will perform according to some desired
specifications. The central idea of the research is to use techniques such as
Lagrangian relaxation and convex optimization to produce certificates that (for
example) all variables will remain within acceptable ranges and that, when so
required, the program will finish in finite time. A considerable economic
benefit is to be gained from partial automation of the software analysis
process, in particular static analysis, and this research is expected to yield a
broad new class of techniques for this purpose. Furthermore, the techniques
being studied complement and extend emerging techniques for abstract
interpretation of programs.&lt;br/&gt; The research pursues several specific
objectives: development of dynamical system representations of software systems
that are suitable for analysis via Lyapunov invariants, development of methods
to compile relevant programs expressed in commonly used languages (such as C)
into these dynamical system models; identification of Lyapunov-like invariants
via linear programming and/or semidefinite programming to automatically
establish key properties of software; definition and preliminary implementation
of an automated software analysis tool, whose outputs are certificates of proper
program behavior; adaptation of the above efforts to scale up to large computer
programs; and finally implementation of the described methods on significant
examples arising from the literature and from existing safety-critical software
routinely used by MIT.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;