* 0451587
* SGER: Evaluation of the Simulated Global Water Cycles in the NCAR, GFDL and GISS Climate System Models
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Aiguo Dai, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/2006
* USD 25,000.00

The movement of water and associated energy within Earth's atmosphere, oceans
and land, and the exchanges among these components are a major aspect of Earth's
climate system. Accompanying the water cycle, there are large radiative and
latent heat fluxes, and oceanic salt transports involved. Correct simulation of
the global water cycle and the associated energy and other fluxes in global
climate system models is an extremely challenging task, yet it is a prerequisite
for these models to provide realistic simulations of current and future
climates. The PI will analyze the global and large-scale water cycles in the
Community Climate System Model (CCSM3), the Goddard Institute for Space Sciences
(GISS) model and the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) model, and
compare them with available observations. He will examine the spatial and
temporal (seasonal to interannual) variations in precipitation (amount,
frequency, and intensity), cloudiness, oceanic evaporation, terrestrial
evapotranspiration and runoff, streamflow, atmospheric and oceanic freshwater
transports, tropics-extratropics water exchange, land-ocean water exchange,
terrestrial water storage, as well as their variability associated with the El
Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO).

The broader impacts of the work are that it will aid in assessing the
uncertainty of the future climate change projections and will guide future model
development. This is important for environmental management and decision-making
activities.