* 0451557
* REU Site: Agricultural Science Summer Undergraduate Research Education &amp; Development (ASSURED)
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2007
* Danise Coon, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2007
* USD 80,900.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site is headquartered at New
Mexico State University's Chile Pepper Institute. The Agricultural Science
Summer Undergraduate Research Education and Development (ASSURED) accepts 10
students from farm worker families for an ten-week period in the summer. The
program's goal is to have under-represented first generation college students
from immigrant farm labor families expand their appreciation of agricultural
science in a university, research-rich context. Students work with a faculty
mentor to develop their own research projects within an existing mentor's
research project. These projects have included genetics, breeding, plant
physiology, insect control, economics, weed control, agricultural engineering,
etc. Weekly group meetings, workshops, and lectures cover development of
scientific inquiry, ethical conduct in research, career awareness, etc. Student
participants are required to make an oral presentation, a poster presentation
and write a research paper on their research results. Some students will have
the opportunity to continue their project during the academic year. Research
opportunities for students with disabilities are eligible for the program as
well. More information is available by contacting Dr. Paul Bosland or Mrs.
Danise Coon at the Chile Pepper Institute, (505) 646-3028, hotchile@nmsu.edu or
by visiting http://www.chilepepperinstitute.org/Assured.htm.&lt;br/&gt;