* 0451534
* Dissertation Research:  The International Cambium Controversy: An Examination of the Development of Paleobotany, 1804-1895
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2006
* David Kohn, Drew University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 11/30/2006
* USD 7,939.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Research Improvement Grant will
explore the history of paleobotany during the nineteenth century and will focus
on the controversy over the cambium. a scientific debate that defined this
nascent science from the 1830s to the 1890s. Natural history during the
nineteenth century saw many controversies. Besides the wide-ranging Darwinian
controversy, a good number hinged on the interpretation of specific sets of
scientific evidence (e.g., the Devonian controversy and the Huxley/Owen debate).
It is into this category of practice-oriented debate that the conflict in
paleobotany falls. The controversy over the cambium illustrates how social,
theoretical and technological factors influenced the practice of paleobotany.
Two individuals defined the poles of the debate, Adolphe Theodore Brongniart
(1801-1876) of the Museum d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris and William Crawford
Williamson (1816-1895) of Owens College, Manchester. Brongniart attained
international acclaim for his paleobotanical researches through his connection
to the museum and his mentor, Georges Cuvier. Williamson began his
paleobotanical career illustrating Lindley and Hutton's Fossil Flora, but gained
notoriety in paleobotany as a result of the cambium debate. The graduate student
investigator will tease out the spheres of interaction for both Brongniart and
Williamson, in order to understand how other paleobotanists viewed the cambium
debate and how theoretical biases and social networks influenced positions on
either side of the controversy. Following David C. Oldroyd's lead, not only will
written sources be studied, but also non-written sources (plant fossil
specimens; thin section microscope slides) will be used to unearth the ways that
paleobotanists observed and interpreted their collections. The student has
completed some of her archival research on Williamson and Brongniart with the
assistance of funding from Drew University in Spring 2003. With the funds from
the National Science Foundation, the student will travel to London, Paris,
Berlin and Prague to complete the remainder of her research on the international
ramifications of the cambium controversy. This project will consider not only
scientific achievements, but also how social ties, nationalism and evolutionary
theory played a role in the practice of paleobotany during its development.
Since the cambium controversy occurred during the period that established the
fundamental framework of knowledge which created the modern science of
paleobotany, careful study of this debate is a keystone for reconstructing the
history of the discipline. Thus, the deeper goal of this research project is to
ground the conceptual foundations of paleobotany in their historical context.
Paleobotany today, as the Botanical Society of America urges in its mission
statement, is essential for testing models and theories of global climate
change, patterns of plant phylogeny, and the antecedents of current patterns of
biodiversity. These are complex scientific issues with broad cultural
significance. A historical understanding of paleobotany's development will
foster the public understanding of what has become a pivotal environmental
science.