* 0451463
* SCI:  ETF Early Operations
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2005,09/30/2006
* James Bottum, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Abani K. Patra
* 09/30/2006
* USD 308,532.00

The Extensible Terascale Facility (ETF), or TeraGrid, involves nine resource
providers operating high-performance computing, information, and visualization
facilities, interconnected with a dedicated optical network and integrated with
a set of common software that presents the user community with a cohesive set of
resources and services. On October 1, 2004, the ETF will conclude a three-year
construction effort to create this distributed environment and will transition
into an operational state. This proposal outlines a set of services to be
provided at Purdue University as part of the TeraGrid infrastructure. Purdue
University will provide a heterogeneous set of compute resources made of an IBM
SP supercomputer (265 cpus) and a linux cluster (960 cpus). Purdue will also
operate a 10Gbps network connection to the Chicago hub linking Purdue to the
TeraGrid backbone. Datasets from the remote sensing scientific community will be
made available on the TeraGrid, specifically data from the Purdue Terrestrial
Observatory (PTO) that will come on-line during the fall of 2004 and will be
production ready in the early spring of 2005. Purdue University is also a
National Weather Service (NWS) Tier-2 Doppler Radar images provider. This data
will be made available uncurated on the TeraGrid. Visualization resources of the
Purdue Envision Center will be available for use by TeraGrid users. Finally, the
Purdue TeraGrid team has worked closely with the NSF Network for Computational
Nanotechnology (NCN) submitting an NRAC community allocation to get NCN users on
the TeraGrid and to connect the NCN application portal to the TeraGrid
resources. This partnership with the NCN will continue and will be enhanced in
the limit of the resources available.

