* 0451951
* Solitons and Wavepackets in the Ocean and Atmosphere and High-Order Numerical Algorithms
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2005,07/31/2011
* John Boyd, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2011
* USD 748,555.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0451951&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study has two
components: (i) numerical and theoretical studies of nonlinear coherent
structures and waves in the ocean and atmosphere and (ii) the further
development of high-order numerical algorithms, especially spectral methods.
Pseudospectral/Newton/continuation numerics will be applied to three species of
coherent structures: equatorially-trapped Kelvin waves in the sea, Tropical
Instability Waves (TIW's) in the ocean, and large-amplitude baroclinic vortices
in the atmosphere. The singularity of the slope-discontinuous Kelvin corner wave
motivates one of the proposed numerical topics: blending ?lters and rational
Chebyshev reconstruction to improve the ability of spectral algorithms to cope
with shocks, fronts, and other singularities. Also, the struggle to solve
discretized nonlinear eigenvalue problems for coherent structures has led to new
methods for computing the roots and algebraic varieties of polynomials expressed
in Chebyshev, Legendre, tensor-product Legendre or spherical harmonic form.
These geophysical problems together with broader need for improved "dynamical
cores" for weather forecasting and climate modelling motivate the other proposed
numerical studies. One is further experimentation and theory for a prolate
spheroidal basis, instead of the usual Legendre polynomials, in spectral element
codes. Another is improved blending of regional spectral models and data
analysis schemes into global models through C8 windowing and local Fourier basis
(Coifman-Meyer basis) ideas. This extends, through closely-related mathematics,
to the fundamental problem of applying global spectral methods on irregular
domains: the proposed work will build upon the PI's previous studies in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics, both geophysical and numerical, are still
full of questions. Why does the Cnoidal/Corner Wave/Breaking bifurcation of the
Kelvin wave occur in so many other kinds of wave species including ordinary
surface gravity water waves? What is generic about this bifurcation? What is
nongeneric? Why do Tropical Instability Waves evolve to quasi-steady translating
vortices resembling solitons in shear? Why are baroclinic vortices in the
atmosphere unstable, self-focusing into wavepackets, intermittent instead of
steady? Are Legendre polynomials, with their highly nonuniform grid, really the
best way to do high order p-type ?nite elements or spectral elements? Can a
combination of ?ltering and reconstruction using rational Chebyshev functions
succeed well where one or the other has succeeded only partially for shocks
&amp; fronts? How can one ?nd the level curves of a truncated spherical harmonic
or multidimensional Legendre series without the numerically ill-conditioned step
of converting to an ordinary multivariate polynomial?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Kelvin waves are the main oceanic component of the coupled
ocean-atmosphere oscillation known as El Nino, whose droughts and heavy rains
have a large global impact. Baroclinic instability is the main engine of large-
scale weather in the middle latitudes. Spectral methods are widely used in
almost all branches of science and engineering from simulations of gravity waves
in general relativity to seismic waves in the earth to sloshing ?ows in the
engine of an automobile; fronts, shocks and other high-gradient regions are a
ubiquitous complication in most of these ?elds: a good ?lter/recontruction
procedure will have very wide applicability. There are many technical advantages
to Fourier series for regional data analysis and modelling of the weather and
climate; better blending and extension methods for limited-area spectral series
will therefore have immediate societal bene?ts. The powers-of-x form of
polynomials is notoriously ill-conditioned; root?nding methods for the Chebyshev
form will be valuable in every ?eld where ?nding roots is important. On the
human side, a graduate student will be trained broadly in both geophysics and
computational techniques. Several undergraduates will also participate in
research, through university-funded programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;