* 0451775
* Characterizing the Composition, Flux, and Temporal Variability of Terrigenous Sources to the Cariaco Basin: Relationship to Climate Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Richard Murray, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 05/31/2011
* USD 289,660.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0451775

Terrigenous deposition, either fluvial or aeolian, is altered by latitudinal
shifts in the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). For example, a southern
shift in the ITCZ during the Northern Hemisphere winter coincides with higher
aeolian inputs in response to strong easterly trade winds, whereas during the
northern migration of the ITCZ in the summer, higher fluvial inputs are
observed. A scientist from Boston University will carry out a geochemical study
of samples recovered from a sediment trap array in the Cariaco Basin to
characterize seasonal changes in the chemical composition and total flux of the
terrigenous component. Material recovered in the traps over a five year period
will be analyzed for major, trace and rare earth elements, as well as radiogenic
isotopes. Changes in chemical composition and total flux will be assessed as a
function of precipitation, wind stress, and upwelling to understand how modern
processes control the terrigenous variability at the site. In addition, this PI
will complement the water column work by collecting samples along the Venezuelan
coastal shelf, local rivers, Aeolian samples from Barbados, and material derived
from the Orinoco River to constrain possible end-member sources.

In terms of broader impacts, results from this study will further our
understanding of how changes in the ITCZ alters inputs of terrigenous material
which in turn can provide information on global climate variations in tropical
latitudes. The project utilizes samples collected as part of the CARIACO time
series off the coast of Venezuela and is a collaborative effort between
Venezuelan and U.S. scientist. A graduate student from Venezuela will be trained
and supported as part of this study.

