* 0451802
* THE EARTHTIME NETWORK: Developing an Infrastructure for High-Resolution Calibration of Earth History
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* Samuel Bowring, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2011
* USD 1,285,862.00

EAR-0451802&lt;br/&gt;Bowring&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of what we know about
biological evolution, episodes of severe climate change, and the evolution of
our oceans and atmospheres is recorded in the geological record. However,
geological records in any one geographical area are incomplete. Thus, to
establish a detailed history of the planet we must integrate records from across
the entire planet using a combination of the fossil record and the dating of
rocks (geochronology). Our ability to determine the age of rocks has improved
dramatically over the past twenty years and calculated uncertainties have been
reduced from about 1% to 0.1 %. With increased precision has come the
opportunity to explore very small differences in time and small but systematic
differences between laboratories and different geochronological techniques.
These differences by no means threaten the validity of the techniques but are a
consequence of a level of precision never thought possible. A necessary step in
the further development of understanding earth history using high-precision
geochronology is the establishment of a coordinated infrastructure and
analytical facilities necessary for the achievement of high-resolution
"sequencing" of at least the last 800 million years of earth history in the next
decade. We propose to develop a cyberinfrastructure, the EarthTime Network, that
will unite geochronology labs around the world in terms of analytical protocol
and the reporting of standards so that we will eliminate or further reduce small
systematic differences between labs and techniques. We will combine this with an
aggressive program of education and public outreach focused on both earth
scientists as well as the general public. Our goal is to understand the changes
our planet has undergone over the past 4.56 billion years so as to better
predict our future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;