* 0451096
* Outsourcing Technology Innovation to Foreign Technology Centers:  An Eipircal Investigation of the Rare Earth Industry
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Cliff Davidson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* stephen zehr
* 01/31/2008
* USD 141,875.00

Although the United States has enjoyed global leadership in many fields of
technological development in the past, recent evidence suggests that this
country is no longer a leader in as many fields as compared with 20-30 years
ago. Many companies have changed their operations to perform less research and
development within U.S. borders, and some firms have moved their development
work entirely to other countries. Several factors influence the decisions of
these companies to work outside of the U.S., among them socioeconomic changes in
the U.S. and abroad, regulations, and a change in the influence of geographic
barriers. Despite their importance, only a limited number of studies have tried
to understand these factors. This is particularly apparent in the rare earth
element (REE) industry, where many firms have been outsourcing development to
Asia, yet the underlying reasons and consequences are not well understood. In
this proposed project, we will study how firms make their decisions to move
operations abroad, using the REE industry as a noteworthy example.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three specific objectives. First, four
individual REE firms will be identified, and detailed case studies will be
performed on the reasons, processes, and outcomes associated with their movement
to Asia, where there is a growing nucleus of REE activity. Information on where
company employees were educated, in the U.S. or at foreign institutions, will
also be obtained. Second, a quantitative analysis of REE technology patents from
1960-2001 will be conducted. This will provide information on the evolution of
the REE industry over time, analyzing in particular the effect of a growing
Asian preeminence. Patent data will also yield information on company leadership
in REE innovation, both in the US and abroad. Finally, a paradigm will be
developed to inform decision makers on how policies impact the environment for
innovation in high technology industries in this country. The methods to achieve
these objectives will include interviewing company representatives, conducting
computer searches of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office database, and
analyzing the qualitative information obtained from the interviews and the
quantitative information obtained from the patent
searches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity: This
project will assess R&amp;D outsourcing and relocation decisions to developing
regions, focusing on the management of technological innovation, while
considering the structure of companies, the raw materials and markets for their
products, and cultures here and abroad. Furthermore, the project will shed light
on the flows of rare earth elements in the U.S. and abroad, considering their
sources, uses in products, and ultimate disposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts Resulting from the Proposed Activity: This project will enhance our
understanding of the factors that strengthen and weaken the leadership position
of the U.S. in high technology industries, focusing on the trend toward more
outsourcing. The results of the research will also be incorporated into
coursework at Carnegie Mellon. Overall, the project will help the U.S. maintain
a competitive advantage in new global markets. &lt;br/&gt;