* 0451238
* SGER: Demonstrating the Feasibility of Semantic Reconfiguration and Semantic Checkpointing
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2005,10/31/2006
* Karen Sollins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brett D. Fleisch
* 10/31/2006
* USD 80,224.00

This project addresses the provision of system support for applications that are
forced or may benefit from use of alternate resources during their execution.
The objective is to provide the application user as much of a sense of
continuity as possible across reorganization of the application, including
significant remodularization of the application. This project is an SGER that
investigates and provides a proof of concept of two key problems: semantic
reconfiguration and semantic checkpointing. Semantic reconfiguration is the
process of reorganizing and remodularizing an application, based on alternate
resources, while retaining the overall semantics of the application. Semantic
checkpointing is the process of capturing and restoring state at the semantic
level of the application itself, in contrast with capturing the state of the
underlying hardware or operating system. To this end, the project is based on a
distributed database application with specific consistency requirements, moving
among combinations of low and high capacity servers and networks. The initial,
handcrafted system includes: specification of the application and state to be
checkpointed, component composition, conversion of checkpointing state, and the
checkpointing itself. The contributions of this work are to 1) design and build
the key algorithms to achieve semantic reconfiguration and semantic
checkpointing, 2) understanding a path toward generalization and automation of
these two tasks, and 3) identify and frame other key components required for
complete automated transitions. As mobile applications become more prevalent,
such a systematic approach will become increasing critical.