* 0451120
* Mapping molecular structure-property relationships for molecular electronics through the use of nanometer-scale, patterned, self-assembled monolayers and probe microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Christopher Gorman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 03/31/2010
* USD 360,000.00

Abstract CHE-0451120 Gorman/NC State

Professor Gorman and his coworkers in the Department of Chemistry at North
Carolina State University are studying the fundamental science of replacement
lithography on self-assembled monolayer systems, for the construction of
molecular electronic devices. With the support of the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program, structure-property relationships in the replacement
lithography of these monolayers are used to develop approaches for the formation
of three dimensional nanostructures that can be used in molecular electronics
applications. In particular, the work concentrates on the examination of
negative differential resistance devices, and the effect of electrochemical
redox transitions in the monolayer materials in the operation of these
structures. Training of students in the field of molecular electronics and nano-
technology is one broader impact of the work being carried out.

Developing the fundamental science of replacement lithography for the
construction of molecular electronic devices is the focus of this research
project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program. Professor
Gorman is systematically examining the connections between structure and
function of self-assembled monolayers formed using replacement lithographic
approaches. This information provides the fundamental understanding needed for
the design and production of molecular electronic devices.

