* 0451289
* Toward a Political Theory of Bioethics: Participation, Representation, and Deliberation on Federal Bioethics Advisory Committees
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,09/30/2007
* Mark Brown, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 09/30/2007
* USD 129,935.00

The goal of this project is analyze and evaluate the actual and potential
contribution of federal bioethics advisory committees to representative
democracy in the United States. The project will devote special attention to
questions of public participation, deliberation, and representation on bioethics
committees. As an exercise in practice-oriented political theory, the project
aims are not primarily explanatory but normative, analytic, and conceptual. The
goal is not to discover the causes underlying the workings of bioethics
committees, but rather to illuminate the reasons with which their work has been
and should be publicly justified. The project will employ a combination of
conceptual and empirical methods to elucidate and evaluate the norms and values
of federal bioethics advisory committees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed project lies in its potential contribution to recent
research on expert advisory bodies in the fields of bioethics, political theory,
and science and technology studies (STS). The project speaks to work in
political theory on deliberative democracy and the concept of representation; to
research in STS on the negotiation of boundaries among science, ethics, and
politics, and on the possibilities and limits of participatory technology
assessment; and it speaks to recent efforts among bioethicists to conceptualize
their profession in a way that facilitates ethically informed and democratically
legitimate decision-making while avoiding the extremes of technocracy, populism,
and interest group politics. The interdisciplinary approach of this project
promises an uncommon and intellectually fruitful perspective on these issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad societal impact of the project lies in its
potential contribution to the efforts of bioethics committees to facilitate the
democratic resolution of controversies over biomedical research (e.g., stem cell
research, genetic therapy, reproductive technologies). In particular, this
project aims to help resolve difficult practical questions about how to select
the members of bioethics committees so as promote the fair representation of
diverse perspectives; how to structure the rules and procedures of such
committees to foster effective deliberation; how to foster productive
communication on bioethics committees among experts, interest group
representatives, and lay citizens; how to expand the participation of lay
citizens to include members of disadvantaged social groups; and how to balance
the often competing tasks of advising policy makers, articulating public
concerns, stimulating public discourse, and educating lay citizens. The analysis
of these and related questions will culminate in a series of specific
recommendations for improving public participation, representation, and
deliberation on federal bioethics advisory committees. In addition, the proposed
research has significant pedagogical benefits: it will improve the principal
investigator's ability to help students understand bioethical controversies;
provide primary materials for in-class exercises and student research projects;
and offer one or more undergraduate research assistants in-depth exposure to
both the project themes and the conduct of scholarly research. &lt;br/&gt;