* 0451194
* RUI: Problems in Stochastic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2005,10/31/2009
* Denis Bell, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2009
* USD 53,290.00

The investigator plans to study three problems in the area of
stochastic&lt;br/&gt;differential geometry. The first problem concerns the
Gauss-Bonnet-Chern&lt;br/&gt;theorem. The investigator has proved a
generalization of this theorem valid&lt;br/&gt;for an oriented even-dimensional
Riemannian vector bundle over a closed&lt;br/&gt;compact manifold, equipped with
a metric connection. The investigator would&lt;br/&gt;like to simplify his
proof, replacing the use of the Splitting Principle,&lt;br/&gt;which constitutes
a key step in his argument, with a more elementary and&lt;br/&gt;transparent
stochastic argument. The second problem concerns the derivation&lt;br/&gt;of
integration by parts formulae for the law of a diffusion process on
a&lt;br/&gt;compact manifold. The investigator has recently found a new method
for&lt;br/&gt;obtaining integration by parts formulae in the case where the
diffusion is&lt;br/&gt;strictly elliptic. He plans to use his method to study
the analogous problem&lt;br/&gt;for degenerate (non-elliptic) diffusions. He
believes he will be able to&lt;br/&gt;prove a dichotomy theorem giving
conditions very close to necessary and&lt;br/&gt;sufficient for the existence of
integration by parts formulae, for a large&lt;br/&gt;class of vector fields in
the degenerate case. In the third problem, the&lt;br/&gt;investigator in
collaboration with Elton Hsu, will use ideas in two papers&lt;br/&gt;of Hsu to
give a simplified stochastic proof of the Gauss-Bonnet-Chern&lt;br/&gt;theorem
for manifolds with boundary. They will use the expertise they
gain&lt;br/&gt;from this work to study the index theorem for the Dirac operator
on spin&lt;br/&gt;manifolds with boundary.&lt;br/&gt; The proposal combines two
areas of mathematics, stochastic analysis, the&lt;br/&gt;study of randomness,
and differential geometry, the study of shape. Both&lt;br/&gt;areas have close
connections with the physical world. For example,&lt;br/&gt;stochastic
differential equations, a central theme of the proposal, are&lt;br/&gt;widely
used to model physical systems subject to the influence of
random&lt;br/&gt;noise. Examples include the flow of heat in a material, weather
systems,&lt;br/&gt;the trajectory of a spacecraft, and the pricing of stock
options. Curved&lt;br/&gt;spaces are often the natural setting for these
phenomena, e.g. if one wishes&lt;br/&gt;to study the heat at various points on a
cylindrical pipe. A deeper&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the mathematics underlying
physical systems is often&lt;br/&gt;crucial in developing good mathematical
models of these systems. Thus,&lt;br/&gt;although it is of a theoretical nature,
the research outlined in this&lt;br/&gt;proposal may prove useful in many areas
of applied science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;