* 0451945
* The Financial Networks of Hong Kong
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2006,12/31/2009
* David Meyer, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2009
* USD 199,902.00

Many of the world's most important financial firms choose Hong Kong as their
Asian regional headquarters. However, the drama of Hong Kong's return to Chinese
sovereignty in 1997 and subsequent threats to the city's future have led many
observers to question the future of Hong Kong as the most important financial
center of Asia and as China's window to global capital. This research project
analyzes decision making and behavior of leading foreign financial firms and
their financiers in commercial and investment banking, money management, and
private equity, which operate in Hong Kong. The thesis is that foreign firms
will, by and large, maintain their Asia-Pacific headquarters in Hong Kong,
because it is the pivotal meeting place in Asia of the networks of capital,
especially of the Chinese and foreign financiers. The research draws on related
theoretical frameworks-knowledge communities, social networks, and communities-
of-practice-to formulate the hypotheses about Hong Kong firms and their
financiers. The study examines seventy leading firms covering the four financial
sectors, and key financiers in each firm. Data from the firms and interviews
with their senior financiers will provide evidence about the firms' approaches
to financial networks and about financiers' behavior-their participation in
knowledge communities, social networks, and communities-of-practice. Interviews
will be digitally recorded and transcribed and analyzed using qualitative
software. Supplementing these qualitative data, extensive evidence from Hong
Kong sources and international business directories will provide data for a more
comprehensive set of financial firms regarding their management bases in Asia.
The international business press will be used to collect diverse anecdotal
evidence about the behavior of financial firms and their strategies for
operating in Asia, and it provides insights into prominent financiers. The
objectives of this project are to develop generalizations about the decision
making and behavior of leading foreign financial firms in Hong Kong and to
determine the consequences for the city's status as a global financial center.
Thus, this research will address important theoretical and policy questions
about global city financial networks and the long-term viability of global
financial centers. The interrelated theoretical frameworks-knowledge
communities, social networks, and communities-of-practice-in conjunction with
empirical findings, will be used to suggest a theory of global city financial
networks.

This study of foreign financial firms and their leading financiers in Hong Kong
presents a unique opportunity to explain the operation of global financial
centers and the business networks which underpin them. The drama of Hong Kong's
return to Chinese sovereignty in 1997 and subsequent threats to the city's
future represent substantial challenges to its functioning as a global financial
center. Therefore, the results of this project will offer insights about the
consequences of political-economic shocks on a global financial center. The
timing of the study offers a unusual chance to personally interview key decision
makers of firms and their top financiers who are making decisions which impact
the future viability of a leading global financial center. While the Hong Kong
case is unique, the research contains all of the elements impacting financial
center networks more generally. The results have implications for public policy,
because city and national governmental leaders are concerned about the viability
of their global financial centers.