* 0451589
* Brownian Transport Through Modulated Potential Energy Landscapes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/09/2004,12/31/2008
* David Grier, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2008
* USD 288,887.00

This program focuses on how colloidal particles move through extensive potential
energy landscapes created with dynamic holographic optical tweezers. Transport
through modulated potential energy landscapes is a classic problem in condensed
matter physics, with variants arising in systems as diverse as flux flow through
type-II superconductors, quasiparticle tunneling in Josephson junctions and
procession in biological molecular motors. While much is known about transport
in one-dimensional periodic potentials, much more remains to be understood
regarding modulated Brownian transport in higher dimensions, particularly in
aperiodic, quasiperiodic, random, and time-varying landscapes, all of which
figure heavily in natural and industrial settings. Previous efforts to
understand such processes have been hampered by the difficulty of controlling
most relevant systems' potential energy landscapes while tracking their
microscopic components' motions. Dynamic holographic optical tweezers present a
unique opportunity to construct arbitrary one-, two-, and three-dimensional
potential energy landscapes for micrometer-scale colloidal particles by
projecting up to several thousand optical traps in any desired configuration.
Unlike most other model systems, colloidal particles' microscopic motions can be
tracked with exquisite accuracy using digital video microscopy. The combination
of optical manipulation and high-resolution particle tracking provides an
extraordinarily flexible and well-characterized model system for studying driven
modulated Brownian transport, not only for single particles but also for
strongly interacting systems of particles. In addition to the fundamental
knowledge gained from such studies, the particular application to mesoscopic
transport promises immediate practical applications in nanotechnology,
biotechnology, and photonics.

How does an electron find its way through the labyrinth of a metallic glass? How
does a DNA molecule thread through a gel? Answering such questions requires a
new fundamental insights into how objects traverse complicated potential energy
landscapes. And the answers will have immediate practical ramifications for
fields as diverse as high-temperature superconductivity, drug discovery,
nanotechnology and engineering. This program combines state-of-the-art
micromanipulation made possible by the recent introduction of holographic
optical tweezers (HOTs) with precision digital video microscopy to provide just
such insights. The heart of this program is provided by HOT's ability to create
arbitrary custom-designed potential energy landscapes from an ordinary beam of
laser light. The technique uses computer-generated holograms to craft the beam
into thousands of individual optical traps, each of which can be moved
independently in three dimensions under computer control. If a single optical
trap can be likened to Star Trek's tractor beam, then holographic optical
tweezers more closely resemble the holodeck. Micrometer-scale colloidal
particles driven through such latticeworks of light trace out solutions to long-
standing fundamental physics questions. In so doing, they also provide the basis
for practical applications such as sorting proteins, DNA, nanoclusters, and
living cells using light. The new techniques on which this program is based were
developed with direct involvement of high school and undergraduate students, as
well as graduate students and postdocs. These students' unique training in these
methods has helped them to land positions in top-rated schools, as well as long-
term employment in industry and academia. This program's methods have been
patented, and the patents have led to the foundation of a new industry in
optical micromanipulation. Such substantive involvement of industry and students
at all levels will continue to be a central theme of this program.

