* 0451598
* The Comparative Study of Electoral Systems
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Ian McAllister, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 430,150.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES) is a coordinated
comparative project that enables the systematic analysis of electoral behavior
under globally varying institutional conditions. CSES coordinates the operation
of more than 50 indigenous national election studies across the world, thereby
ensuring that information about citizens' behavior and attitudes gathered at
each site&lt;br/&gt;is comparable. Under CSES auspices, information about the
institutional arrangements that characterize each participating country is also
collected, also in comparable form. CSES designs, receives, rationalizes,
cleans, and merges these data, and then makes them freely and immediately
available to the world's scholarly community.&lt;br/&gt;CSES is a uniquely
valuable resource for comparative research. Already CSES&lt;br/&gt;data have
been put to productive use - enabling the understanding of the consequences of
political institutions for democratic citizens and providing a venue for the
further development of comparative methodology - and much more work is underway.
Established in 1996, CSES completed its first round of data collection (Module
1) in 2001, with some 33 countries participating. Module 2, with more than 50
participating countries, will draw to a close in 2005. The first two waves of
the CSES concentrated on the performance of democracy and on accountability and
representation, respectively. The third wave of CSES, commencing in 2006,
will&lt;br/&gt;focus on the choice set that voters face in an election. While we
know a lot about why and how voters vote, we know little about how voting is
affected by the kind of choices that are available to the electorate. This issue
has broad relevance for both normative and theoretical reasons. This award is to
cover only the essential central coordinating operation that CSES has provided
so successfully so far, modestly supplemented by funds to provide airfare
support to CSES planning meetings for participants from poorer counties in
Eastern Europe, Africa, Latin America, and Asia. All of the costs of the surveys
themselves are contributed by the various national studies. The planning for the
modules is subsidized by committee members when they host planning committee
meetings at least once annually; hosts provide meeting space, plus lodging and
meals for all participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. CSES serves
as a multiplier of research on comparative politics. CSES makes it possible to
generate millions of dollars worth of valuable cross-national data on electoral
behavior at a fractional cost. By effectively coordinating the efforts of
election specialists and centers around the world, CSES provides a unique
resource for scholars everywhere interested in deep and consequential questions
of democratic politics. In addition, because CSES is a cooperative effort among
projects rather than individuals, there are important consequences for the
individual projects involved, in terms of reexamining their own practices and
learning from others, and these consequences are especially significant because
of the large number of scholars affected by these institutionalized practices.
Finally, because some of CSES affiliates, especially those in the emerging
democracies, are very new, CSES provides a venue for training social scientists
in these emerging democracies in cutting-edge social science theory and
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;