* 0451444
* The Organization of Environmental Injustice
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Don Grant II, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2007
* USD 128,858.00

&lt;br/&gt;THE ORGANIZATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL INJUSTICE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will address the following question: Which types of chemical plants
pose the greatest health threat and in which types of communities? Environmental
justice scholars have long been interested in the physical dangers posed by
industry and the factors that make communities vulnerable to them. They have
extensively researched the effects of community characteristics like race,
class, and civic engagement on exposure to industrial facilities and their
emissions. However, researchers have rarely studied industrial facilities
themselves and the effects of their characteristics on emissions. Nor have they
examined how combinations of facility and community characteristics influence
pollution exposure. In large part, this is because researchers have lacked
systematic data on the health risks posed by facilities' emissions and the
methods available to scholars have not been suited for testing complex, higher-
order interactions. &lt;br/&gt;To remedy this situation, we use the EPA's newly
released Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators (RSEI) to investigate the
effects of facility and community characteristics on chemical plants' risk-
related emissions. We employ conventional regression techniques to analyze the
independent effects of facility and community factors, and novel qualitative
comparative analysis (QCA) methods to determine their conjoint effects.
Consistent with research on structural embeddedness, we hypothesize that not
only do facility and community factors exert significant net effects on risk-
related emissions, but they also interact to produce multiple causal pathways.
By specifying such interactions, this project will help to bridge the gap
between the literatures on organizational behavior and environmental justice.
This study will also generate a structural typology of industrial polluters that
policymakers can use to focus and prioritize their regulatory efforts. In
particular, this research will benefit Local Emergency Planning Committees
(LEPCs) and State Emergency Response Commissions (SERCs) that are responsible
for disseminating information about local polluters under the Community Right-
to-Know Act. Finally, results should help the Chemical Manufacturers Association
improve the self-regulation and environmental performance of its member
companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;