* 0451163
* Enhanced Electron-Phonon Coupling at Metal Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2010
* E. Ward Plummer, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2010
* USD 480,000.00

***NON_TECHNICAL*** Treating the dynamic interaction of the electrons and the
atoms or molecules in a solid is difficult but essential if functionality is to
be designed into advanced materials. In textbooks this interaction is handled by
using the Born-Oppenheimer Approximation (BOA), which allows scientists to
consider the slow-moving atoms to be frozen in space in their average positions
while the more energetic electrons do their thing. But a multitude of important
chemical, physical, and biological phenomena are driven by violations of the
BOA. Breakdown in the BOA results from low-energy excitations of the electrons
near what is known as the Fermi energy coupling with vibrational excitations of
the solid. The resulting vibronic interactions are a necessary ingredient in any
process that makes or breaks a covalent bond or in conventional
superconductivity, which is driven by the electron-lattice interaction. Many of
the emergent properties of complex materials or artificially nanostructured
materials result from coupling of the electronic and lattice (atom) motion in
systems that are inherently anisotropic. This project will use a newly developed
data analysis procedure to extract the details of this coupling between the
electrons and the lattice from high-resolution spectrocopic data.
Undergraduates, graduates and post docs will be involved with state-of-the-art
instrumentation and materials preparation. This award is co-funded by NSF's
Division of Materials Research and the Department of Energy's Office of Basic
Energy Sciences.

***TECHNICAL*** This individual investigator award supports an experimental
investigation of the electron-phonon coupling (EPC) at metal surfaces. A newly
developed data analysis procedure enables the spectroscopic features of this
coupling to be exacted from high-resolution angle-resolved photoemssion
spectroscopy (ARPES) data. For the first time in very anisotropic systems it is
possible to "see" which vibrational modes couple to which electrons. This
procedure will be applied to a variety of materials, ranging from layered
transition-metal oxides, MBE grown thin films of MgB2, and clean and modified
surfaces. ARPES measurements will be correlated with scanning tunneling
spectroscopy measurements of the EPC and inelastic electron scattering
measurements of the phonon dispersion at the surface. A world wide collaboration
has been created to take full advantage of theoretical and experimental advances
in this field. This research project offers an ideal training ground for
undergraduates, graduate students, post docs and visiting scientists, exposing
them the state-of-the-art instrumentation, sophisticated growth procedures and
close coupling with theory. This award is co-funded by NSF's Division of
Materials Research and the Department of Energy's Office of Basic Energy
Sciences.