* 0451543
* SCI:  ETF Early Operations - TACC
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* Edward Walker, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Barry I. Schneider
* 02/28/2006
* USD 743,678.00

The Extensible Terascale Facility (ETF), or. TeraGrid, involves nine resource
providers operating high-performance computing, information, and visualization
facilities, interconnected with a dedicated optical network and integrated with
a set of common software that presents the user community with a cohesive set of
resources and services. On October 1, 2004, the ETF will conclude a three-year
construction effort to create this distributed environment and will transition
into an operational state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal outlines a set of
services to be provided at the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The
University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin) as part of the TeraGrid. TACC has
developed a comprehensive TeraScale infrastructure at UT Austin and will provide
many significant resources to TeraGrid users: a Linux cluster with 1028
processors for high-end computing; a Sun SMP system with 512 GB shared memory
and 16 dual-pipe, high-end graphics cards for visualization and data analysis; a
50 TB storage area network and a massive archival system for data storage; and
four unique geosciences data collections from leading research units at UT
Austin. TACC will operate and support all of these resources as production
systems and integrate them into the TeraGrid using the appropriate software
components. TACC staff will provide services and support to ensure maximum
effective use of these resources, including HPC and visualization applications
support and outreach, consulting, training, and documentation, as well as data
collection curation and user support. TACC will also operate the TeraGrid User
Portal, working with all other TeraGrid resource providers to ensure that the
portal provides up-to-date information services and reliable, simple interactive
ways of using TeraGrid resources and accessing TeraGrid services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;