* 0451339
* Travel Grant Program for the 2005 Congresses of the International Union of Microbiological Societies to be held in San Francisco, CA from July 23-28, 2005.
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2006
* Stanley Maloy, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 05/31/2006
* USD 18,672.00

The United States, for the first time in 20 years, will host microbiologists
from around the world for the congresses of the International Union of
Microbiological Societies (IUMS), an organization that promotes microbiological
research worldwide. The IUMS consists of three divisions that span three major
disciplines in microbiology: bacteriology, mycology, and virology. The unifying
theme of the congresses is "Microbes in a Changing World". The meetings will
take place in San Francisco, California from July 23-28, 2005
&lt;http://www.iums2005.org&gt;. Topics include the molecular and cellular
biology of microorganisms, microbial ecology and evolution, host-pathogen
interactions, emerging diseases, biodefense and invasive species. This award
will support 15 small grants to U.S. graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers to attend and participate in the congresses. The National Academy of
Sciences' U.S. National Committee for the IUMS will organize the evaluation and
dissemeniaton of the travel grants. Special attention will be paid to the
inclusion of grantees from traditionally underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is vital to the interests of global security that the
internationalization of science is encouraged, especially since science is a
productive forum for peaceful interaction among peoples of various cultures and
beliefs. The international congresses provide young investigators with a unique
educational experience that has a lasting impact on their research careers,
including possibilities for international collaboration. The meeting provides a
forum for scientists to meet potential collaborators and foreign colleagues
working in the same and related fields, leading to working relationships and
lifelong scientific interactions. Young investigators gain the opportunity to
listen to distinguished international scientists discuss the most current
research across the breadth of microbiology and to interact with them in an
informal setting. The international congresses also provide young scientists
with different perspectives on research being done internationally, including in
developing countries, and the impact of microbiological research worldwide. The
resulting scientific interactions promote international cooperation and
exchange, leading to scientific advances that would be difficult to achieve in
isolation.