* 0451536
* Low-coordinate and  Multiply-bonded Compounds of Silicon, Germanium and Tin
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Robert West, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2008
* USD 363,000.00

This project addresses the fundamental chemistry of unusual heavy-metal
congeners of carbon compounds. Metallole dianions - five-membered ring compounds
containing silicon, germanium or tin atoms - bear two negative charges which are
delocalized over the rings. Reactions of these unique dianions are expected to
give rise to a wide range of novel compounds containing metal-to-carbon double
bonds, as well as to a remarkable series of stable diradicals, containing two
unpaired electrons. The synthesis and chemistry of stable silylenes - compounds
of silicon in the unusual oxidation state of 2 rather than the customary 4 -
will also be explored. The process by which some stable silylenes serve as
catalysts for the polymerization of unsaturated organic compounds will be
investigated.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Robert West, of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Wisconsin - Madison. Although our understanding of the chemistry
of compounds containing carbon has become quite sophisticated, the chemistry of
carbon's closely related relatives, silicon and germanium, is comparatively
undeveloped. Professor West is studying the synthesis and reaction chemistry of
a series of compounds in which one or more carbon atoms are replaced by silicon,
germanium or tin. These studies are of fundamental importance in developing our
understanding of the chemistry of the other elements in the periodic table. In
addition, the unusual structures of Professor West's target compounds promise
potential advances in practical reaction chemistry, including polymerization
reactions.