* 0451602
* Collaborative Research: A 3-D Seismic Investigation of the Nankai Trough Plate Boundary System in the Kumano Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2005,10/31/2011
* Demian Saffer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 10/31/2011
* USD 156,572.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI team will acquire, process, and interpret a
high-quality 3-D seismic reflection data volume in the Kumano Basin region south
of Kii Peninsula, Japan. The 3D seismic survey will be carried out in April 2006
by PGS ship R/V Ramform Victory (Norwegian registry), jointly supported by the
NSF and JAMSTEC. These data will define the fundamental geometry, history and
physical properties of the multiple faults that compose the up-dip end of the
seismogenic zone, many of which ruptured in the 1944 M 8.1 Tonankai earthquake.
The proposed work is a major component of the integrated Nankai Trough
Seismogenic Zone Experiment (NanTroSEIZE), including the recently highly ranked
shallow non-riser drilling and the deep riser drilling planned through the
Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP). With ground-truth from drilling and
associated borehole geophysical experiments, this 3D seismic volume will provide
unprecedented illumination of a plate boundary fault system to visualize its
geometry, history, and associated rock properties, as it evolves down dip into a
seismogenic zone. Furthermore, 3D imaging and seismic attribute mapping are
essential components for refining drill site locations and for detailed planning
for drilling and casing operations in support of the most ambitious scientific
ocean drilling operation ever conceived. This project is a collaborative effort
among four U.S. and two Japanese institutions to contract a seismic company to
collect and provide preliminary processing of an ~20x80 km 3-D seismic
reflection grid, along a transect from the Kumano Basin to the frontal thrust of
the Nankai accretionary prism. The study encompasses a number of broader
impacts, including the societal benefit of better understanding the origin of
dangerous subduction zone thrust earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;