* 0451385
* Electrophilic Attack on Coordinated Ligands Involved in Catalysis by Organometallic Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2008
* Jack Norton, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 01/31/2008
* USD 585,000.00

Dr. Jack Norton, Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, is supported by
the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division for mechanistic studies into organometallic catalysis that
involves electrophilic attack on coordinated ligands. Specific objectives
include: (1) developing an effective catalyst for asymmetric C=N hydrogenation
by an ionic mechanism; (2) explaining how coordinated tertiary amines (the
products of C=N hydrogenation) can exchange with the corresponding free amines
more rapidly than they dissociate; (3) developing an effective catalyst for the
hydrogenation of aziridines and epoxides to straight-chain amines and alcohols;
(4) measuring the barriers to enantiomer interconversion for imines, aldehydes,
and ketones that are coordinated to electropositive metals; (5) determining if
the binding of additional ligands to "constrained geometry" zirconaaziridines is
stronger than to zirconocene systems. In connection with (2), a hypothesis that
electron transfer initiates anomalously fast tertiary amine exchanges will be
tested. In connection with (3), a hypothesis that the regiochemistry of hydride
transfer depends upon whether it happens in one-step or in two (i.e., whether
electron transfer and hydrogen atom transfer happen simultaneously or
consecutively) will be tested.

This project addresses issues that have broad important to inorganic chemistry
and to organic synthesis. The project will develop new catalytic methodologies
for the preparation of species that are important in, e.g., pharmaceutical
chemistry. In addition, it will uncover details of how present catalysts
operate. Another important goal of the project is the training of undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students for industrial and academic positions. There
is also an international component to the project because of a regular
interchange of students between the PI's group and that of Prof. G. Erker
(Muenster Germany).