* 0451419
* Collaborative Research: DOP Utilization in the Sargasso Sea: Quantifying Taxon-specific Rates of Uptake and Hydrolysis
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2010
* Sonya Dyhrman, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2010
* USD 324,206.00

Photosynthetic uptake of CO2 by oceanic phytoplankton and the export of the
resulting organic carbon to the deep sea comprise a "biological pump" capable of
extracting globally significant amounts of CO2 from the atmosphere. Mounting
evidence suggests that primary production in two of the larger subtropical ocean
gyres, the Western Tropical/Subtropical Atlantic (Sargasso Sea) and the North
Pacific Subtropical Gyre, may be controlled by phosphorus availability. There
are vanishingly low inorganic phosphorus (SRP) concentrations, sub-nanomolar in
some locales, and ratios of inorganic N:P greatly exceed the canonical Redfield
Ratio in these environments. In these low SRP regions dissolved organic
phosphorus (DOP) may help meet biological phosphorus demand: data collected in
the Sargasso Sea shows a 30% decline in DOP inventories during summer
stratification. The hydrolysis and assimilation of DOP by primary producers is
likely dependent on phytoplankton physiology, and highly variable between taxa,
and through space and time. The investigators hypothesize that despite rapid
turnover times, chronically low and seasonally invariant SRP concentrations at
BATS cannot support measured rates of primary production without utilization of
additional P from the DOP pool. Furthermore, inherent physiological differences
among microbial taxa represent a significant source of temporal and spatial
variability in DOP utilization rates that is yet neither understood nor
constrained. The PIs propose to use proven taxon-specific methodologies to:
quantify temporal and spatial variability in DOP hydrolysis in the Sargasso Sea;
quantify temporal and spatial variability in taxon-specific SRP and DOP uptake
rates; quantify whole-community total P uptake rates as well as SRP and model
compound DOP uptake and regeneration rates; identify factors regulating rates of
DOP hydrolysis and assimilation; and evaluate the role of DOP in supporting
primary production in the Sargasso Sea. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An understanding
of ocean ecosystem function is important on a broad scale. Photosynthetic uptake
of CO2 by oceanic phytoplankton and the export of the resulting organic carbon
to the deep ocean are a "biological pump" that removes globally significant
amounts of CO2 from the atmosphere. This project will help to constrain
predictions of the strength of the oceanic biological pump in the Sargasso Sea.
If dissolved organic phosphorus supports a significant fraction of primary
production in the Sargasso Sea, then diversity in biological metabolic processes
in the central oceans plays a greater role in the global carbon cycle than is
presently recognized. The investigators will sponsor a minimum of three
undergraduate researchers each year, as well as two graduate students. Data
generated from the project will be used in problem-based learning modules for
courses taught by the investigators, and the curriculum will be submitted to an
appropriate digital repository such as www.dlese.org.