* 0451712
* The Comparative Politics of Trade Policy
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Elhanan Helpman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 276,372.00

Patterns of import protection and export promotion vary widely across countries.
So do&lt;br/&gt;methods of industry support. Part of this variation reflects
differences in economic structure and&lt;br/&gt;in the political organization
and activities of industry interest groups. But political
institutions&lt;br/&gt;matter as well. Whereas much recent research has focused
on the relationships between voters,&lt;br/&gt;interest groups, and politicians
that help determine trade policy in a particular political
setting,&lt;br/&gt;much less is known about the role that political institutions
play in the formation of trade policy.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the principal
investigators will examine how variation in political
institutions&lt;br/&gt;translates into predictable and testable differences in
the structure and form of trade protection&lt;br/&gt;and industry
support.&lt;br/&gt;Comparative politics is, of course, one of the core fields in
political science, where it has a long&lt;br/&gt;and venerable tradition. But,
whereas political scientists often focus on the implications
of&lt;br/&gt;different political institutions for political outcomes . such as
the number of political parties that&lt;br/&gt;are active in a country, the
stability of the government, and the representation of minority
groups&lt;br/&gt;. the principal investigators will address the effects on
economic policy outcomes. By studying&lt;br/&gt;the comparative politics of
trade policies, they will contribute importantly to the analysis
of&lt;br/&gt;political regimes. The existing formal models of presidential and
parliamentary democracies are&lt;br/&gt;quite rudimentary and do not allow for
political parties and interest groups as distinct participants&lt;br/&gt;in the
political process. The principal investigators will develop extensions of the
formal theory&lt;br/&gt;that will add significantly to its realism and
domain.&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators are well known for their earlier
research on the political economy of&lt;br/&gt;trade policy. That work,
published in numerous articles and two books, focuses on the role
that&lt;br/&gt;special interest groups play in the policy process. Whereas the
earlier research assumed a&lt;br/&gt;particular, stylized political regime with
a given set of institutions, the principal investigators now&lt;br/&gt;intend to
re-focus their analysis on a comparison of outcomes in different political
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to our understanding
of trade policy formation and of the&lt;br/&gt;importance of political
institutions. The principal investigators will investigate how trade
policies&lt;br/&gt;depend on the strength of party discipline, how outcomes
differ in presidential versus&lt;br/&gt;parliamentary political systems, how
trade policies are affected by electoral rules and by the&lt;br/&gt;organization
of the trade bureaucracy. Moreover, they will examine how the institutional
setting&lt;br/&gt;affects the incentives facing industry lobby groups and will
ask which institutional arrangements&lt;br/&gt;are best able to generate
policies that serve the general interest of the polity. Thus, the
project&lt;br/&gt;will help identify characteristics of the institutional
setting and trade bureaucracy that can&lt;br/&gt;contribute to the formation of
better trade policies.&lt;br/&gt;The project also will develop new conceptual
tools that will help other researchers study the&lt;br/&gt;democratic policy
process for a wider range of economic policies. The results will
be&lt;br/&gt;disseminated widely to the research communities in the social
sciences via journal publication&lt;br/&gt;and participation in national and
international conferences. The authors plan to integrate
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students into the project; they will help to assemble data,
check the analytical results, and prepare&lt;br/&gt;computer simulation models.
In this way, the project will promote the education of the
next&lt;br/&gt;generation of researchers in economics and political science.