* 0451073
* Dissertation Research:  Informating, Eco-Environmental Governance in Beijing, China: Global, Local, and Technoscientific Influences Since 1979
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Kim Fortun, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 12/31/2005
* USD 6,000.00

This Science and Technology Dissertation Improvement Grant requests NSF funds to
support ethnographic fieldwork in China (January-June 2004) based at the Chinese
Academy of Science's Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences. Through
ethnographic interviews and participant observation, the study will work to
answer one main question: Since 1979, how has China's scientific and
technological capacity to monitor and model its urban environment developed, and
in turn shaped policy initiatives and directives? An answer to this question
will be derived from the following three sub-questions: 1) How have
international agreements, pressures and collaborations influenced China's
capacity and expertise in environmental information systems? 2) How have local
political, social, and cultural needs structured development and use of
environmental information systems in China? 3) How have scientific and technical
developments shaped the design and use of environmental information systems in
China? The intellectual merit of this project is its contribution to Chinese
area studies, to the history of technology, to anthropological studies of the
environmental field, and to policy analysis of environmental governance. It will
produce original empirical material and theoretical perspectives on the dynamics
of the environmental field, and on how development of information systems both
support and are driven by policy concerns. The study will have a broad impact
through the circulation of results among pollution researchers and regulators as
the study progresses. Feedback from pollution researchers and regulators will
enable validation and refinement of findings while also influencing how
pollution researchers and regulators do their work. The significance of China as
a key site of environmental governance in the 21st century is widely
acknowledged both within and outside China. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;