* 0451513
* Collaborative Research:  Determinants of Kaizen Event Success and Sustainability
* ENG,IIP
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Eileen Van Aken, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Senich
* 07/31/2010
* USD 221,319.00

This research examines the success and sustainability of using "Kaizen events"
as a mechanism to rapidly introduce change and to create a culture of continual
improvementkai (or zen) in lean manufacturing. Objectives have been defined to
investigate the determinants of initial and longitudinal outcomes, as well as to
compare Kaizen events with a more traditional improvement mechanism (continuous
process improvement teams). Both quantitative and qualitative methodologies
(surveys, operational performance data, observations, document reviews, and
interviews) will be used to collect data from eight manufacturers over a three-
year period. We explicitly including both social and technical system outcomes
and will empirically test claims that Kaizen event use will lead to the creation
of a culture of continual improvement over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Research results will be shared with the collaborating organizations
and industrial consortiums will be used to disseminate the results to a broader
industrial and research community. Members of these consortiums will be able to
use the research findings to design better Kaizen events, with a higher
probability of successfully sustaining outcomes. Also, the research will be
integrated into engineering curricula of both undergraduate and graduate courses
at Oregon State University and Virginia Tech. Both PI's are actively teaching
engineering courses in which lean practices and change mechanisms are explicitly
covered.&lt;br/&gt;