* 0451693
* Technician Support: Phase I Technician Support for AIRIE Program TIMS Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Judith Hannah, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2008
* USD 225,000.00

EAR-0451693&lt;br/&gt;Stein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AIRIE Program (AIRIE),
Colorado State University (CSU), recently acquired funding for a new Multi-
Collector Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer (MC-TIMS). This award provides
three years of support, 80% from NSF and 20% from CSU, for a research technician
dedicated to installation, calibration, and testing of the new MC-TIMS, and
subsequently assisting with methodological innovations to take advantage of
greatly improved analytical capabilities. Technician support will underpin
growth of the Program through increased student involvement, increased Front
Range collaborations, and expansion of global partnerships. New research
opportunities will build on AIRIE's nine-year history of collaborations with
over 250 scientists from industry, government and academia, on projects spanning
five continents. To date, the focus of the Program has been on development,
testing, and application of the rhenium-osmium (Re-Os) molybdenite
geochronometer, with transfer of this technology to the mineral industry for
application in exploration. Improved instrumentation and technical support
broaden the array of both fundamental and applied research opportunities,
including (1) utilization of the molybdenite geochronometer for tectonic
reconstructions and fundamental earth history, (2) exploration of Re-Os
systematics in other ore minerals, including the possibility of direct dating of
tungstates, gold, and other sulfides, (3) investigation of Re and Os
distribution in the lower crust and the behavior of Re and Os during melting and
assimilation of lower crustal rocks to better understand the evolution of
continental crust, (4) further development of methods for Re-Os dating of
carbonaceous shales, providing age control with applications for both the
petroleum and mineral industry, (5) application of Re-Os systematics in
carbonaceous shales to define variations in Os isotope chemistry of seawater
through geologic time, with implications for changes in weathering processes and
the rise of atmospheric oxygen, (6) development and application of new isotopic
systems, especially molybdenum-ruthenium (Mo-Ru) for understanding double-beta
decay and its implications for fundamental problems in physics. &lt;br/&gt;