* 0451274
* US-Japan Cooperative Program on Sensors, Smart Structures, and Mechatronic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Billie Spencer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

0451274 PI: Billie F. Spencer, Jr. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

The objective of this project is to establish a US-Japan Joint Working Group to
develop a bilateral research program in Sensors, Smart Structures, and
Mechatronic Systems that meets the mutual interests and integrates the
respective strengths of the two countries. Advances of enabling technologies
such as information technology, communication and miniaturization coupled with
ever increasing needs for higher performance, increased functionality and
safety/reliability enhancement at reduced costs have set the sensor technology
and the engineering of sensor-based intelligent systems at the threshold of
major growth. The two countries have vigorous research and development
activities in the field, but it requires efforts by both US researchers and
Japanese researchers to identify topics and areas of most effective and
meaningful collaboration. A comprehensive plan will be developed, including
goals and objectives, major research directions and thrusts, anticipated outcome
and milestones, resources needed, and other supplemental information as
industrial and educational components and their values, and practical
applications as they impact on the civil infrastructures, aerospace and
mechatronic systems, and earthquake hazard mitigation. Successful completion of
this effort will facilitate broader international student exchange, technology
transfer thru test bed experiments and transfusion of research data, education
/training of engineers in the region for smart structure design, and promote
smart structures and integrated mechatronic systems activity with regional
industries.

