* 0451333
* Development of 'Eye-in-the-Sea' (EITS), an Unobtrusive Camera System using Far-Red Illumination for Remote in-Situ Observation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2005,02/28/2006
* Edith Widder, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 02/28/2006
* USD 595,404.00

This proposal seeks to explore the new frontier of using low-light-level (LLL)
imaging in combination with far-red illumination in a camera observatory called
Eye-in-the-Sea (EITS). A prototype system has been built and is operational as a
stand-alone battery-powered platform that can be deployed for short periods (~24
hrs). This proposal seeks funds to take this proof-of-concept to the next level.
The new version of the EITS will be designed for use on cabled observatories,
specifically MBARI.s first MARS node, to provide real-time, continuous in situ
measurements of marine activity, record spontaneous bioluminescence activity,
carryout photobehavior experiments, document the pattern of succession at food
drops and monitor sediment accumulation and scouring at the node. Cabled
networks promise to revolutionize the field of oceanography by opening a window
into the ocean. The Eye-in-the-Sea will help to make that promise a reality by
providing real-time video data in a way that will allow us to see without being
seen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One reviewer
commented that use of imagery from the camera will facilitate public outreach
and educational efforts. Widder is an extraordinarily talented communicator with
an exceptional record of outreach activities: teaching, lectures, television
shows, web-based outreach, etc. Dr. Widder has been a master at using diverse
approaches to bringing her science to the public. Another said that the most
important contribution of this project is that it introduces a new tool to the
study of deep-sea benthic communities. Scientists across many disciplines would
be able to benefit from this new capability.&lt;br/&gt;