* 0451199
* Structure and Selectivity of Designed Metallohomeodomains
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Sonya Franklin, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 05/31/2008
* USD 479,164.00

The focus of this work is to incorporate a series of metal-binding loops into a
protein domain, utilizing a modular approach to protein design in which
isostructural metal-binding loops are substituted into a helix-turn-helix (HTH)
DNA-binding domain. The long-term goal is to engineer novel metalloproteins with
tunable hydrolytic activity and DNA sequence selectivity. This work is a
foundation for understanding protein-DNA recognition and the contextual
reactivity of metal-binding loops generally. Specifically, a series of chimeric
proteins will be prepared and characterized to elucidate key design features
involved in protein stability and DNA sequence selectivity. The following three
aims will be addressed:&lt;br/&gt;1) Incorporate an EF-hand metal-binding site
into a HTH domain, and test the optimal size of the turn mutation, the
importance of hydrophobic residues flanking the EF-hand, and the effect of the
EF-hand loop sequence on Ln-binding and domain folding. 2) Determine the
affinity and reactivity of the metallo-homeodomains toward DNA, as a function of
loop position and metal binding. 3) Tune DNA-binding selectivity and affinity by
domain dimerization, by modularly combining recognition units to yield new
specificity. A series of chimeric engrailed dimers will be prepared, comparing
linker length and relative orientation of the domains (head-to-head (disulfide
linkers) vs. head-to-tail with varying poly-glycine linkers).&lt;br/&gt;This
research represents a new biomimetic strategy for investigating metalloprotein-
nucleic acid interactions. This chimeric approach is unique in that it addresses
two functions synergistically (catalysis and sequence targeting), and tests the
underlying principles governing recognition with spectroscopically rich,
hydrolytically active small constructs. Designing an enzyme from first
principles that actually folds and has biological activity serves as a benchmark
of our understanding of protein folding, metalloenzyme active-site reactivity,
and the many subtle factors involved in tuning recognition to yield the
incredible diversity of function seen in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. These studies rely on a diverse, interdisciplinary experimental
approach, which offers students and postdoctoral fellows a multifaceted training
experience. This project provides training in areas ranging from molecular
biology to physical measurements to spectroscopy. Furthermore, students at a
local college (Loras College, Dubuque, IA) will utilize these chimeras in
developing discovery-based Biochemistry labs for upper-level undergraduates,
based on specific point mutations, protein expression, and NMR characterization
of the metallohomeodomains. The engineered enzymes could potentially have
diverse biotechnological applications.