* 0451645
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Understanding the Pair Bond in Callicebus Brunneus: Male and Female Reproductive Interests
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2005
* Marina Cords, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 12/31/2005
* USD 4,605.00

Monogamous systems are rare in mammals, including primates, and understanding
how monogamy evolved and is maintained has been a goal of research for the past
30 years. Of special interest has been the pair bond: why should one male and
one female form an exclusive and enduring attachment? Explanations have
generally centered on three categories of benefits: joint defense of resources,
male mating exclusivity, and the delivery of male services that increase female
reproductive success (e.g. paternal care, protection from predators, infanticide
protection).

Over 13 months at the Los Amigos Research Center and Conservation Area in the
Peruvian rainforest, this project will attempt to differentiate among these
potential benefits by examining the sensitivity of the bond between pairmates of
brown titi monkeys (Callicebus brunneus), a highly vocal and territorial species
characterized by extensive paternal care and a strong attraction between the
adult male and female of a family group. Through the use of observational
sampling and playbacks of unfamiliar calls (simulating intruders), this study
will quantify the behaviors that have indicated pair-bondedness in captive titi
monkeys and correlate changes in these behaviors with differences in the
physical environment (i.e. fruit abundance, territory location) and social
environment (i.e. proximity of a sexual competitor to the subject's pairmate).
As one of the few monogamous primates in which pairs are unambiguously bonded,
Callicebus is ideally suited for the questions of this study, which will be
addressed with a novel combination of detailed behavioral data, food-abundance
data, and playbacks experiments.

This research will be part of a long-term collaborative monitoring and research
project between plant and animal biologists that will directly inform
conservation activities in southwestern Amazonia, one of the most biologically
diverse regions in the world. In addition to directly supporting the training of
a U.S. graduate student, the funding for this study will help to increase
scientific capacity through collaborations with Peruvian scientists and non-
governmental organizations as well as the training of local staff, community
members, and Peruvian graduate and undergraduate students in primate natural
history and general methods of behavioral ecology.

