* 0451014
* Third International Symposium on Computational Cell Biology to be held March 19-23, 2005 in Lenox, MA
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* J. H. Carson, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/2006
* USD 12,000.00

This award is for support of student participation in the "Third International
Symposium on Computational Cell Biology," held March 19-23, 2005 in Lenox, MA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational Cell Biology is a growing interdisciplinary
field that responds to the need for computational methods to analyze and
organize complex experimental data on the structure and function of the cell.
Whereas other meetings in computational biology focus on bioinformatics and
structural biology, this is the only meeting geared specifically to the use of
computational modeling applications in cell biology and that is primarily
targeted to cell biologists. The symposium is being organized by the National
Resource for Cell Analysis and Modeling (NRCAM), located in the Center for
Biomedical Imaging Technology (CBIT) at the University of Connecticut Health
Center. The organizing committee consists of Drs. Leslie M. Loew, Director of
NRCAM and CBIT, John Carson, co-Director of NRCAM, and Ann Cowan, Deputy
Director of CBIT and head of dissemination and training for NRCAM, who chairs
the committee. Previous symposia, held in 2001 and 2003, were highly successful
both in their scientific content and in providing a venue for cell biologists to
interact with theoreticians and computer scientists. The 2005 Symposium
continues to serve as an important focal point for the community of scientists
in this rapidly expanding field. The scientific focus of the meeting is on areas
of cell biology for which modeling approaches are currently being developed or
that are ripe for computational modeling approaches. Topics at the meetings
encompass a range of cellular mechanisms including cytoskeletal dynamics, cell
cycle control, signal transduction pathways, and regulation of calcium dynamics.
The meeting format is an intensive mix of platform sessions, poster sessions and
small workshops and tutorials. The venue is a small resort in the Berkshire
mountains that is limited to a maximum of 125 on-site participants, a setting
and meeting size that is ideal for encouraging individual interactions, and
encouraging active participation by graduate and postdoctoral
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;