* 0451212
* Social, Cultural, Economic and Policy Challenges for Cyberinfrastructure Workshop; Dec. 1-3, 2004; Washington, DC
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Francine Berman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2005
* USD 120,000.00

Cyber-infrastructure refers to the ability to access and integrate today's
hardware, software, and human information technology resources in order to
facilitate science, engineering, research and education goals. In the next five
years, the challenge for Cyber-infrastructure will be socio-cultural and
behavioral dynamics, economics, and policy. The objective of this award is to
hold a hold a workshop that will seek to identify for the SBE and CISE
Directorates at NSF the key problems in the social sciences, economics,
organizational, and policy studies for Cyber-infrastructure. The goal of the
workshop will be to stimulate discussion within and between the communities
served by the SBE and CISE Directorates about Cyber-infrastructure and to
produce a report that outlines some of the key challenges and areas for fruitful
research, development and experimentation by SBE and CISE. Specific goals for
the workshop are&lt;br/&gt;1) To produce a report which lays out a Cyber-
infrastructure research and development roadmap for the SBE and CISE community
and provide a framework for projects and efforts going forward;&lt;br/&gt;2) To
provide a venue for community building within the SBE and IT
communities;&lt;br/&gt;3) To lay out a program for research on the effects of IT
on society and the &lt;br/&gt;dynamics of IT-focused organizations and the
cyber-culture&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;SBE plays a key
role in the development of Cyber-infrastructure. Not only is data and
computational Cyber-infrastructure an enabler for key efforts for SBE
communities, but SBE can play a critical role in the design, development and
culture surrounding the deployment of Cyber-infrastructure itself. A strategic
approach to the development of a body of research, development, and
experimentation that addresses the socio-cultural, economic, and policy
challenges of Cyber-infrastructure will be critical to ensure its success. In
particular, social and behavioral scientists, humanists, organizational, policy
and management researchers, etc. are critical as process builders for Cyber-
infrastructure as well as end users of Cyber-infrastructure. Such communities
have only sporadically been engaged in the development of Cyber-infrastructure
models, social and organizational structures and have a wealth of experience and
context to offer.&lt;br/&gt;