* 0451708
* Microbially Mediated Cycling of Organohalides in Marine Sponges
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Lee Kerkhof, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2009
* USD 610,163.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0451708&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbially-
mediated dehalogenation processes in the ocean contribute to the global cycling
of anthropogenic and biogenic halogenated organic compounds with applications in
both natural products chemistry and in bioremediation. In this study,
researchers at Rutgers University will investigate the dehalogenating bacterial
populations within the sponge animal with the goal of understanding the roles
and metabolic activities of the endomesohyl microbiota. Sponges (Porifera)
harbor large numbers of bacteria that can amount to 40% of the biomass of the
animal, although little is know about the specific roles of the bacterial
populations associated with them. Sponges are known to produce a plethora of
secondary metabolites that may function as chemical defense against predators
and biofouling. Many secondary metabolites are organohalogen compounds that may
constitute over 10% of the animal dry weight of some species. The abundance of
halogenated compounds in sponge tissue and the high bacterial biomass implies
that sponge-associated microorganisms may have the ability to metabolize the
organohalide compounds. The sponge Aplysina aerophoba and related species of the
order Verongida are chosen as a model system because the presence of brominated
compounds is characteristic for this taxonomic group and because this species is
experimentally tractable. The overall working hypothesis is that dehalogenating
bacteria form stable populations within the sponge that function in the cycling
of organohalide compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project
will provide unique research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. Undergraduates will be trained through summer internship programs at
Cook College and actively partake in the laboratory analysis, providing them
with hands on research experience and study on a multidisciplinary topic to
foster both career development and professional placement in diverse scientific
fields. The project will integrate with the new Microbiology undergraduate
curriculum at Rutgers University and employ students from under-represented
ethnic groups through the RISE @ Rutgers program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;