* 0451213
* International Workshop on Structural Health Monitoring 2005
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Fu-Kuo Chang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/2005
* USD 20,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0451213&lt;br/&gt;(Fu-Kuo Chang, Stanford
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to organize and hold an
International Workshop on Structural Health Monitoring at Stanford University,
Sept. 12-14, 2005. Structural health monitoring is an emerging technology, which
combines advanced sensing technology with knowledge of material/structural
response and damage characteristics to monitor the integrity of structures, in
real time, while in service for sustaining their reliability and performance,
minimizing catastrophe and human loss in addition to the reduction of
maintenance cost. It is, therefore, particularly important for civil
infrastructures such as public transportation systems, buildings, highways,
tunnels, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the Workshop are to review
the progress of the current rapid development in the technologies related to the
field, identify key and emerging issues in research and development, and promote
exchanges and cross-fertilization across diverse disciplines: such as sensors,
sensor systems, networking, computing, data mining, diagnostics, prognostics,
signal processing, and multifunctional materials. The workshop will also address
issues involved in practical application for civil infrastructures,
ground/air/space transportation vehicles, and marine structures, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distinguished individuals from industry, academe, and
government will be invited to deliver keynote lectures and presentations.
Product and technology demonstrations will also be exhibited. The workshop will
conclude with panel discussions on key issues and concerns identified during the
workshop. The workshop will produce volumes of proceedings of the technical
presentations. A technical committee consisting of key personnel from
government, industry, and academe will be formed to guide the future development
in the field. The committee will be responsible for developing appropriate
guidelines and recommendations for government agencies and industry to promote
structural health monitoring technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;