* 0451989
* Collaborative Research: Observation and Modeling of Inner Shelf Sediment Dynamics and Large-Scale Sorting: Cross-shelf or Alongshelf Transport?
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2006,03/31/2011
* George Voulgaris, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Midson
* 03/31/2011
* USD 369,695.00

Under this award the PIs will investigate the origin and significance of rippled
scour&lt;br/&gt;depressions or sorted bedforms. These are found on the inner
continental shelves in &lt;br/&gt;relatively coarse sediment, which extend kms
in the cross-shore direction and are on the order of 100 m wide. Previously
these have been interpreted to indicate concentrated cross-shelf currents, which
transport sediment away from shore during storms. However, recent observations
strongly suggest that they are associated with sediment transport along-shore. A
new hypothesis for the origin of these features begins with the observation that
where a shallow seabed is covered by coarse material, that sediment is sculpted
into large wave-generated ripples. Wave motions interacting with these large
roughness elements will generate large-scale, energetic turbulence. This
enhanced turbulence will tend to enhance the entrainment of fine sediment, and
to inhibit its redeposition locally. Then, any mean current will tend to advect
the fine sediment to a location where the bed is finer, the wave-generated
ripples are smaller, and the turbulence is less energetic. Starting from a
nearly homogeneous seabed, these interactions will tend to preferentially remove
fine sediment where the bed is coarser, and to preferentially deposit it where
the bed is finer, producing accumulations of fine material separated by self-
perpetuating coarse domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research to test the
hypothesis that this feedback and subsequent interactions between sorted
features could produce large-scale sorted patterns with the characteristics
observed in nature will consist of two linked parts: 1) field measurements of
turbulence and suspended sediment concentrations, using tripod-mounted
instruments located in both coarse and fine domains on a well-studied shoreface
off Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina; and 2) development of a numerical model
simulating these processes and the evolution of the seafloor. The field program
will rigorously characterize interactions between coarse concentrations and
sediment entrainment and deposition. Field data would subsequently be used to
direct and constrain model development. This model will investigate what
sediment-transport relationships that arise from the small-scale processes, and
what environmental conditions, are sufficient to produce bedforms similar to the
features observed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;