* 0451509
* Internal and Relative Topologies for Multi-Resolution Vector Data
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Barbara Buttenfield, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2009
* USD 179,400.00

The search for a robust vector-based, multi-scale geospatial data architecture
has challenged GIS and cartographic communities for decades. The successful data
model must generate representations at multiple resolutions that preserve line
length, local coordinate density, and correct topology. All three are
prerequisite to robust spatial analysis and modeling. In particular, the
solution must preserve internal and relative topologies. Internal topology means
that (for example) stream channels must connect at their confluence, at every
level of resolution. Relative topology preserves feature registration between
layers: the road feature in one layer must register to the river feature in
another layer at the bridge feature in a third layer. Preservation of internal
and relative topology at multiple levels of resolution confounds many aspects of
GIS-based spatial analysis: simply stated, if features are "conflated" (if they
do not register spatially) it becomes difficult to assess spatial relationships
that underlie most GIS investigations. This project will implement a pyramid-
based vector data architecture along with algorithms for retrieval and data
management. The first phase of research implements algorithms for simple
vectors, compound vectors (e.g., stream tributaries) and multi-layer vector
archives (e.g., roads and hydrography) and demonstrates them on a public domain
website that delivers example vector files at progressive resolutions. The
second phase addresses core intellectual questions about the nature of
geographic information whose content and structure vary with resolution, by
embedding uncertainty metrics in the data pyramid that can help to automatically
determine if vector data representations at two resolutions are in fact
different, and if independently compiled vector datasets contain essentially the
same content or unique details across a range of resolutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will benefit human and physical geographers,
by facilitating access to important vector datasets, as for example historical
GIS datasets of US Census boundaries dating back to 1790. It will validate
general purpose geospatial data products such as USGS National Map, by reducing
costs of compiling and maintaining numerous 'single purpose' vector databases at
resolutions tailored to special purpose applications. The website demonstrating
progressive vector data delivery will show how the pyramid architecture can
reduce delivery times for very large data archives. The research will refine
current metadata practice that assumes positional accuracy is uniform throughout
a vector archive.&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding of internal and relative
topology in scale-dependent data will support creation of robust, multi-scale,
topologically correct vector databases. Broader impacts will improve choices
about selecting GIS data at appropriate levels of detail, and about integrating
geospatial data sets compiled at discrepant resolutions. &lt;br/&gt;