* 0451240
* Biomechanics of Chromosome Structure and Dynamics In Living Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Kerry Bloom, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 06/30/2009
* USD 403,343.00

The research team will study the biophysical properties of specific chromosomal
domains and the role forces play in their function throughout the cell cycle.
DNA and RNA polymerases generate considerable force (up to 40pN) during
processes of replication and transcription. During mitosis, microtubules attach
to centromeric regions to provide the motive force for chromosome segregation.
The tension generated by microtubule attachment (~20pN/microtubule) between
sister centromeres of replicated chromosomes is critical to the mechanisms that
ensure the fidelity of chromosome segregation upon anaphase onset. Thus
mechanical force plays a critical role in DNA metabolic processes. However,
excessive force (&gt;10pN) can inhibit chromatin assembly in S-phase and
breakage of chromosomes with two centromeres (dicentric chromosomes) in mitosis.
It is therefore likely that forces on chromosomes are spatially as well as
temporally regulated throughout the cell cycle. Recent experiments have
addressed the amount of force required to stretch DNA and displace nucleosomes
in vitro. These experiments reveal different DNA-protein interactions around the
nucleosome core and enhance our understanding of the enzymatic processes that
require access to nucleosomal DNA. In this project they will isolate specific
chromatin domains and determine the biophysical properties of distinct regions
of the chromosomes. They will apply force to chromatin to measure the force-
extension relationships for centromeres, euchromatin and telomeric sequences.
Intellectual Merit: Using this approach, they will dissect the DNA sequence and
protein structural contributions to the biophysical properties of specific sub-
chromosomal domains. In addition, they have identified proteins that recognize
DNA under tension. By examining the force extension curves for specific
chromatin domains in cells lacking these components they will establish the
genetic requirements for specific force extension signatures. They expect this
work to lead to a Force-extension map for an entire eukaryotic chromosome. This
approach will provide the first biomechanical view of the chromosome and will be
critical in understanding how energy and structural information is stored.
Broader Impact: This research will be integrated into education and outreach
through three venues: a networked molecular manipulation project to K12
students, through integration into an undergraduate science perspective course,
and through an extensive undergraduate research program. The first program
allows K12 students to manipulate real molecules (DNA, Viruses) under an AFM
that is located remotely at UNC. In a typical year this program reaches over 200
K12 students, allowing undergraduates and graduate researchers the experience of
mentoring and exciting K12 students. The science of forces in mitosis will be
included as a section in a science perspective class, "How Things Work" taught
to over 250 non-science majors each year. For undergraduate research,
educational goals will focus on integrating research and teaching activities to
give students the tools to evaluate and employ new technologies. About 6
students will study forces in mitosis within an intensive research-based program
over the course of the grant.