* 0451089
* The University of California Diversity Initiative for Graduate Study in the Social Sciences (UC-DIGSSS)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* George Breslauer, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2008
* USD 978,669.00

The University of California consortium composed of University of California at
Berkeley, Los Angeles, and Santa Barbara (UC-DIGSSS) is uniquely poised to
increase the number of underrepresented minority students who enter the
professoriate in the social and behavioral sciences. As the first initiative of
its kind involving the social sciences, the broader impact of this program will
be not only to increase the number of underrepresented minority students
prepared or the professoriate at University of California campuses but also to
influence similar initiatives for recruiting and retaining underrepresented
minority students in the social sciences at other institutions. The intellectual
merit of this proposal lies in the new models and strategies put forth in the
proposal aimed at building a supportive environment conducive to increasing the
number of underrepresented minorities entering the professoriate in social
science disciplines. By virtue of housing top ranking departments in the social
sciences, showing a strong record of commitment to increasing underrepresented
minorities in Ph.D. programs and ultimately the professoriate and leveraging the
strengths of the three campuses in its counterpart, AGEP (Alliance for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate) in science, technology, engineering, and
disciplines, UC-DIGSSS seeks a synergy that will promote strategies and
practices that are innovative, cost-effective, and sustainable. To gain greater
momentum in the recruitment of underrepresented minority students, UC-DIGSSS
focuses on the following five strategies: 1. Form partnerships with minority
serving institutions so as to increase the applicant pool, by developing
longitudinal relationships with minority serving institutions across
administration, faculty, and staff. 2. Build upon the extensive alumni network
of University of California graduates at institutions across the country in
order to identify potential underrepresented minority graduate students and to
mentor students who are already on the pathway to the Ph.D. 3. Mentor
underrepresented minority students with one-on-one research traineeships with
faculty in the early stages (first three years) of the graduate program in order
to help build research skills and to create strong bonds with faculty mentors
early on. 4. Improve retention by focusing on community building and help
students overcome academic hurdles through seminars and workshops throughout all
stages of the graduate program, including written and oral qualifying exams,
finding a dissertation topic, preparing the dissertation proposal, and applying
for professional employment. 5. Support graduate research by encouraging
academic skills building, participating in conferences, and conducting field
research. UC-DIGSSS expects concrete project outcomes to include an increase in
the number of underrepresented minority students entering the Ph.D. programs in
the social, behavioral and economic sciences by 50 percent or more (by 2007), a
decrease in time to degree from seven to six or five years, an increased
retention, increased visibility and dissemination of new methods for recruiting
and retaining underrepresented minorities in the social sciences to other
campuses, and a significant increase of underrepresented minorities in the
social science professoriate.

