* 0451848
* Community Variation in the Disposition of Criminal Cases: The Role of Social, Cultural, and Political Context
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,10/31/2007
* Eric Baumer, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/2007
* USD 120,752.00

SES-0451848&lt;br/&gt;Eric Baumer&lt;br/&gt;University of Missouri Saint
Louis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine whether the
outcomes of criminal cases are shaped by features of the communities in which
they are processed. Specifically, drawing from a variety of theoretical
perspectives, the project examines whether legal sanctions applied to criminal
defendants are more severe in jurisdictions characterized by higher levels of
fear, greater public support for punitive measures of formal social control, a
larger concentration of political conservatives, higher or lower levels of
social capital, and relatively more whites who perceive blacks to be threatening
or who hold prejudiced attitudes toward blacks. In addition to examining the
direct effects of these community attributes, the project will explore whether
they help to interpret the effects on legal outcomes of structural factors such
as population composition, racial inequality, segregation, religious
composition, region, and rates of violence. The influence of these aspects of
community social, cultural, and political context on felony case outcomes will
be examined at four stages of the criminal justice process: prosecutorial
screening, the pretrial detention decision, adjudication, and sentencing. These
issues will be examined with multilevel and nested logit regression analyses of
data on felony cases from the State Court Processing Statistics (SCPS) program
and the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) murder arrest file, and community-
level (i.e., county and Metropolitan Area) data from the General
&lt;br/&gt;Social Survey (GSS) and a variety of other sources that capture the
legal, social, cultural, and political context in which these cases were
processed. The project contributes significantly to existing research by
developing and incorporating measures of the proximate community conditions
believed to influence outcomes at various stages of the criminal justice process
and by evaluating some of the most often stated reasons for why more distal
community structural factors are believed to shape those outcomes. The project
holds promise for enhancing our understanding of geographic differences in the
disposition of criminal cases and for developing and modifying theories of the
application of law. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will yield several broader
impacts. The project will integrate research and educational activities by
facilitating the training and mentoring of a graduate student who will
participate in all phases of the research and who will help plan and teach
graduate and undergraduate methods courses organized around the themes examined
in the proposed study. These courses will significantly enhance the social
science curriculum at the host institution, and they will help broaden the
participation in research of historically underrepresented groups, particularly
women and African Americans. The courses will be developed and taught with the
dual objectives of engaging students in the specific research issues addressed
in the project and of stimulating and encouraging students to consider pursuing
careers in research and teaching. The project also will yield broader impacts
for the infrastructure for social science research by using the GSS in an
innovative way to construct more direct measures of the community-level
conditions emphasized in the theoretical literature. &lt;br/&gt;