* 0451263
* Political Institutions and Economic Development, 1800-2000
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2007
* Adam Przeworski, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2007
* USD 110,200.00

The aim of the project is to re-examine the impact of political institutions on
economic development by collecting and analyzing data going back to the early
nineteenth century. The central question is whether -- by securing property
rights, coordinating investment, or rendering rulers accountable to citizens --
political institutions affect the pace and the patterns of development. The data
will cover on an annual basis the period from 1800 to the present for all
countries that existed at any time after 1918. These data will combine
originally collected information about political institutions and events with
economic and social statistics from existing sources. While the impact of
political institutions on development has recently become a subject of intensive
scrutiny, these studies have not succeeded in resolving problems due to the
possibility that institutions may change as a consequence of development. To
confront the econometric difficulties arising from the endogeneity of
institutions, it is necessary to consider the entire historical experience of
each country: its colonial background, if any, the institutional framework
inherited or established at independence, the original place of the country in
the international division of labor, and the subsequent political and economic
transformations. Moreover, since every econometric approach is based on
particular assumptions, a variety of techniques must be utilized to assess
whether the answers are robust. Broader Impacts The contribution of the project
should be threefold. First, it should elucidate the joint dynamics of political
institutions and economic development, hence clarifying the role of specific
institutional arrangements in promoting or blocking the development of
productive inputs and technological change. Secondly, the project will generate
a unique database containing detailed information about historical
transformations of modern political institutions. This database should be of
general interest to researchers seeking to understand the impact of history on
subsequent political and economic trajectories of particular countries. Finally,
the project should cast light on the policy issues entailed in transferring
political institutions to different contexts.

