* 0451850
* Effects of Base Rate, Environmental Uncertainty, Values, and Feedback on Accuracy and Performance in Selection and Detection Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Thomas Stewart, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2009
* USD 229,131.00

Many important decisions are based on cutoffs. For example, a doctor may
suspect, but not be sure, that a child has an ear infection. The doctor's
suspicion is a judgment based on the child's symptoms, and antibiotics will be
prescribed if that suspicion is strong enough, that is, if it is above some
cutoff. Other "cutoff" decisions are police deciding to arrest suspects, juries
deciding guilt or innocence, airport security deciding to detain passengers,
emergency managers deciding to evacuate a hurricane-threatened area, and
personnel managers hiring job applicants. In each case, the decision to act or
not is based on a judgment that must be made under uncertainty. Decisions can
result in two kinds of error: acting when inaction is more appropriate or not
acting when action should be taken. Such errors can be costly and can never be
avoided entirely, but understanding their causes can contribute to reducing
them.

This project will investigate how people learn to make cutoff decisions when
their feedback is limited. Feedback is limited when decision makers do not find
out if they made the right decision. Often the decision itself eliminates the
possibility of feedback. For example, personnel managers rarely find out if
applicants not hired would have been good employees. The research will be
conducted using a new laboratory procedure designed to simulate decision-making
conditions. Important properties of decision making situations will be varied,
including the amount of uncertainty, the probability that the event of interest
occurs, and the costs and benefits of errors and correct decisions. This project
will establish a new paradigm for studying an important class of decisions, will
apply that paradigm to critical issues of human decision-making performance, and
will potentially lead to methods for improving performance.