* 0451068
* The Earth Science Storybook Project:  An Intervention Strategy for Teaching Science to Pre-service Elementary School Teachers
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Barry Bickmore, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 01/31/2009
* USD 217,602.00

Poor attitudes toward science and inadequate science content knowledge among
elementary school teachers significantly detract from the education of young
children in the United States. Teachers with inadequate content knowledge
sometimes teach scientific concepts in a false or misleading way, while those
with poor attitudes toward science might pass on similar attitudes to their
students or neglect to teach science at all. The Earth Science Storybook Project
(ESSP) is a program designed as an "intervention" strategy to improve the
attitudes toward science of pre-service elementary teachers during a one-
semester college class. Pre-service teachers are mentored through the process of
creating a storybook that teaches an earth science concept for K-4 students.
These storybooks are then professionally illustrated by Visual Arts students and
formatted for free distribution on the internet. Broader impacts of this study
should include 1) the enhancement of attitudes toward science and science
education for hundreds of pre-service elementary teachers, 2) the increased
involvement of women in science, 3) a Ph.D. dissertation, and 4) a long-term
effort in the BYU Geology department to promote educational studies by
university science professors. In addition, the project includes very aggressive
outreach and dissemination strategies. For example, students will be required to
present their stories during an outreach program at a local elementary school,
which has Title I status and 60% student turnover each year. 75% of the students
in this school qualify for free or reduced price school lunch, and 60% of the
students come from homes where English is not the primary language.
Dissemination of the results of this study and associated educational products
will take place at several academic conferences. In one or more academic
journals, on the internet in conjunction with the DLESE and state educational
clearinghouses, in e-mail lists and newsletters for five local school districts,
at a BYU-hosted science fair, and at the state educational association
conference.