* 0451510
* Conformations of Biomolecules by Advanced Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Methods
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Tatyana Smirnova, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2010
* USD 647,929.00

This research project is aimed at understanding fundamental roles of
intermolecular interactions in self-assembly and structure-function
relationships in multicomponent protein systems. Specifically, the project will
investigate how specific lipid-protein interactions can influence transmembrane
protein structure and dynamics and how metal ion-protein interactions can
trigger large scale structural changes in viruses. The project will use three
viral systems: Sindbis virus, Tomato Bushy Stunt virus (TBSV), and Red Clover
Necrotic Mosaic virus (RCNMV). Investigation of interactions between
phospholipid bilayers and small peptides mimicking the transmembrane domain
glycoprotein of enveloped virus will be carried out to define constraints placed
upon membrane-spanning domains for correct integration into the bilayer and to
elucidate the effects of residue-sequence mutations and specific lipid-peptide
interactions on peptide transmembrane assembly and dynamics. The research will
elucidate the molecular mechanism and the role of divalent metal ions in
triggering large-scale structural changes in plant viruses and its effect on
dynamics of viral capsids. Those questions will be addressed by nitroxide spin-
labeling EPR, High Field EPR, and by using manganese ions as a spectroscopic
probe for the calcium ions. The High Field EPR methods developed in the course
of this project will be suitable for studies of other calcium-binding systems
and for investigation of membrane-associated and transmembrane
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project will enhance the EPR
infrastructure for research at NCSU; the project will support further
development of the state-of-the-art multifrequency EPR facility that will be
available for the researchers in diverse areas of chemistry, materials and life
science. The project will develop new High Field EPR methods in areas of
molecular and structural biology and plant pathology through proposed
collaborations. The project will also result in multi disciplinary training of
students from under represented groups, especially women, in application of
sophisticated biophysical techniques in virology.