* 0451285
* RUI:     Frequency-Dependent Modulation of Hippocampal Neural Circuit in Freely Moving Rats
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2004,12/31/2005
* J. Harry Blaise, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 12/31/2005
* USD 72,644.00

0451285&lt;br/&gt;Bronzino&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will contribute to
developing a clear understanding of how local neural circuits respond to various
inputs in determining how information is processed globally in the brain. The
hippocampal formation, a brain structure intimately involved in learning and
memory processes, is involved and the proposed studies are designed to quantify
the modulation of a specific neuronal circuit within the hippocampal formation
when it is subjected to different inputs (i.e., tetanization paradigms with
varying burst frequencies). The investigators hypothesis is that modulation of
the dentate cellular response is dependent upon the "burst frequency" of the
tetanization paradigm activating this neuronal circuit. This is important as the
pattern of firing in the perforant path consists of trains of 4-6 action
potentials occurring every 25 ms, thereby sending a bursting pattern of
activation to the dentate granule cells of the hippocampal formation.
Tetanization of the medial perforant path (one of the major input pathways to
the hippocampal formation) has been shown to induce long-term potentiation (LTP)
in the dentate granule cell layer. This neural circuit serves as the first leg
in the hippocampal trisynaptic circuit and such modulation influences the gating
of neuronal transmission into and through the hippocampal formation; it
therefore may play an important role in the development of learning and memory
both in early life and throughout adulthood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigation is a unique partnership of the fields of biomedical engineering
and neurobiology, melding the approaches and techniques of both disciplines to
provide important insights regarding the performance of neural circuits capable
of modifying their responses as they mature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
obtained from the experiments to be conducted are expected to have benefits
beyond the immediate studies. First, the miniaturized stimulation and recording
methodologies that are to be developed to record bioelectric data in the freely
moving pre-weaning animal can be used by others in a wide variety of
applications. Second, the data acquired can be utilized to extend this line of
research in the future.