* 0451259
* Improving Citizen Participation in Deliberative Decisions: Understanding and Evaluating Different Sources of Knowledge
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* Robin Gregory, Decision Science Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/29/2008
* USD 295,000.00

This research seeks to develop a more rigorous basis for understanding,
evaluating, and making use of different sources of knowledge as part of
consultations that contribute to decisions about environmental management
policies. Along with sound science, appropriate attention also must be given to
the knowledge held by community and aboriginal participants, whose insights
often represent a useful, and in some cases essential, complement to science-
based knowledge. To establish the integrity of the deliberative process,
however, there is a need to ensure the quality and relevance of all knowledge
claims. This research therefore will address three practical questions: what new
methods can help to evaluate and communicate inferences based on different types
of data or observations; how can decision-aiding techniques help to consistently
incorporate the insights of both scientists and local knowledge holders; and how
can the better integration of science and local knowledge help participants in
deliberative processes (and, in turn, decision makers) to address uncertainty
and learn over time? The research will take place at four sites. It will involve
tests of promising techniques, critical analyses focusing on how (and how well)
science and local knowledge are used as part of environmental consultations, and
workshops, interview-based surveys, and detailed probability elicitations with
agency-based scientists, local and traditional knowledge holders, and decision
makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key intellectual merit of the research is its
contribution to the understanding and use of alternative knowledge sources as
part of consultations involving multiple stakeholders, with an emphasis on
providing insights to participants and decision makers about preferred
environmental management options. The broader impacts of the research include
improving deliberative decisions by enhancing the quality of available
information and by improving methods used by regional, state, and federal
agencies for explicitly and consistently incorporating the uncertainty
associated with different knowledge claims. This, in turn, should reduce
societal conflicts as exposed through failed consultations, assist in
communication between scientists and other participants in risk-management
debates, and aid the democratization of these processes by encouraging the
participation of often-frustrated community and traditional knowledge holders.