* 0451843
* Embodiment Awareness, Mathematics Discourse, and the Blind
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* David McNeill, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2010
* USD 749,839.00

When we speak, our embodied behavior of gesture, gaze, posture, and facial
expression are brought into the service of the communicative process. This
research is grounded in psycholinguistic theories of multimodal human
communication. One path from multimodal behavior to language is bridged by the
underlying mental imagery. This spatial imagery, for a speaker, relates not to
the elements of syntax, but to the units of thought that drive the expression
(vocal utterance and visible display). Gestures reveal the focal points of the
accompanying utterances, and relate to the meaning of the newsworthy elements of
the unfolding discourse. This is the underlying premise of the current project,
in which the PI will focus on math discourse and education for blind
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical reasoning is rich in spatial imagery
that is revealed in gesture. Furthermore, gesture has the capacity to create
images of the math concepts that serve as "objects of contemplation." When a
graphic/illustration is available for math instruction, the discourse stream is
typically situated with gestures of spatial reference into the graphic. Research
with individuals who are blind suggests that they have remarkable capacity for
visual imagery, memory, and conceptualization. However, students who are blind
tend to lag behind sighted students in mathematics education. The PI posits that
a significant impediment to math instruction for students who are blind lies in
the lack of visual access to the embodiment of the instructor. He notes that we
have, in such students, a population that is able to access graphical content
(through tactile image technology), but is not visually aware of the embodied
behavior of the interlocutor. He proposes to remedy this problem by affording
blind students a sense of embodiment awareness, with the help of augmentative
communication approaches that employ tactile devices to provide elements of
embodiment awareness. To this end, the PI will perform a series of "perception
and action" experiments to assess the efficacy of such devices, followed by a
second series of experiments with blind and sighted students in mathematics
instruction, to be captured on video, and with pre- and post- tests, to assess
the quality and quantity of imagistic content both conveyed by the teacher and
by the student in the course of the instruction, and to determine the
correlation, if any, between these and the formation of math conceptualization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project should have significant
direct impact on inclusive mathematics instruction at all grade levels for
visually impaired students; provision of a sense of embodiment awareness to
students who are blind has not hitherto been studied, and has the potential for
empowering such students. Furthermore, understanding the channels for embodiment
awareness will affect the design of future distance learning systems, and will
afford insights on how best to provide embodiment cues to students in Internet-
based instruction.