* 0451293
* REU SITE:  Harvey Mudd REU Site on Artificial Intelligence, Systems, and Optical Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Ran Libeskind-Hadas, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 04/30/2009
* USD 286,209.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CNS-0451293&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ran Libeskind-
Hadas&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Harvey Mudd College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU
Site: Harvey Mudd REU Site on Artificial Intelligence, Systems, and Optical
Networking&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a new Research Experience
for Undergraduates site focused on the areas of artificial intelligence,
systems, and optical networking. Cohorts of undergraduate students from the
greater Los Angeles area participate in a ten-week summer research program at
the host institution. The project includes mentorship by the experienced
computer science faculty members, weekly presentations and seminars, and
laboratory visits and other professional development opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in strong research basis
and the expertise of the faculty. The projects are in major current research
areas that are of interest to the community at large and that have clear
practical applications. The students participate in a full range of research
activities from preparing research literature reviews to production and
dissemination of research results.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the project include providing a quality research experience to undergraduate
students, particularly students from underrepresented groups. The participating
faculty members are committed to engaging women and under-represented minority
students in their research. The partnership with nearby campuses in the
California State University system should enable recruitment of a diverse set of
students who might not have access to similar experiences on their own campuses.
Thus this project has the potential to produce new computer science graduate
students and faculty members and to advance discovery and understanding while
promoting learni&lt;br/&gt;