* 0452785
* Dissertation Research:  Manufacturing Peace:  Conflict and Cooperation in an Indonesian Marine Park
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2007
* Celia Lowe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2007
* USD 11,980.00

This dissertation project by an environmental anthropology student from the
University of Washington will examine historical, social and political processes
of conflict and cooperation within the management of Bunaken National Park, a
marine protected area in North Sulawesi, Indonesia. In the past five years,
intense opposition to the park has mounted, culminating in an uprising that
occurred in January 2004. Through a detailed ethnographic analysis of this high
profile, culturally and ecologically diverse marine park, this research explains
how local people have articulated their responses to seascape transition and
secondly, presents a detailed analysis of the ways that elites have represented
these responses.&lt;br/&gt;Marine protected areas are now amongst the most
common ocean conservation methods promoted throughout the tropics. However,
conflict surrounds every facet of these projects, directly correlating with
their high failure rate. This research seeks to illuminate political processes
of this representation and local action by drawing substantially from resistance
and social movement theories, focusing on peasant resistance to modernizing
schemes, and political ecology theory, focusing on cooperation. Using
qualitative and quantitative methods - ethnographic research combined with a
household survey and document and archival analysis - it will extend theoretical
frameworks developed to examine conflict to analyze cooperation in order to
question taken-for-granted assumptions about marine conservation and the meaning
and practice of marine conservation in the developing world. Broader impacts of
the new knowledge created by this research involve helping marine policy makers
to design more effective marine protected areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;