* 0452613
* Taxation, Retirement Saving, and Investor Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,09/30/2013
* James Poterba, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 159,401.00

Intellectual Merits &lt;br/&gt;One component of this project investigates how
taxes affect investor decisions about which&lt;br/&gt;assets to invest in, and
when to buy and sell those assets. The project will begin with an analysis
of&lt;br/&gt;dividend taxation and portfolio choice. The 2003 tax reform reduced
the individual income tax burden&lt;br/&gt;on dividend income by more than any
other tax change in the post-war period. This tax change could have important
implications for the willingness of high income, and otherwise high marginal tax
rate, investors to hold dividend-paying stocks. Comparing data from various
Surveys of Consumer Finances will provide insight on the way household
portfolios have adjusted to the new tax regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will also investigate how tax rules on capital gain distributions from
mutual funds affect&lt;br/&gt;investor behavior. It will use a data set on
trading patterns by investors in a mutual fund complex to&lt;br/&gt;explore
whether taxable investors are less likely to buy fund shares just before a
taxable distribution.&lt;br/&gt;A second part of this project will analyze the
market valuation of assets and liabilities in&lt;br/&gt;corporate defined
benefit pension plans. . This project will investigate how the equity market
values&lt;br/&gt;over- and under-funded corporate pension plans, and consider
how this valuation pattern may affect firm decisions about the amount to
contribute to their pension accounts. Taxes and ERISA regulations have created a
time-varying set of incentives and requirements for funding defined benefit
pension plans. Prior to the mid-1980s, firms were able to withdraw excess assets
from over-funded pension plans, and many firms used their pension plans as
vehicles for making tax-free financial investments. Beginning with the Tax
Reform Act of 1986, however, excise taxes which are now set at 20 percent were
levied on distributions of pension plan assets from overfunded plans. This
project will explore how the stock market reacted to these taxes, and whether
investors assigned greater value to the excess assets in over-funded plans in
the early 1980s than in subsequent years.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the last component
of this project will explore the operation of annuity markets,&lt;br/&gt;which
are an important source of retirement income security and will probably become
even more&lt;br/&gt;important in the future. One component of this research will
investigate the extent to which&lt;br/&gt;differences between the mortality
rates of annuitants and the population at large can be traced
to&lt;br/&gt;socioeconomic differences between annuitants and non-annuitants,
rather than to private information that annuitants have about their potential
future mortality. A second component of this work will explore how changes in
the set of characteristics that insurance companies are able to use in pricing
policies, such as the elimination of gender-specific retirement annuities
following the Supreme Court's Norris v. Arizona decision in 1983, affects the
efficiency of annuity markets.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The aging of
the U.S. population suggests that issues related to saving and the provision
of&lt;br/&gt;income in retirement will grow increasingly important, both as
concerns for policymakers and as&lt;br/&gt;topics for research in applied
economics. All of the research subprojects described in this proposal are
concerned with understanding how public policies, particularly taxes, affect
wealth accumulation and the adequacy of retirement income support. Studying how
the tax treatment of dividends and the tax rules governing mutual fund
distributions affect household portfolios is a building block for broader
analysis of the efficiency cost of taxation. Since more than 36 million
households own taxable mutual funds, the distortions associated with mutual fund
taxation may now influence a substantial group of investors. The research on the
valuation of corporate pension assets and on the operation of annuity markets is
related to an ongoing national debate on retirement income security. The recent
prospect of several large under-funded corporate pension plans being transferred
to the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC) has led to calls for
regulatory changes with regard to corporate pension contributions. Part of this
research will provide input on the potential determinants of corporate pension
contributions, while the other work, on annuity markets, will generate insights
on the possible role of annuity markets in financing the draw-down of assets in
individual account Social Security systems.