* 0452744
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative Investigation of Finestructure and Internal Waves in the Norwegian Sea from Simultaneous Temperature and Acoustic Reflectance Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* W. Steven Holbrook, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/29/2008
* USD 181,743.00

ABSTRACT OCE-0452744-0452265

Oceanic finestructure can be imaged in great detail using low-frequency (10-150
Hz) seismic reflection profiling. In September 2003, a joint
hydrographic/seismic imaging survey of oceanic finestructure was conducted,
acquiring temperature and salinity data on 110 XBT.s and 12 XCTD.s as a low-cost
piggyback to a previously scheduled seismic reflection study in the Norwegian
Sea. Initial results showed that the reflection method (1) is sensitive to fine-
scale temperature contrasts as small as 0.03 C; (2) can image finestructure from
M2 internal tides and map the sites of M2 internal tide generation; (3) can map
water-mass boundaries in great detail; (4) can produce quantitative internal
wave spectra that reproduce the expected Garrett-Munk spectrum and deviations
from it; and (5) can image disruptions in finestructure consistent with internal
wave on critical continental slopes.

This proposal will focus on analysis of the data, targeting the following
questions: (1) How can we best extract quantitative information on internal wave
displacement spectra and vertical coherence from acoustic images of
finestructure? (2) What are the characteristics of the internal wave field in
the thermocline of Norwegian Sea, and are there systematics with depth, distance
from continental slope, and bottom topography? (3) Is high-wavenumber internal
wave energy enhanced at sites near critical continental slopes? (4) Where are M2
internal tides generated on the Norwegian continental slope, and are there
systematics with slope angle and tidal cycle? (5) What is the relationship of
imaged reflectors to the geostrophic velocity field? (6) What is the shape of
the deep water mass boundaries revealed in the various sections?

This work is a logical next step in determining the capabilities and limitations
of low-frequency acoustic imaging to study ocean structures and dynamics.

