* 0452567
* Playful Invention and Exploration (PIE) Institute: Professional Development Opportunities for Informal Educators
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Samuel Dean, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 03/31/2010
* USD 1,987,626.00

The "Playful Invention and Exploration (PIE) Institute" is a three-year project
to increase the capacity of museum educators and exhibitors to design and
implement technology-integrated inquiry activities for the public. The
collaborators include the Exploratorium, MIT Media Lab, Science Museum of
Minnesota, Fort Worth Museum of Science and History, Explora Science Center and
the Children's Museum of Albuquerque. The deliverables include a portfolio of
technology-rich activities, professional development institutes, online educator
resources and a handbook of pedagogical design principles for museum educators.
This project builds upon prior NSF supported work that developed the PIE
Network, which among other things developed the "cricket," an inexpensive
computer that makes informal learning inquiry activities more compelling. This
project has the potential to impact both the theory and practice of informal
science education in museums. It will implement new theories and tools that
represent a new approach to engaging and supporting visitors' learning
experiences using play and experimentation that mirrors the processes of
laboratory investigation. It also provides an innovative model of collaboration
that develops and implements a major complex project by bringing together
science centers with unique and complementary expertise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;