* 0452862
* CROSSTEX - Swash Zone Hydrodynamics and Sediment Transport
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Philip Liu, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2009
* USD 739,998.00

0452862

This proposal is a part of the Cross Shore Sediment Transport Experiments
(CROSSTEX), designed as a multi-investigator project that is focused on cross-
shore sediment transport processes in the coastal zone. CROSSTEX consists of
three sub-group projects that address different coastal sediment transport
processes, including sheet flow transport in the swash zone, suspended transport
in the inner and outer surf zone and short-term morphological changes. These
projects are interconnected by the nature of the problems to be studied and by
the conducting of an integrated and shared experiment in the large wave flume at
the Oregon State University (OSU).

This project specifically seeks a better understanding of small-scale sediment
transport processes in the swash zone. The instantaneous fields of concentration
and fluid and sediment particle velocity will be measured in the sheet flow
layer and these measurements and the directly calculated turbulent statistics,
including the particle stress, will be used to test existing two-phase sediment
transport models and to guide their further development. To achieve the
objectives, an integrated experimental, theoretical and computational research
program is proposed. Dr. Philip Liu will lead a research team to develop
simulation models based on the two-phase Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS)
equations. In collaboration with other research groups in the CROSSTEX, a series
of near prototype scale experiments will be conducted in the large wave flume at
the OSU. A new Fiberscope Measurement System (FMS) will be designed with a
remotely controlled positioning device. By adopting quantitative imaging
techniques, such as particle imaging velocimetry (PIV), simultaneous high-
resolution measurements of both fluid and sediment particle velocities can be
obtained. Dr. Edwin Cowen will be responsible for the design and performance of
the FMS. Broader Impacts: The research is at the interface between several
fields of science and engineering- fluid dynamics, oceanography, geology, soil
mechanics, and applied mathematics- and will serve as a bridge among them. All
graduate students involved in the project will receive cutting-edge training in
mathematical modeling, numerical methods, and experimental techniques. The
numerical models to be developed will be useful as research tools for many
related engineering science fields and can be employed to investigate wave-
induced soil failures, scouring around coastal structures, debris flows, and
sand dune migration. The laboratory data will be used to benchmark other
numerical models under current or future development. A project web site will be
developed to disseminate the results broadly in addition to publishing
manuscripts in the peer-reviewed literature. The research program will have
significant impacts on our academic programs. Several upper-level undergraduate
and graduate student courses at Cornell will benefit significantly from the
research program, as the instruments developed in this project will be used in
these courses and the experimental and numerical results will be included in the
course material. We will also make every effort to directly expose undergraduate
students to the research. Oregon State University is currently an REU site. At
Cornell, the PIs and REU participants will work with staff members of the
Sciencenter on exhibits on both the mechanics of sediment deposition and scour
in rivers and along coasts. At Oregon State University, the PIs also have good
working relationships with the local aquarium and science museum and will
distribute distilled versions of CROSSTEX to them. Finally, the processes
leading to sediment transport in the swash and the methodology developed in this
study are relevant to sediment transport caused by tsunamis.

