* 0452332
* Tuskegee University Research Experience for Undergraduates Site in Material Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Melissa Reeves, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 08/31/2009
* USD 203,480.00

Abstract for Reeves, 0452332:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This awards supports an REU
site, Research Experience for Undergraduates in Material Science and
Engineering, at Tuskegee University, based on Tuskegee's PhD program in Material
Science and Engineering (MSE). It funds eight student participants each year for
three years in a 10-week summer program. The interdisciplinary nature of MSE
makes this program open to students majoring in Aerospace Engineering, Chemical
Engineering, Chemistry, Electrical Engineering, Mathematics, Mechanical
Engineering, or Physics. The main pool of students recruited for this summer
program comes from science and engineering majors at Historically Black Colleges
and Universities (HBCU's), including Tuskegee University, attendees at LSAMP and
AGEP conferences, and the HBCU-UP National Conferences. The objective is to
increase the number of minority students involved in research and also to
increase the number of minority students entering graduate programs in Material
Science and Engineering or other areas of science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the program arises from the
students' involvement in advanced MSE research. The broader impact is the
increase in minority undergraduates involved in this field and continuing to
advanced degrees and related professional participation. While the primary
recruiting effort is aimed at students in HBCU's, all interested students are
welcome. Research in MSE at Tuskegee University is highly interdisciplinary but
focused particularly on developing new materials. The individual research
projects include use of natural/renewable resources for new materials, polymer
and nanocomposite modeling, study of interfacial properties in adhesives
andnanophased systems, thermal and mechanical characterization of materials,
mechanical testing, new electronic materials, and manufacturing of composites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the researchers associated with this project are
also participants in the Tuskegee University NSF CREST center in Nanocomposite
Manufacturing. In addition to performing a research project, students will be
exposed to seminars and be given training in searching of literature, and
technical writing and presentations. A weekly seminar series includes five weeks
of interactive lectures on research ethics conducted by a member of the Tuskegee
University National Center for Bioethics in Research and Health Care as well
technical seminars on a variety of scientific and technical topics. Tuskegee
University, through its HBCU-UP grant, has been providing a one-credit
Introduction to Research course as part of another summer program (CReATE). This
class is expanded to include the REU students, hence providing formal training
in technical writing and presentations. Students complete their summer by
submitting a final report and giving oral presentations in a research symposium.
&lt;br/&gt;