* 0452163
* Environmental Variability and Evolution of Virus Specialists and Generalists
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Paul Turner, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 02/28/2010
* USD 682,338.00

Whereas some viruses can easily shift to infect new host populations, other
viruses remain confined to their original host. This research examines the
environmental factors which cause viruses to be specialists that infect few
hosts or generalists that attack a variety of hosts. This goal is accomplished
using experimental evolution of Vesicular Stomatitis Virus in laboratory
culture. The first major objective is to see if different patterns of host
availability affect whether specialist or generalist viruses will evolve, and
can be used to predict which viruses are more likely to shift to new hosts in
the future. Second is to identify the changes to the virus genome that are
associated with evolved host shifts. Third is to determine whether populations
of specialist and generalist viruses differ in the rate at which they evolve.
Methods include techniques from a variety of disciplines, including molecular
biology, population genetics, genomics and evolutionary
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project results can be applied to several
systems because viruses are important disease agents in wild and domesticated
populations of animals and plants. The project virus resembles many vector-borne
human viruses (such as West Nile Fever Virus); thus, the project should help
elucidate environmental factors promoting viral host shifts into human
populations. &lt;br/&gt;