* 0452380
* Collaborative Research: Large Eddy Simulations of Estuarine Mixing
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Ugo Piomelli, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2009
* USD 223,283.00

OCE-0451699/04521740/0452380&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Large Eddy Simulations
(LES) will be conducted to investigate turbulent mixing processes in estuaries
and coastal oceans. Temperature and salinity equations will be added to an
advanced LES code that has been validated in engineering flows. The model will
include LES equations generalized to incorporate large-scale density and
pressure gradients, non-uniform meshes in two directions, allowing for fine
resolution of the stratified pycnocline and other regions of interest, and an
immersed-boundary method to represent variable-bottom bathymetry and curvy
coastlines. This LES model will investigate three important mixing processes in
estuaries: (1) asymmetric tidal mixing due to baroclinic pressure gradient and
tidal straining; (2) mixing and lateral circulation in a straight, stratified
channel with transversely varying bottom depth; (3) topographically-forced,
localized mixing in hydraulic transitional flows near channel constrictions.
Finally, we shall use the LES model to simulate a segment of the Hudson River
estuary and compare the model results with recent dye-release experiments; the
velocity and scalar fields obtained from the LES will be used to interpret
observations collected in this partially-mixed estuary. The objectives of the
proposed research are to elucidate turbulent mixing processes in stratified
estuarine flows and to extend LES modeling techniques to horizontally-
inhomogeneous estuarine and coastal flows affected by varying bathymetry and
shoreline geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Understanding
turbulent mixing in stratified shear flows is a fundamental problem in physical
oceanography. Partially-mixed estuaries are an excellent natural laboratory for
studying stratified turbulence, and elucidating key turbulent processes
affecting salt and momentum transports in estuaries will shed light on the
important mixing problem. LES techniques have been used successfully to
investigate oceanic boundary layers; however, they are generally limited to
horizontally-homogeneous flows in simple geometries. The methodology to be
developed in this project can be used to tackle a wide range of turbulent mixing
problems in coastal oceanography and generate turbulence data for calibrating
and improving turbulence parameterization schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: The proposed study will lead to improved representations of turbulent
mixing processes in regional ocean models, which are used to predict sea level,
currents, water quality, contaminant transport, and ecosystem productivity in
estuarine and coastal environments of societal concerns. Biogeochemical state
variables can be added into the model to investigate ecological hotspots such as
harmful algal blooms in estuaries and coastal oceans. The project will provide
training for a graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow to acquire advanced
numerical skills for solving oceanographic problems.&lt;br/&gt;