* 0452460
* The Impact of New Varieties on Domestic and International Prices
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2012
* David Weinstein, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2012
* USD 349,993.00

One of the most important measurement challenges facing macroeconomics,
international economics and urban economics concerns how to properly measure
aggregate prices when varieties appear and disappear. We have long known that
the creation and destruction of products exerts a profound impact on our
standard of living. A proper cost-of-living index would measure the expenditure
needed to maintain a certain level of utility and therefore should reflect the
invention of new (and different) goods even if the new items sell for the same
price as existing ones. Statistical agencies around the world, however, compute
price indices from formulas that do not capture this effect. This project aims
to solve this problem for a substantial share of consumer expenditure.
Specifically, this research will obtain the first structural estimate of the
impact of variety and quality growth on prices and welfare across a broad range
of products. The main objective is to generate a utility-based aggregate price
index that can be used as a benchmark to better understand how the US and other
countries have benefited from the increase in varieties available to consumers.
A major part of this effort includes the use of a new database that provides
sub-brand-level data for a large fraction of the goods that comprise the US CPI.
The investigators intend to explore these gains along two dimensions. One way in
which consumers can increase their choice of goods is through international
trade. Trade with other nations allows consumers to choose from a variety of
goods that are not available to them domestically. Over the last several decades
there is evidence of spectacular growth in the number of traded varieties. The
number of varieties imported by the U.S. -defined as the import of a particular
10-digit HTS good from a particular exporting country - has risen by a factor of
four. Furthermore, preliminary results for a wider range of countries suggest
enormous growth in imported varieties among fast growing and liberalizing
countries. This explosion in traded varieties raises two important questions
that the investigators seek to answer: 1) How much do conventional import price
indexes around the world overstate import price inflation by not taking new
goods and varieties into account? and 2) What are the world gains from trade
from the growth in imported varieties? A second source of variety growth comes
from the increase of domestic varieties. This project aims to compute a variety
adjusted aggregate price index that covers roughly 25 percent of the goods
available to US consumers. Using a unique database that gives us access to the
whole universe of packaged goods (i.e., over 2 million Universal Product Code
goods), the investigators will describe the extent of product creation and
destruction at the product level on an annual or quarterly frequency.
Furthermore, the availability of price and quantity at this level of aggregation
will allow the investigators to calculate the price and welfare impact of new
domestic varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The investigators
intend to disseminate the results from this research through the publication of
articles and the participation in conferences. In addition, the investigators
will make available a dataset with elasticities of substitution as well as
supply elasticities available to researchers on a website. The investigators
have already had a large number of requests for elasticities from their work on
the US and believe that there is enormous interest in these estimates. They
intend to make their data and parameter estimates available to future
researchers. Third, the investigators have also discovered that there is
enormous media interest in understanding the gains from variety and believe that
their results are likely to be widely reported. Finally, the investigators plan
to work with statistical agencies and monetary authorities to help improve the
measurement of prices and formulation of policy. This research will also have a
cross-disciplinary/cross-institutional dimension as well. First, some of the
work will be performed in cooperation with the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center.
In addition, a part of the research will be conducted at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York. This will aid the bank in its efforts to improve the formation
of monetary policy.&lt;br/&gt;