* 0452756
* Algebraic and Stochastic Models of Structures Arising in Utility Theory and Psychophysics
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* R. Duncan Luce, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/2009
* USD 215,000.00

The research concerns the modeling of choices between, and judgments about,
uncertain and risky options. It involves both algebraic modeling of a sort that
has been actively studied for many years, but where important improvements are
still possible, and probabilistic modeling to accommodate the somewhat
inconsistent behavior apparent in such choices and judgments. Four of the
algebraic problems are: (1) Provide a fundamental behavioral model
(axiomatization) of the general linear weighted utility representation. Although
many models are of this type, a general understanding of the behavioral
properties that give rise to it still is lacking. For instance, a behavioral
formulation of Birnbaum's Transfer of Attention Exchange model is needed. (2)
Understand at a deeper level the assumption that two gambles are independently
realized, which is often invoked in these theories. (3) Although often
mentioned, little has been done to understand the utility or disutility of
uncertainly itself. Following non-axiomatic work of Meginniss (1976) in the
context of risk, the investigator in collaboration with others has been working
on an axiomatization that yields a linear weighted utility plus a constant times
a standard measure of entropy. This needs further clarification and development.
(4) Develop more fully models of mixed gains and losses, which often are
postponed in favor of the simpler cases of either all gains or all losses.
Turning to probabilistic models, the investigators' approach is designed to
supplement and improve the existing literature that focuses mainly on the random
analogue of one-dimensional measurement. The crux of the problem is to deal with
interlocked structures, such as gambles and their joint receipt, and, in
particular, to gain what amounts to a random version of the (algebraic
distribution) laws that interlock two structures. Attempts to resolve this type
of problem have not been very satisfactory, except for the recent sophisticated
axiomatization of a probabilistic version of expected
utility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will impact the sciences, including
economics, management science, psychology, and statistics, that examine
individual decision making under uncertainty. Sensory psychophysicists also
should benefit because the formal results of utility theory can be applied,
sometimes with modifications, to the measurement of subjective intensity. The
social importance of the developments in utility theory lies largely in the
advice that is given by decision analysts to clients in areas such as investment
and medicine. Up to now, such advice has typically been based on rational
theories such as subjective expected utility. With a deeper understanding of the
ways in which traditional theories have failed to capture people's goals, we can
expect considerably improved advising.&lt;br/&gt;