* 0452652
* Does Microbial Ecophysiological Response to Long-Term Environmental Change Control Ecosystem Carbon Storage?
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2008
* Teresa Balser, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ann Russell
* 01/31/2008
* USD 149,961.00

This proposal is designed to increase our understanding of the role played by
soil organisms in carbon cycling under changing environmental conditions. One of
the largest gaps in our understanding of ecosystem functioning lies in our
understanding of how soil communities are impacted by environmental changes, and
how these impacts feedback to alter plant community dynamics. Few studies have
explicitly investigated the impact of multiple global change drivers on
microbial communities and their control over carbon dynamics. In this study, we
propose to quantify the long-term response of the microbial community to a suite
of global change drivers, and test a conceptual model predicting carbon flow and
fate in soil under elevated CO2 at the Jasper Ridge Global Change Experiment
(JRGCE) facility. We will directly link carbon utilization and soil community
composition using compound-specific 13C isotope signatures of microbial lipids,
and will assess long-term changes in microbial functional potential. By
increasing our understanding of the soil biological component, the results of
this work will enhance our ability to predict ecosystem response to global-scale
anthropogenic changes. In particular, it will increase our understanding of what
controls soil carbon sequestration. Further, this project will be important in
creating synthesis and synergy among research groups studying the effects of
global-scale changes on terrestrial ecosystems. This type of interdisciplinary
interaction is becoming increasingly important in studies of anthropogenic
global changes.