* 0452325
* Second Round of the Collaborative Research Network - CRN II
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2013
* Gerhard Breulmann, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2013
* USD 10,423,946.00

The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) is an
international treaty organization, created to coordinate and promote scientific
research related to global change in the Americas. The Institute has an evolving
Science Agenda identifying particular areas for research that have been defined
by the scientific community of the Americas. The Science Agenda is complementary
to the research priorities of the US Climate Change Science Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support the second round of the IAI
Collaborative Research Program (CRN II). The program supports 10-12 regional
research networks addressing global change issues of regional relevance that
advance the understanding of global change phenomena and their socio-economic
impacts. All projects are highly interdisciplinary. Each network involves
Principal Investigators and Co-Investigators from institutions in at least four
IAI member countries (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Chile,
Colombia, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Ecuador, Jamaica, Mexico, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, USA and Venezuela). The networks were selected on the
basis of submitted proposals evaluated for technical merit using a peer-review
system. Results from this research will be available to the US scientific
community, as a condition of US funding, through an electronic data and
information system. The IAI receives additional support for its activities from
the other Parties. This additional support takes the form of direct
contributions to the IAI Budget, in-kind contributions, or in-kind contribution
pledges made at the time of proposal submission in the form of investigator
salaries, ship-time, computer time, logistical support,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is integrative, involving the natural and
the social sciences in a collaborative way and seeking to provide sound
scientific understanding of global change issues in support of sustainable
development in the region. CRN II promotes applied science with a focus on
emerging issues and themes that have not been dealt with under previous IAI
programs or that are not yet (fully) explored. The CRN program brings together
multinational and multidisciplinary teams of researchers to carry out regional-
level research projects that no one country or institution could carry out
individually. The collective research capacity of the participating institutions
is huge, making possible an entirely new structure for participation in
multinational and multidisciplinary projects focused on global
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the individual projects contribute
to the development and strengthening of regional capacity to deal with global
change. The program provides a scientific basis for documenting, understanding
and projecting changes in the Earth system, and specifically to facilitate the
full use of scientific information in policy and decision making. CRN II
includes a strong capacity building component in terms of graduate and post-
graduate education and enhancement of institutional infrastructure, and also
promotes the participation of scientists from countries with less developed
global change research communities. The first round of CRN showed that the
multinational component of the projects provides an excellent opportunity for
dialogue and exchanges among top researchers, students, decision makers and
institutions from across the Americas, which in many cases led to partnerships
that lasted and evolved far beyond the end of the individual CRN I projects. CRN
II also promotes partnerships with other regional and/or international projects
and programs, for example those of the Earth System Science Partnership (ESSP).
Under the first round of CRN, those linkages were very effective not only in
terms of coordination of associated efforts, but also as a medium to distribute
the results of CRN science to a very broad audience. The synthesis of CRN II
will be done through a technical synthesis for the scientific community and a
non-technical synthesis for policy and decisions makers. This second synthesis
is part of the IAI's strategy of communicating scientific information, models,
and conclusions to and among researchers, educators, students, resource and
industrial managers, policy makers and the public.