* 0452547
* REU Site:     Creating Computer Applications for Medicine
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Alfred Weaver, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 12/31/2008
* USD 298,775.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CNS-0452547&lt;br/&gt;PI: Alfred
Weaver&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
REU Site: Creating Computer Applications for Medicine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project creates a new Research Experience for Undergraduates site focused on the
development of new computer applications for medicine. Cohorts of undergraduate
students participate in a ten-week summer research program engaging in a current
medically-related research project at the host institution. Through their
research the students should improve the quality of healthcare delivery by
devising, developing, adapting, or inventing computer-based solutions to modern
medical problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
lies in strong research basis and the expertise of the collaborative partners
participating in the project. The project team includes faculty with significant
expertise in engineering and engineering ethics as well as medical doctors to
oversee the medical aspects of the projects. The students in the project have
the opportunity to work with teams to develop solutions to problems that are
relevant and critical in an emerging interdisciplinary field that combines
computer science and medicine.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
project include providing a quality research experience to undergraduate
students, particularly students from underrepresented groups. The project
provides community college students an opportunity to engage in research and
actively pursue a full range of professional opportunities. Thus, the project
has the potential to produce new computer science undergraduate and graduate
students as well as future faculty members. The project team of computer science
faculty, engineering ethics faculty, and physicians provides each student cohort
a broad exposure to the technical, medical, ethical, and social issues related
to their problems. Thus the project represents a quality educational and
professional experience, which is innovative and challenging to the
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;