* 0452254
* REU Site: Harvard Forest Program in Forest Ecology: Multi-Scale Investigations of a Forested Ecosystem in a Changing World
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Aaron Ellison, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2011
* USD 748,648.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the Harvard Forest REU
Site in Forest Ecology are to (1) Enhance the ability of students to undertake
high-quality interdisciplinary research in a collaborative, collegial
environment; (2) Encourage students to link fundamental and applied issues in
their research; and (3) Cultivate the next generation of ecological scientists
and educators that reflects the diversity of backgrounds and experiences of
students in the United States. Students are involved in a summer research
program with a central focus on the ecology of invasive species, through which
they will learn how a single broad topic can be approached in depth from
different scientific directions and with a variety of methods and techniques.
Students interact with each other and with leading scientists from many
institutions, all of whom conduct research at the Harvard Forest Long-Term
ecological research site. Students and their mentors conduct investigations on a
diversity of taxa - from microbes to forest trees - using tools and techniques
of genetic analysis, plant and animal physiology, population biology,
experimental terrestrial and aquatic community ecology, and ecosystems analysis
and modeling. The Harvard Forest Summer Research Program recruits a diverse
applicant pool, with particular emphasis on students from cultural and ethnic
groups that are traditionally underrepresented in scientific careers. In
addition to research, students attend lectures and workshops to enhance their
understanding of forest ecology and to improve their verbal and written
communications skills. Student research is disseminated widely, as posters and
oral presentations at regional and national scientific meetings and through
publications in the peer-reviewed literature. The Program incorporates an ethics
component that introduces students to ethical issues. Particular attention will
be paid to the experiences of students from groups that are underrepresented in
scientific careers. More information is available at
http://harvardforest.fas.harvard.edu/education/reu/reu.html, or from Edythe
Ellin, Director of Administration, Harvard Forest, PO Box 68, Petersham,
Massachusetts, 01366; Telephone 978-724-3302; email
ellin@fas.harvard.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;