* 0452815
* International Relative Prices in Micro-Founded Models of International Trade
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Andrew Atkeson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2011
* USD 274,372.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Prop ID: SES-0452815&lt;br/&gt;P I: Atkeson, Andrew G.
&lt;br/&gt;Organization: National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
&lt;br/&gt;Title: International Relative Prices in Micro-Founded Models of
International Trade &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two main parts. The
first part develops a model of the response of international relative prices to
productivity and monetary shocks. The model will be designed to explore the
potential of some new findings in international trade and shed light on some
major puzzles in international macroeconomics. This model is motivated by the
recent evidence uncovered in micro data on international trade that national
markets for tradeable goods are in fact quite segmented. Researchers have found
in manufacturing census data (manufactured goods are typically regarded as
tradeable) that only a minority of manufacturing firms actually export any of
their production at all. What is more, of that minority of firms that do export,
they export only a small fraction of their output. These researchers and others
have built models to account for these observations that assume that there are
costs to trading manufactured goods internationally. This project extends a
model with such costs to consider its implications for fluctuations in
international relative prices. There will be three versions of the model - with
perfect, Bertrand, and Cournot competition. This project will determine whether
a model that matches these important observations on the pattern of trade at the
micro level can account for the puzzling observation that a large fraction of
the fluctuations in real exchange rates across countries can be accounted for as
fluctuations in the relative price of tradeable goods. This finding in the data
has attracted a lot of attention since it sharply contradicts the conventional
view that the Law of One Price (or if not that, at least relative PPP) should
hold for tradeable goods and hence there should be no fluctuations in the
relative price of tradable goods. The project also determines whether this model
can account for several important features of the data regarding fluctuations in
the relative price of goods that are actually traded as measured by the export
and import price indices that together make up the terms of trade. These
features include the extent of pass-through and pricing-to-market and the
implications of incomplete pass-through for the magnitude of the fluctuations in
the terms-of-trade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the second part, the investigators
will purchase and analyze new micro supermarket scanner data from Argentina,
Brazil, and Uruguay that will allow us to examine the response of pricing and
expenditure at a very disaggregated level in response to large changes in
exchange rates. Large devaluations are natural laboratories where import-price
pass-through, pricing to market, and switching of expenditure from imported to
locally produced goods can play an important role. The investigators focus on
three recent large devaluations: Argentina (December 2001), Brazil (January
1999), and Uruguay (June 2002).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
behavior of international relative prices is one of the central puzzles of
international macroeconomics. It is essential to develop a firm understanding of
these fluctuations to evaluate monetary and exchange rate policy. This project
will also develop a new micro dataset on international prices that should be
useful to other researchers for a broad range of questions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;