* 0452364
* Estimation of Cross-sectional and Panel Data Duration Models with General Forms of Censoring (Revised)
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* Shakeeb Khan, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2006
* USD 44,742.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prop ID: SES-0452364&lt;br/&gt;P I: Khan, Shakeeb
&lt;br/&gt;Organization: University of Rochester &lt;br/&gt;Title: Estimation of
Cross-sectional and Panel Data Duration Models with General Forms of Censoring
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual merit of the proposed activities
is the development of new econometric and statistical methods for conducting
estimation and inference in duration models. The statistical models considered
in this proposal are motivated by particular features of duration data, which
often arise in empirical settings. For example, censoring often arises in time-
to event data, for a variety of reasons that are usually a consequence of the
empirical researcher's observation or data collection plan. Unemployment spell-
length may be censored because the agent is lost from the sample, or to control
data collection costs, unemployed agents are only followed for short period of
time. If they are still unemployed at the end of this period, their spell length
is censored. The estimators introduced in this proposal will permit a general
form of censoring, in the sense that they permit the censoring variable to
depend in an arbitrary way on the observed variables that explain the duration
length. This is motivated by, (but not restricted to) a specific empirical
setting. With certain welfare programs, such as those in TANF (Temporary
Assistance to Needy Families), entitlement depends on individual labor market
histories. In this case, duration until one finds employment would be censored
at the period when entitlement expires. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
general forms of censoring, the proposal includes new estimation procedures for
models encountering other features of duration data encountered in practice. One
such class of duration models is those for panel data, where the researcher
observes multiple times-to-event, either for the same individual, or for
different individuals within the same group, i.e. either family members, or
firms within the same industry. Generally speaking, panel data allows
researchers to control for unobserved factors that cannot be controlled for in a
cross-sectional data set. In the context of durations models, this proposal
suggests a new estimator for a panel data model which allows for a very general
form (in this case spell specific) censoring. The other components of this
proposal develop estimators for duration models which exhibit the following
features: doubly censored data, duration models with time varying covariates,
and stock sampled duration data, all of which have been encountered in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project provides applied
economists with new tools to conduct inference in duration analysis. Duration
models are widely applied in practice in a variety of fields in applied
economics, since they are used to address important policy issues, such as the
effect of welfare reform, tax incentive effects on retirement, and the incentive
effects of unemployment insurance. Duration models are also used in labor,
development, public finance and finance. The new methods introduced here, and
the software code will be made available on the investigator's
website.&lt;br/&gt;