* 0452932
* Neuropsychology of Risk Perception and Risk Taking
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2007
* Elke Weber, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 114,909.00

Economists, psychologists and neuroscientists have proposed a wide range of
models of people's choices when confronted with risky options that describe how
such decisions should be made (normative) or how such decisions appear to be
made (descriptive). However, the actual processes by which such choices are made
remain an open question. Recently, neuroscience researchers using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) have begun to examine how the human brain
encodes information about some of the variables used by many models of risky
decision making. These techniques have been used to identify neural signals that
may be related to both the material and emotional consequences of choices, and
can thus inform controversies between competing descriptive theories of risky
decision making.

We will use neuroscience evidence to test between different theories or models
of behavior in two areas of considerable interest to researchers and policy
makers: (a) the nature of risk perception and its role in risky decision making,
and (b) differences in the way people make risky decisions when basing them on
repeated personal experience with the outcomes of choice options vs. basing them
on statistical summary information about the choice options, typically provided
by others. Our investigation of risk perception and risky choice will relate
levels of brain activation in areas known to be involved in risk judgments and
risky decisions to choice set characteristics and to observed judgments and
choices. This will enable us to test between competing models of risky choice
and to investigate the neural determinants of individual differences in risk
perception and risky choice. Future studies will take such insights and apply
them to risky decisions from description and uncertain decisions from personal
experience made in clinical populations, in particular by schizophrenics and
young substance abusers. The will help to build a neural process model of risky
decision-making in normal adults, which can serve as a foundation for
understanding the neural sources of impaired decision making in clinical and
other at-risk populations.