* 0452573
* The Intraparty Dimension and Legislative Representation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Matthew Shugart, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2008
* USD 192,511.00

A central question in political science is the nature of representation. The
literature has long recognized that the representation of local and national
interests is often contradictory. Furthermore, it has long been recognized that
electoral systems, the formal rules that govern the process of voting and
assigning legislative seats, are crucial to affecting the balance between local
and national representation in democracies. The primary purpose of this project
is to advance knowledge of how the "intraparty dimension" of electoral systems
affects representation. The intraparty dimension concerns rules that affect the
ways in which legislators and legislative candidates relate to their party
organization, and to constituents. To date, most literature on electoral systems
has focused on the interparty dimension, i.e. the &lt;br/&gt;translation of
votes into seats for parties. This project focuses on the intraparty dimension
by collecting, coding, and analyzing data at the level of the individual
legislator/candidate, both in the form of biographical data (birthplace,
political experience, occupation, etc.) and votes obtained by candidates and
their ranks on party lists (where relevant, as in proportional-representation
systems). Thus, the intellectual merit of the proposed research is to develop
theory and data applicable to the intraparty dimension of legislative
representation. &lt;br/&gt;A principal way in which electoral systems affect the
local vs. national balance is through the incentives given by the rules for
legislators and legislative candidates to cultivate a "personal vote," typically
defined as that part of the vote that is based on a candidate's personal
characteristics, experience, and service to constituents, rather than his or her
party affiliation. Whereas parties are the primary vehicles for the
representation of broad interests, including national issues, candidates often
articulate their personal votes through a focus on more local or otherwise
parochial concerns. Preliminary results of related research by the PI have shown
that variations in electoral systems on the intraparty dimension affect the
attributes of legislators under proportional-representation (PR) elections. For
instance, the higher the degree of intraparty competition, the more likely
legislators are: (1) to be native to the district they represent, and (2) to
have electoral experience prior to entering the legislature. &lt;br/&gt;This
investigation builds on these preliminary findings by (1) collecting additional
data on &lt;br/&gt;the countries for which the PI has undertaken preliminary
research, (2) extending the data collection on legislators to additional
countries, including both proportional and nonproportional electoral systems,
and (3) collecting, coding, and analyzing data at the intraparty level,
including votes for candidates in systems that entail intraparty competition,
and ranks on party lists for PR systems, on a wide range of democracies.
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research are of at least three
forms. First, the project will result in an extensive data set on legislators
and intraparty voting and list ranks, which will be made available to other
scholars and the general public for academic, research, and noncommercial
purposes. Second, it will contribute to the professional development of graduate
students, through employment as graduate student researchers. Third, extending
political science research on the intraparty dimension will improve knowledge
about the impacts of electoral reforms that are being contemplated in many
countries, both established and transitional democracies, or may be contemplated
in the future. The United States is among the countries in which there is
increasing interest in the effects of electoral systems on the intraparty
dimension. There is ongoing experimentation at the local level with alternative
electoral rules, often as a result of Voting Rights or reapportionment
controversies. At present, the discipline of political science has limited
practical advice to offer regarding the effects of electoral systems on the
intraparty dimension. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;