* 0452885
* Collaborative Research: Connectivity of Reef Fish Populations: Mechanisms and Consequences
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2008
* Gabriele Gerlach, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

The larvae of most reef fishes disperse from the natal reef soon after hatching
and return to the reef environment after a pelagic stage of several days to
weeks. Ocean currents were assumed to disperse larvae widely, resulting in broad
genetic connectivity between reef populations. In some recently studied cases,
connectivity appears to be more limited and self-recruitment (settlement on
natal reefs) more common than previously assumed. This may be the result of
favorable hydrographic conditions, perhaps aided by a behavioral component of
larvae using swimming and sensory capabilities to stay in proximity to a reef by
using appropriate currents. Preliminary data on the genetic structure of the
cardinalfish Apogon doederleini show significant differences between reef
populations at the geographical scale of 7 to 18 km. Genetic differences between
reefs using a hydrographic model would have predicted panmixis. This suggests
that larval behavior plays an active role in retention and self-recruitment.
This project will determine the genetic population structure of three reef fish
species with different larval biology and study mechanisms of dispersal and
recruitment behavior. The objectives are: (1) Determine in two consecutive years
the degree of genetic substructure and its temporal stability of fish within and
among reef clusters at spatial scales of approx. 10 to 20 km based on three
species with different dispersal biology. (2a) Determine whether pre-settlement
juveniles of the three species differentiate between odors of hydrographically
more or less connected reefs and (b) Determine the temporal stability of their
reef odor preference. (3) Extend the hydrographic dispersal model for different
source populations among the proposed reef clusters and compare the results with
connectivity results from genetic analysis and odor preference tests. For
genetic analysis, geographic distances and dispersal links and barriers will be
studied using DNA microsatellite markers, centered around One Tree Island in the
Capricorn/Bunker group of reefs in the Great Barrier Reef, Australia. The
hydrographic model of the OTI region will be employed to predict dispersal by
advection. Genetic substructure and reef odor preference in settling
larvae/juveniles of three species will be compared: Acanthochromis polyacanthus
(no pelagic stage), (b) Apogon doederleini (pelagic, weak swimmers) and (c)
Pomacentrus coelestis (pelagic, strong swimmers). A mini-flume for odor choice
tests will be used on-board ships in which single settlement stage fish have
shown significant odor preference for specific reefs.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merits are demonstrations of 1) the scale of genetic substructure in coral reef
fishes impacting concepts about the scale of reef connectivity, 2) differences
between hydrographic dispersal predictions and genetic population structure, 3)
olfactory capabilities of reef fish larvae to discriminate between odors of
closely linked reefs, 4) possible connections between odor preference and
genetic population structure suggestive of early imprinting and retention near
natal reefs. Broader impacts are in 1) coral reef conservation and management
(connectivity, water quality), 2) training of the next generation of scientists
in biological oceanography, behavioral ecology, evolution and (marine)
conservation, 3) international collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;