* 0452328
* REU--An Undergraduate Research Program on the Elwha Dam Removal and Restoration Project in Washington State
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2010
* William Eaton, Peninsula College
* Continuing grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2010
* USD 597,210.00

The removal of two dams on the upper Elwha River in Washington State, officially
described as a salmon restoration project, will begin in 2007, and will change
the ecosystem dramatically for re-entry of salmon into the upper river. It is to
be the largest dam deconstruction and habitat restoration project conducted and
is ranked as the second most urgent restoration priority by the National Park
System. The removal of the Elwha dams presents an unprecedented REU Site setting
at Peninsula College (PC) for 16 students per year to address fundamental
ecological questions never before studied in this context and scale, associated
with nutrients and trophic webs, succession, aquatic and terrestrial habitats,
and fluvial processes operating within a wild salmon watershed. A consortium,
consisting of scientists from PC, Western Washington University/Huxley College
of the Environment (Huxley College), Olympic National Park (ONP), USGS
Biological Resources Division (USGS BRD), NOAA Fisheries Northwest Fisheries
Science Center (NWFSC), and Lower Elwha Klallam Tribal (Elwha Tribal) has been
created to study the watershed before, during and after dam removal. Sixteen
students per year will work with consortium mentors to investigate restoration
management regimens while exploring fundamental questions in ecology, wildlife
sciences, and restoration ecology. Students will be involved in a year-long
course (Fall through Summer Quarter) that includes over 100 hours of course
activities and 400 hours of research on the Elwha system, working as full
participating members of the consortium. The research projects will focus on
analysis of a variety of parameters in the Elwha ecosystems throughout the year,
identifying mechanisms and indicators of changes in population distribution and
abundance; predicting changes in these populations due to dam removal; and
providing information on the effects of dam removal and restoration projects for
use worldwide. Interested students should contact Dr. Brian Hauge, REU Student
Advisor (brianh@pcadmin.ctc.edu) or Dr. Bill Eaton, REU Project leader
(bille@pcadmin.ctc.edu) for more information. Information is also available at
http://pc.ctc.edu/academics/artssciences/life_sciences/research.asp.

