* 0452927
* Linking Archaeal Membrane Lipids and Ecology in Great Lakes: Understanding the TEX86 Paleotemperature Proxy
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Randall Hicks, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2009
* USD 537,294.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0452927

Paleotemperature is difficult to measure in great lakes systems. The recent
establishment of the relationship between crenarchaeotal membrane lipids (GDGTs)
and mean annual lake surface temperature provides a powerful and much needed
lake temperature reconstruction tool. Unfortunately, very little is known about
the ecology of the Crenarchaeota from which these GDGT compounds are derived.
Many questions remain before we can understand why the membrane lipids derived
from the Crenarchaeota seem to reflect sea or lake surface temperatures.
Presently, the potential for the membrane lipids from these archaea to be used
for paleotemperature reconstruction is based solely on core-top calibrations
from a diverse suite of marine and large lake environments.

In this project, researchers at the University of Minnesota at Duluth will
attempt to link the production of GDGTs in the water column of Lake Superior
with specific aspects of the ecology of the Crenarchaeota in order to improve
our understanding of the Crenarchaeota themselves as well as to determine
whether the GDGT distribution identified in sediments reflects lake surface
temperature and whether other factors are influencing the apparent temperature
signal preserved by these crenarchaeotal membrane lipids.

The research team will study the GDGT membrane lipids and nucleic acids of
Crenarchaeota in the water columns and sediments of Lake Superior (North
America) and Lake Malawi (East Africa). In Lake Superior, they will identify the
time of the year when these compounds are most abundance in settling particulate
organic matter and their fluxes to the sediment using sediment traps. They will
also intend to identify specific depths where these crenarchaeotal compounds are
dominant by analyzing them in suspended particulate matter (SPM) at various
depths in the water column. Finally, the diversity of GDGT membrane lipids will
be compared with the diversity of archaeal communities in both SPM and sediments
from Lakes Superior and Malawi to examine whether variations in archaeal
diversity are reflected in GDGT distributions. The project outlined in this
proposal is expected to lay the groundwork for understanding the mechanistic
link between the TEX86 paleotemperature index and water temperature in great
lakes. Ultimately, results from this study should lead to the confident
application of the TEX86 index by other scientists to address continental
paleoclimate questions in lake systems worldwide.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this project include training of
graduate and undergraduate students, both in field methods as well as state-of-
the-art analytical methods and enhancement of national and international
scientific collaborations. This study will also greatly increase our
understanding of the mechanistic links between the TEX86 paleotemperature proxy
and archaeal communities in great lakes, giving us a useful tool to help
understand past, present, and future global climate and environmental change.