* 0452015
* Collaborative Research: Mechanism Design with Imperfect Commitment
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Vijay Krishna, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2009
* USD 155,171.00

The investigators will conduct research on mechanism design with imperfect
commitment. Their work will use the tools of mathematical economic theory to
address an important real-world problem. In many decision and policy
environments, the individual who makes a decision does not have all relevant
information. For example, often the people who will be affected by a decision
have important information that is not directly available to the person making
the decision. In this case, the informed individuals may have an incentive to
distort what they tell the uninformed decision-maker, in order to distort the
eventual outcome towards their self-interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanism
design economics uses tools from game theory to explore this situation. It uses
tools from game theory to determine how accurate information can be elicited by
providing participants with the right incentives. The theory originates in the
study of auctions, taxation, and public goods, and it has also been applied to
monetary economics, development economics, and labor economics. This theory has
had a substantial impact on the advice economists provide to policy-makers, but
it rests on a key assumption: the policy-maker must be able to commit to (or
contract on) providing the promised incentives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
practice, this is sometimes difficult. Once the policy-maker has accurate
information, he or she may choose to renege on his/her commitment to reward
truthtelling. The goal of this research project is to extend the current theory
to consider exactly this problem of "imperfect commitment". The result will be a
theory that can be applied to a substantially wider range of real-world policy
decisions.