* 0452527
* The Foundation of Kant's Philosophy of Mathematics
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2006,04/30/2008
* Daniel Sutherland, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2008
* USD 65,000.00

Project Summary The Foundation of Kant's Philosophy of Mathematics What sort of
things are numbers? Does mathematics have a foundation, and if so, what is it?
How do we know mathematical truths such as .5+7=12,. or the Pythagorean Theorem?
There is still no consensus on the answers to these questions, and, despite
advances in mathematics and mathematical logic during the last few centuries,
Kant's deep influence on these debates is still felt. There are nevertheless
important aspects of Kant's philosophy of mathematics that have not been
properly understood, in no small part due to the tremendous changes in
mathematics since the early modern period. Above all, Kant's philosophy of
mathematics and mathematical cognition has been obscured by the centrality of
his theory of magnitudes. Since the 19th century, numbers rather than magnitudes
have played the central role in our understanding of mathematics. Intellectual
Merit This research project will provide a new, systematic, and historically
sensitive account of Kant's philosophy of mathematics based on his theory of
magnitudes. It will revive a significant perspective on mathematics very
different from the modern view, one that can offer insights into current
debates. Both the early modern and Kant's understanding of magnitudes can be
traced back to the Eudoxian theory of proportions found in Euclid's Elements.
The Eudoxian theory rests on the cognition of the part-whole and equality
relations of magnitudes, and Kant adopts this mereological approach to
magnitudes in his own theory. His mereology of magnitudes contrasts sharply with
the modern view, in which mathematics is founded on set theory. Furthermore,
Kant holds that mathematical cognition requires a non-conceptual quasi-
perceptual kind of mental representation he calls intuition.. The modern set-
theoretic approach can be best described as appealing to conceptual
representation alone. Reconstructing the early modern influences on Kant's
thought and Kant's own theory of magnitudes will therefore articulate a very
different way of looking at both mathematics and mathematical cognition. The
first part of the project will investigate the early modern views of magnitude,
number, and mathematical properties that influenced Kant.. Early modern views
were in flux, however, and differed in important respects from the Greek
mathematical tradition. Reconstructing the early modern views that influenced
Kant will explain further aspects of Kant's own theory. The second part of the
present project will further investigate Kant's own views on three important
issues concerning the role of intuition in mathematical cognition. Together, the
two parts will provide a complete, systematic account of Kant's philosophy of
mathematics. The proposed project will build on earlier studies and will
complete this work to provide a complete and systematic treatment of Kant's
philosophy of mathematics. Broader Impacts The results will be widely
disseminated; they will appear in various presentations, at least four articles,
and will form the basis of a book. The project will more broadly impact the
history of mathematics and will offer insight into contemporary debates in the
philosophy of mathematics. The results of this research will be incorporated
into undergraduate courses focusing on the interaction between philosophy,
mathematics, and science during the scientific revolution. These courses put
students in the position of a natural philosopher of the 17th and 18th centuries
and ask them to reflect on magnitudes such as distance, force, and weight,
beginning with levers and building up to a (simplified version) of Newton's
derivation of the law of universal gravitation. A discussion of the mathematical
character of magnitudes is an effective way to make mathematics and science
accessible to humanities students while giving historical and philosophical
understanding to science and engineering students. Further insight into the
early modern view of magnitudes and their relation to mathematics will improve
this successful pedagogical approach.