* 0452503
* Summer REU in Biomedical Engineering: Imaging, Modeling and Rehabilitation of Neurosystems
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Kristina Ropella, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 03/31/2008
* USD 274,967.00

Abstract for Ropella, 0452503:

This award to the Department of Biomedical Engineering at Marquette University
(MU) supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site in Biomedical
Engineering (BME), which enables 10 highly qualified undergraduate students to
participate in independent biomedical research. This summer program is funded
for three years. The intellectual focus of the program is the imaging, modeling
and rehabilitation of neurosystems, drawing on faculty strengths at MU and The
Medical College of Wisconsin (MCW).

The goals of the this project are: 1) to involve undergraduate biomedical
engineering students in meaningful ways in ongoing, interdisciplinary research
projects at MU and MCW; 2) to integrate research and education to attract,
prepare, and motivate a diverse pool of talented students into careers in
engineering and research; and 3) to provide high-quality interactions between
students and faculty mentors. Specifically, it provides instructional and
mentoring opportunities to allow ten talented and diverse BME students to
participate each year in interdisciplinary biomedical research aimed to improve
the quality of life of individuals with impaired nervous-system function. This
9-week summer project allows participants to explore career opportunities in
engineering, science, and research, to gain a level of independence in a
research environment, and to gain exposure to various aspects of a professional
research career. The stated goals are achieved by 1) aggressively recruiting
talented undergraduates from around the country, particularly students from
underrepresented backgrounds and from institutions where research opportunities
are limited, 2) providing them with faculty mentors, seminars, and professional-
development activities, 3) providing state-of-the-art research laboratories and
training from faculty engaged in interdisciplinary research and education, and
4) evaluating and monitoring the effectiveness of the project in meeting its
goals using metrics reported to the NSF.

This REU program engages the students in intellectually stimulating neurosystems
research. The individual research projects are aimed to better understand and
improve human performance by engineering better diagnostic, therapeutic and
assistive technologies. The students work side by side with leading experts in
neurosystems research and thus gain an appreciation for how interdisciplinary
teams of scientists, engineers, and clinicians work together to solve
challenging problems and how researchers move from imaging and physiologic
monitoring to modeling and simulation in order to control and rehabilitate
neural function. In doing so, students learn about the physics of imaging,
instrumentation for physiologic monitoring, modeling and numerical simulation,
robotics, control, and design for rehabilitative purposes. Students have the
opportunity to publish their work and perhaps engage in technology transfer.

Ultimately, the goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a
diverse, internationally competitive, and globally engaged science and
engineering workforce, a priority for NSF. The project engages participants in
exciting and rewarding research experiences that motivate them to pursue careers
in scientific and engineering research. Students not only learn about the
engineering innovations used to solve biomedical problems but they also see the
opportunities for service to society as biomedical engineers.