* 0452631
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Vertical Climbing Efficiency in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2005,06/30/2006
* Daniel Schmitt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,965.00

Vertical climbing is thought to have played a major role in the evolution of
locomotor specializations within primates. As a primarily arboreal radiation,
all primates regularly climb. However, almost nothing is known about energetic
costs of climbing in primates or any other mammals. As a result they are an
ideal group in which to address questions concerning the mechanics of vertical
climbing. Some primates, such as apes, spider monkeys, and lorises, have
putative morphological and behavioral adaptations for climbing. These
adaptations, like long limbs and long stride lengths, are argued to have been
important in the evolution of suspensory locomotion and bipedalism. The data
collected for the project proposed here will fill a critical gap in our
knowledge concerning the mechanics of climbing and the relationship between
postcranial anatomy and metabolic costs for this important locomotor behavior.
This research will collect data on the energy costs of climbing in primates and
compare these costs to step length in order to determine whether long steps
provide an energetic advantage during climbing. Research will be conducted at
the Duke University Primate Center, Durham, NC, and the Monkey Jungle/DuMond
Conservancy, Homestead, FL. Five species of primates will be examined, three
species with long limbs and two, more generalized species. Subjects of each of
these species will be videotaped during climbing on a novel, vertical rope
treadmill while the researchers collect oxygen consumption data to estimate
energetic cost. The results of this study will provide the first quantitative
data on the energetic costs of climbing in non-human primates, and contribute to
a broader knowledge of climbing dynamics. Such data will be important for
understanding primate adaptations to climbing, and ultimately the evolution of
specialized locomotion like bipedalism. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
study are three-fold. First, this project supports the development of women in
science as both first-rate teachers and researchers by contributing to a female
graduate student's dissertation research. Second, the methods and conclusions
developed in this project will be included in undergraduate anthropology classes
taught by the PI and Co-PI. Finally, this project intends to directly involve
undergraduates from both Duke University and the University of Florida in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;