* 0452612
* Cosmic Topology and Software Development
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Jeffrey Weeks, Weeks                   Jeffrey        R
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2009
* USD 154,800.00

In a sufficiently small multiconnected universe one expects unusually weak
broad-scale fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background (CMB), and that is
exactly what the WMAP satellite has observed, at a confidence level of roughly
1-in-300 to 1-in-500. However, the mystery has deepened with the discovery of
anomalies in the CMB. Specifically, the broadest fluctuations (the ell=2 and
ell=3 modes) align in the direction of the cosmological dipole. Stranger still,
radio and optical astronomers have independently observed unexplained
anisotropies pointing in the same direction. While it would be premature to draw
conclusions, dark matter is high on the list of candidates. Whatever the
ultimate explanation, if the broad-scale CMB fluctuations turn out to be weaker
than they seem, this will strengthen the case for a finite universe. The current
project continues to develop the mathematics of the eigenmodes of finite
universe candidates for better comparison with observations, while
simultaneously trying to make sense of the anomalies in the data and to gauge
their impact on topological conclusions. The educational half of the project is
developing and expanding a suite of geometry and topology software, spanning the
gamut from specialized research software (SnapPea) to widely used topology games
for middle school students.

Speculation on the shape of the universe goes back to ancient times, but serious
mathematical study of cosmic topology began in 1854 when Riemann proposed the
hypersphere as a cosmological model. Topology blossomed in the late 19th
century, leading to a variety of possible 3-dimensional spaces. The astronomer
Karl Schwarzschild presented these models to the German Astronomical Society in
1900 as candidates for the topology of space, but given the limited
observational data available at the time, he could conclude only that the
universe must be much larger than our Milky Way galaxy. Indeed cosmic topology
made little headway as an observational science until the 1990's when the COBE
and WMAP satellites found hints of a finite universe in the cosmic microwave
background radiation. The past decade has been a turbulent one, though, with
intense work on hyperbolic models giving way to flat and spherical models to
accommodate the 1998 discovery of dark energy. More recently the plot has taken
a new twist, with features of the cosmic microwave background -- as well as some
optical and radio anomalies -- all aligning in the direction of Virgo. This
suggests some new physical effect -- perhaps dark matter -- which has not been
previously accounted for. The research component of the present project applies
geometrical and topological knowledge to the ongoing efforts to understand the
shape and nature of our universe, while the educational component makes these
breathtakingly beautiful ideas accessible to middle school, high school and
college students (www.geometrygames.org).