* 0452021
* REU Site:    Sensor Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* John Vetelino, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 02/29/2008
* USD 249,985.00

Abstract for Vetelino, EEC-0452021: This REU award for a Site on Sensors Science
and Engineering supports 9 engineering and science students each year for three
years in a 10-week summer research experience at the University of Maine.
Students conduct research advancing their knowledge of engineering, chemistry,
physics, and/or biology. The participants work with eleven UMaine researchers
and benefit from access to specialized sensor science and engineering research
facilities such as the Laboratory for Surface Science and Technology and
National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis. The students are
treated as junior colleagues and by the end of the summer function at least at
the level of typical first-year graduate students. REU participants interact
with faculty research mentors, graduate students, post-docs, technicians,
visiting scientists, and middle- and high-school teachers. Such interactions
help the students develop strong communication skills and the ability to work
across disciplines as required in a growing number of professional environments.
REU participants complete formal courses, INT 398, Undergraduate Research
Participation, and ECE 465, Introduction to Sensors, make a presentation within
a context similar to a national or international conference, and share results
from their research experience at a middle or high school.

Intellectual merit: The focus on sensor science and engineering research and
interdisciplinary problem-solving is novel and contributes to the program's
intellectual merit. This focus builds on substantial research strengths at
UMaine that have led to NSF-funded GK-12 (Graduate Teaching Fellows in K-12
Education) and RET (Research Experiences for Teachers) programs in sensor
science and engineering.

This program capitalizes upon past success with undergraduate training
activities and efficiency in student recruitment and selection, assignment to
faculty mentors, research supervision, and follow-up. Broader Impacts:
Undergraduates utilize new knowledge to solve real-life research problems that
impact society. This REU site specifically recruits women and minorities and
provides research experiences for students from non-PhD-granting institutions.
Three of the 11 senior research personnel are women who are especially well
qualified to mentor female students. The site enhances the Nation's
infrastructure for research and education by bringing together faculty and
students from diverse disciplines under the intellectual umbrella of sensor
science and engineering. The program activities also ensure that multi-user
facilities are sites of research and mentoring for significant numbers of
science and engineering students. Specific research results are disseminated
through campus presentations and more broadly through professional journals and
symposia, enhancing scientific and technological understanding. Based on their
interaction with RET participants and GK-12 fellows during their on-campus
research assignments, REU participants share their research experiences with
middle and high school students and teachers. Society will benefit as these
undergraduates, as a result of their research experiences, choose to continue in
graduate school or to excel in technologically and scientifically challenging
careers that advance such areas as homeland security, food safety,
transportation, communications, and medicine.

This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program.