* 0452473
* Macroeconomic Models of the Family:  Positive and Normative Analysis of Fertility Choice in Dynamic Settings
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Larry Jones, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 203,940.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prop ID: SES-0452473 &lt;br/&gt;P I: Jones, Larry
E. &lt;br/&gt;Organization: University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
&lt;br/&gt;Title: Macroeconomic Models of the Family: Positive and Normative
Analysis of Fertility Choice in Dynamic Settings
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on dynamic models of
family decision-making and their quantitative properties. Three of the most
important features of this type of decision-making are: designing joint labor
supply decisions of couples, determining the number of children to have (and
their timing) and the education of these children. This research follows others
in the use of modern, dynamic, general equilibrium techniques to study how these
decisions are made. Both fertility and education decisions are forward looking
choices by their nature. This makes the application of this set of tools to
these questions particularly appropriate. The research involves both qualitative
and quantitative aspects and, as such, the tools developed will be useful in a
variety of other studies as well. Since part of the emphasis is on building
quantitative models, historical data can be used to check the validity of the
modeling assumptions. For example, do the models built and the techniques for
solving them developed provide an accurate description of the long term trends
that are seen in the data on family labor supply and fertility? &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of the Project: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There are two
elements of the research that will be particularly useful for the broader
scientific community. First, since this project builds quantitative, general
equilibrium models of fertility decisions and compares the results with the data
from time series in the US and other countries, the resulting models can be used
by historians and demographers to help forecast the time paths of population in
developing countries. The methodology is such that it will allow future
researchers to determine how this time path will change in response to future
events such as improvements in health and the introduction of social security
systems. Second, since this project also extends the standard notions of modern
Welfare Economics to environments in which population size is endogenous, the
tools will be a useful addition to the debate on population control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;