* 0452217
* Gait Mechanics in Primate and Nonprimate Quadrupeds
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Daniel Schmitt, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2010
* USD 119,660.00

The origin of our Order-Primates-is believed to be associated with a fundamental
change in locomotor behavior in response to the mechanical requirements of
moving and foraging on thin flexible terminal branches of the forest canopy. The
quadrupedal walking of primates differs from other mammals in footfall sequence,
limb and joint excursions, muscle recruitment, and peak load distribution.
Although these data already suggest that primates are unusual in their walking
patterns, recent research has suggested a more fundamental way in which the
walking of primates differs from nonprimate mammals. &lt;br/&gt;During walking
in most animals, the center of mass (COM) moves up and down as if it on the end
of a stiff upside-down pendulum. By moving their center of mass up and down with
appropriate timing during walking, most animals can conserve muscular energy
through the exchange of potential and kinetic energy. In contrast, during
running the COM moves like a bouncing ball and energy storage and recovery
occurs in tendons and muscles. Virtually nothing is known about the movements of
the COM in quadrupedal primates, but some research has suggested that primates
use unusually compliant walking gaits. Such walking gaits involve deep elbow and
knee yield, suggesting that the COM follows a flatter path with minimal exchange
of potential and kinetic energy. If this is the case then this would represent a
fundamental shift in the locomotor mechanics of primates compared to other
mammals. However, no direct empirical data exist describing the movement of the
COM in primates.&lt;br/&gt; In this study five primate species (two prosimians,
one New World monkey, and two Old World monkeys) and one nonprimate species
(domestic cat) will be studied walking on terrestrial and, for the primates,
arboreal supports across a force platform. Force data will be used to determine
vertical and fore-aft accelerations, velocities, and displacements of the COM of
the whole body and the forequarters and hindquarters. From these values the
oscillations of kinetic and potential energy as well as the percentage of energy
recovery can be calculated. &lt;br/&gt; This study tests the hypothesis that
walking gaits of primates are unusual among mammals in that they do not conform
to an inverted pendulum model. This potential difference is not a trivial
mathematical distinction nor is it simply a difference of degree but rather an
abrupt adaptive shift. Understanding the mechanics of walking in primates will
shed light on the origins of primate locomotion and the origin of specialized
locomotor behaviors such as arm-swinging and bipedalism. &lt;br/&gt;Aside from
improving our understanding of primate locomotor evolution, this project
benefits scientific education at two levels. This project will directly involve
undergraduate and graduate students with a strong emphasis on female and
minority student participation. In addition, the research techniques, data, and
results developed from this project will be incorporated into general
anthropology courses and advanced graduate and undergraduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;