* 0452004
* Radical Cage Effects in Organometallic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2009
* David Tyler, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 08/31/2009
* USD 390,800.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports Professor David Tyler at the University of Oregon to investigate the
fundamental, underlying principles of the cage effect in radical reaction
chemistry. The still-confusing role of the solvent will be explored using a new
model based on the "microviscosity" of the solvent. Another part of the research
will focus on what effect the wavelength of light has on the cage effect in
photogenerated radical cage pairs. Preliminary results show a trend opposite to
that predicted by theory. Other experiments will probe spin effects on the
recombination of two metal radicals, which has not been systematically addressed
until now. Another set of experiments will examine the effects of radical mass,
size, and shape on the cage effect. In particular, it is proposed that the ratio
of the rate constants for cage escape to cage recombination is proportional to
the square root of the mass divided by the surface area of the radical. This
hypothesis will be tested with radicals of various masses and sizes. If this
relationship is general, it will give researchers a powerful tool for predicting
cage recombination efficiencies. Femtosecond timescale laser pump-probe
experiments will be used to directly observe the shortlived radical cage pair.
In these experiments, the cage effect for two randomly colliding radicals will
be studied relative to the cage effect for a radical cage pair formed by bond
homolysis. As former radicals initially have a random orientation when they meet
in a cage, whereas the latter radicals are initially aligned, this difference
may show up as a difference in the cage effect and in the reactivity of the cage
pair.

Graduate students will participate in successful internship programs, which
prepare Ph.D. students for successful careers in industry or teaching by placing
them in regional companies or in colleges for a one-term internship experience.
The research described herein has also fostered closer ties to regional
companies and colleges in the form of collaborative research projects. This has
led to professors at regional colleges taking sabbatical leaves in the Professor
Tyler's laboratory and to students at such colleges and companies using the
instrumentation in the University of Oregon Department of Chemistry.