* 0452160
* Jaw Muscle Architecture and Skull Form in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Fred Anapol, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2010
* USD 50,148.00

Although the relationship between skull form and function has been well studied
in primates, the ways in which jaw muscle fiber architecture (such as fiber
length and orientation) remodels and adapts to different feeding behaviors and
diets have been rarely examined and remain poorly understood. Evaluating the
bony and muscular systems together, this study examines the ways in which skull
form and fiber architecture are functionally related to feeding behavior and
diet. Results of this study will provide important information on how the jaw
muscles and bony skull are functionally integrated to both produce and limit
movement during feeding, and can be applied to studies reconstructing feeding
behavior and diet in fossils. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project begins with a
comparison among three species of South American monkey (Callitrichidae,
Primates). These monkeys have uniquely different feeding behaviors, but are
otherwise characterized by similar diets. The contrast in feeding behaviors
between these closely-related monkeys provides an ideal model to evaluate the
significance of fiber architecture for muscle function. Specifically, common
marmosets (Callithrix jacchus) feed on tree gums by opening their jaws widely
(producing a wide jaw gape) and applying their anterior teeth to gouge the tree
trunk or branch in order to stimulate the flow of gums. Cotton-top tamarins
(Saguinus oedipus) and squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus) also feed on gums,
but unlike marmosets, these primates feed on gums that have already been
extracted by insects or other mechanical damage to the tree. Through initial
study of these three monkeys, the relationship between fiber architecture, skull
morphology and feeding behavior is addressed through the following two specific
objectives. First, fiber architecture of the superficial masseter and temporalis
muscles is examined using gross anatomic, microscopic, and histologic
techniques. The hypothesis is tested that the tree-gouging common marmoset has
an architectural arrangement that facilitates the production of wide jaw gapes.
Second, morphological data on the skull will be obtained to examine how skull
structure is functionally and/or adaptively linked to different feeding
behaviors. As part of the long-range goals of this project, fiber architecture
and craniometric data on prosimian and anthropoid primates will be collected to
evaluate the cranial correlates of fiber architecture. These data will be used
to test whether bone proxies can be employed to accurately predict architectural
parameters of muscle, and to evaluate how these parameters vary with changes in
skull and body size.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project has an important
educational component that involves training and supporting undergraduate
students in all aspects of this project. This work continues to support the Duke
University Women's Initiative by encouraging undergraduate women in research and
will also strengthen collaborative relationships among three academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;