* 0452789
* REU Site:  Environmental Sciences and Engineering at Clarkson University
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Stefan Grimberg, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 03/31/2008
* USD 280,000.00

Abstract for REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates. Environmental
Sciences and Engineering at Clarkson University, Stefan J. Grimberg,
0452789&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant renews the Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site at Clarkson &lt;br/&gt;University. This program brings
students interested in basic science and engineering to Clarkson
&lt;br/&gt;University to share their perspectives on solving complex
environmental problems through research in environmental science and
engineering. Eight or nine outstanding undergraduate students each year conduct
research on campus for a 10-week intensive summer research experience.
&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the program are: &lt;br/&gt;__ To provide students
who are traditionally underrepresented in environmental science and
&lt;br/&gt;engineering with an opportunity to conduct independent research;
&lt;br/&gt;__ To teach these students how to conduct meaningful environmental
research and communicate &lt;br/&gt;the results of that research to professional
colleagues and the general public; &lt;br/&gt;__ To communicate to students the
importance of graduate school as an integral part of the &lt;br/&gt;educational
preparation leading to successful careers in science and engineering;
&lt;br/&gt;__ To demonstrate why synthetic, integrative research is necessary
for understanding and solving &lt;br/&gt;complex environmental problems, and
thus why multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary approaches to environmental
science and engineering are so important; &lt;br/&gt;__ To improve
students'skills in analyzing and solving complex problems by working within
teams&lt;br/&gt;comprised of diverse members, in terms of individual
perspectives and disciplinary expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. The primary component of the program is the completion of a research
project on a complex environmental problem. Undergraduates are assigned a self-
contained aspect of a larger research project and work with graduate students
and faculty in the Departments of Civil, Chemical, Environmental and
Aeronautical Engineering, Chemistry, Physics and Biology to complete their
projects. Students are matched with these faculty based on the interests and
abilities of the students and the research priorities of the faculty.
Dissemination of the research results is emphasized; all students participate in
research group meetings, write a report, and present their work at a University-
wide undergraduate research symposium. They are encouraged to publish their work
in peer-reviewed publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary seminars
are held once a week to introduce students to concepts of sustainable management
of complex environmental systems and of the systems approach to understanding
and solving environmental problems. Students integrate at least two sustainable-
management concepts or processes into their individual research projects.
Additional seminars that cover the conduct of sound research and aspects of
post-graduate study add breadth to the students' experience. Also included in
the program are several community-building activities designed to foster
cohesiveness among the students as a multicultural group and to enhance their
appreciation for environmental research. Assessment of the program includes
continual evaluation and improvement of the program to ensure that the stated
objectives are achieved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. A major
objective of the program is to attract underrepresented students to continued
study of engineering at the post-graduate level and particularly to reach
students who would not otherwise be exposed to the possibility of a career in
research. Students are recruited to this REU program through poster and
electronic mailings to more than 400 institutions and through the program's web
site. Of the 68 students supported by the prior REU grant to Clarkson, 53% were
women and 10% African Americans or from Puerto Rico. Only 12 of the 68 students
were Clarkson undergraduates; the remaining 56 came from schools spanning the
US, from Connecticut to California. Results from the analysis of pre- and post-
surveys indicate that the program provides the students with an appreciation of
research and that most participants decide to pursue graduate education. It is
expected that this productivity will continue under in the current grant and
will thus contribute to the Nation's technical manpower. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;