* 0452852
* The Dynamics of Household Land Use and Economic Welfare on the Amazon Frontier
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Jill Caviglia-Harris, Salisbury University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/2008
* USD 168,679.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to understanding household land use and
economic welfare in the Amazon basin, through the collection of a third round of
panel data with improved spatial referencing and a new system for tracking
households and individuals, in a study area typical of the "arc of
deforestation" across the southern Brazilian Amazon. The researchers will use
this dataset to model the relationship between deforestation and household well
being, thereby gaining insight on welfare outcomes that also have implications
for conservation policies. While the global and local costs of deforestation are
widely recognized, the benefits of deforestation for small farm households, who
are among its principal agents, are less clearly understood. This is partly due
to the deforestation literature's reliance on cross-sectional or aggregate data.
Household land use strategies and livelihoods are actually simultaneously
determined over long time periods and reflect heterogeneity (some unobserved)
across households and space. Thus, data sets and analyses that are rich in both
time and space dimensions will provide the best policy guidance. Analysis that
ignores these dynamics or simultaneities may misrepresent the size,
significance, and even direction of the effects of land use on economic welfare
and on the reverse relationship: the impact of economic well being on
deforestation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the opportunity to address
these gaps by building on an existing spatially referenced two-period panel of
farm households. This new round of data collection will add detail to the
spatial data and additional quality controls to reduce the attrition of
households. Properties of surveyed households will be precisely geo-referenced,
enabling comparisons with remotely sensed land cover data at the scale of the
decision-maker. The modeling approach will use the household production
framework, providing a theoretical basis for understanding responses to larger-
scale socioeconomic forces as played out across time and space in the study
region. The empirical analysis will focus on a simultaneous model that
explicitly estimates the co-evolution of land use and welfare at the household
level using panel estimation techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts:
This grant will continue and improve a panel survey in a remote, but
environmentally and economically significant region. Particular attention and
resources will be dedicated to creating a survey registry to maintain the panel
by lot and household, tracking households and individuals that have moved,
gathering detailed geo-referenced data, and collecting ground control points to
link remote sensing land cover data to survey data. These processes will lay the
foundation for empirical analyses that will result in journal publications,
conference presentations, benefits for students and the development of a long-
term panel.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include methodological contributions, such
as quantifying the costs and benefits of reducing attrition and collecting panel
versus retrospective data, and opportunities for students to learn about applied
research in an international setting through participation as research
assistants and courses taught by the principal investigators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the Office of
International Science and Engineering Americas Program, the Geography and
Regional Sciences Program and the Economics Program.&lt;br/&gt;