* 0452643
* Teaching Decision Behavior: A Conference at the University of Michigan (May-August 2005)
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2007
* J. Frank Yates, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 135,915.00

In recent years, decision behavior scholarship has achieved numerous exciting
breakthroughs. For instance, we now know where particular chronic decision-
making deficits are localized in the brain. We know that certain aspects of
people's mechanisms for anticipating future events are characteristically
different in some parts of the world than in others. And we also know that
people's risk-taking behavior sometimes results from a complex-but orderly-
interaction of cognition and emotion. Such advances promise more than a deeper
scientific understanding of natural decision processes. They also offer hope for
guidance in preventing at least some of the devastating breakdowns of our
society's organizations and institutions that are so familiar, from failed
corporate governance practices and rules (e.g., Enron) to space shuttle
disasters to everyday medical errors that kill thousands each year.
Unfortunately, however, it is doubtful that this great promise will come close
to being realized. A major reason is that good, solid courses in decision
behavior are available to only a remarkably small fraction of the nation's
undergraduates and graduate students. Thus, the great majority of the people we
could expect to exploit the decision behavior knowledge that is being created
are destined to remain woefully ignorant of it. Perhaps even more troubling,
this fact necessarily means that future research in the field cannot possibly
progress as it should because there will be few trained scientists capable of
doing the required work. Moreover, even current research suffers from the
absence of the eager, inquisitive, and demanding students who serve as essential
catalysts in every vibrant scientific field. The proposed effort is intended to
redress this problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of the project is a small,
intensive, "working" conference that is followed by print and electronic
publications as well as symposia at annual meetings of major professional
societies. Conference participants will include decision scholars who have
demonstrated their excellence not just as researchers, but also as master
teachers, communicators, and innovators. The invitees will also include experts
in the development of instructional techniques and technologies as well as
dissemination. The conference will be preceded by initial surveys intended to
help inform conferees of the full magnitude and dimensions of the decision
behavior instruction problem and also its foundations, e.g., in faculty and
student incentives. The sessions of the conference will include ones devoted to
the topics that arguably should have priority in decision behavior courses, to
reasons for the current dearth of decision courses, to techniques and
technologies that have established their value elsewhere, and to means for
developing new methods and tools. Before they disperse, conferees will design
and set in motion concrete action plans. These plans will guide efforts to
complete and disseminate the conference's publications. Just as importantly,
these plans will also result in specific teaching and development efforts at
institutions in this country and elsewhere.