* 0452377
* Bacterial production and community structure during the North Atlantic Spring Bloom [NASB 2005]
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* David Kirchman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/2008
* USD 302,000.00

Data collected in the JGOFS field experiment conducted in 1989 indicated that
bacteria process a large fraction of primary production even at the height of
the North Atlantic spring bloom. Re-examination of those rates has raised
several questions, and work since 1989 has discovered many new microbes and
microbial processes not considered at the time. Some of the new microbes appear
to be photoheterotrophic, such as the aerobic anoxygenic photosynthesizing (AAP)
bacteria, which can be as abundant as Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus in the
North Atlantic. These new findings indicate that it is essential to re-examine
the role of bacteria (and archaea) during the North Atlantic spring bloom. In
2005, NSF-supported investigators and the EU CarboOcean project will address
questions about the impact of pCO2 levels and temperature on algal community
structure and biogeochemistry during the North Atlantic spring bloom. The
investigators will join this effort and will explore how bacterial community
structure changes in response to variation in phytoplankton biomass, growth, and
community structure. Their working hypothesis is that Cytophaga-like bacteria
are abundant during the height and waning stages of the spring bloom because of
the use of high molecular weight dissolved organic matter, whereas SAR11 and
other alpha-proteobacterial groups supported by low molecular weight DOM
dominate non-bloom surface waters. The investigators will test this hypothesis
using culture-independent methods, including microautoradiography and FISH
(Micro-FISH) augmented by flow cytometry, and will also examine the uptake of
select DOM components (amino acids, protein, glucose and polysaccharides) and
CO2 by SAR11, Cytophaga-like bacteria, photoheterotrophs, and other abundant
microbial groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 1989 JGOFS field experiment was an
important study of the North Atlantic Spring Bloom. The results of the study
generated numerous hypotheses regarding the roles of bacteria in processing
primary production, and these hypotheses have had a great influence on the
subsequent development of marine microbial research. In 2005, researchers will
revisit the North Atlantic Spring Bloom in an international collaboration
designed to examine the influence of climate change on ocean processes, using
the spring bloom as a proxy for longer-term climate change. In this project, the
investigators will participate and examine explore how bacterial community
structure changes in response to variation in phytoplankton biomass, growth, and
community structure, using a combination of molecular genetic, ecological and
biogeochemical approaches. The work is an essential addition to the NASB 2005
experiment and to the US/EU partnership to determine how the North Atlantic, an
ecosystem that is shared by both North America and Europe, may react to climate
regime changes during the coming century. The project will involve graduate and
undergraduate students in research, and public outreach through a
website.&lt;br/&gt;