* 0452180
* CRI:   Enabling Globally-Distributed Electronic Collaboration (GloDEC) for Expertise Studies and Human and Social Dynamics Research Planning Grant
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Michael Prietula, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Urban
* 06/30/2007
* USD 49,979.00

Abstract Program: NSF 04-588 CISE Computing Research Infrastructure Title: CRI:
Enabling Globally-Distributed Electronic Collaboration (GloDEC) for Expertise
Studies and Human and Social Dynamics Research Planning Grant Proposal: CNS
0452180 PI: Becerra-Fernandez, Irma Institution: Florida International
University

Florida International University will use this planning award to evaluate
feasibility and expansion of its knowledge management lab to support studies in
collaborative expertise and human and social dynamics. Emphasis will be on
expanding research programs in expertise in collaboration with other Florida
universities, on understanding through computer models how components of
expertise interact with social, communication and organizational structures, and
on developing linkages between these two areas. Specific planning activities
will explore inter-university PhD education and research, assess and recommend
technology infrastructure for their needs, and plan an implementation for a
student-centered collaborative, electronic learning community. Broader impacts
include the potential for impact on education programs in management information
systems. Florida International University has the largest contingent of Hispanic
students among US doctoral granting institutions who can benefit from this
innovative program.

