* 0452067
* SGER:     Modeling, Analysis, and Diagnosis for Safety of Distributed Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

CNS-0452067 Gautam Biswas Title: SGER: Modeling, Analysis, and Diagnosis for
Safety of Distributed Hybrid Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed embedded
systems are pervading all aspects of our daily lives, from home appliances to
safety and mission critical systems, such as automobiles, aircraft,
manufacturing processes, nuclear plants, and military systems. These engineered
systems consist of multiple subsystems with software components tightly
integrated into physical processes. Complete analysis of their behaviors at
design time is computationally infeasible. Diagnosis of fault behavior and its
potential propagation through highly-coupled complex systems lacks a
comprehensive scientific foundation. Commonly used methods for fault and failure
mode criticality analysis do not address the detailed interactions of these
systems and do not scale. A key observation is that the coupled subsystems
interact at the physical level through energy-related interactions and at the
logical level, by information exchange typically facilitated by a communication
fabric such as a local area network LAN or control network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives and primary thrust areas of this
exploratory research effort are two-fold. &lt;br/&gt;(i) Advance the scientific
understanding of modeling and behavior analysis of complex, embedded systems
that are made up of distributed, interacting subsystems. This will require
developing modeling methodologies and languages that integrate heterogeneous
paradigms, developing formal models and mechanisms to handle subsystem
interactions, and parameterizing the models to facilitate fault analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Develop practical technologies for safety analysis and online
diagnosis of complex distributed systems. The significant challenge in building
a systematic framework for distributed diagnosis is to specify the coupling
between subsystems in a way that fault interactions are captured in sufficient
detail and integrated into the hybrid modeling methodology. It is also important
to combine the results of the subsystem diagnostic components in a
computationally efficient manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science and
technology developed in this project will inform designers in how to build more
effective, reliable, and verifiable systems. For rapid dissemination through
graduating engineers, research results will also be introduced in undergraduate
and graduate engineering classes and laboratories at Vanderbilt University.
Besides regular publications, efforts will be made to run a focused workshop in
this area.&lt;br/&gt;