* 0452886
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  A Comparative Analysis of Ateline Functional Anatomy and Locomotor Performance
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* Denise Guillot, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 02/28/2006
* USD 10,990.00

Upright postures and below branch, suspensory behaviors are key locomotor
innovations that led to the anatomical and ecological divergence of apes.
However, understanding how and why these behaviors evolved is complicated by an
inadequate fossil record and the behavioral diversity of living apes. Unlike the
apes, the New World subfamily Atelinae, which includes howler monkeys, woolly
monkeys, spider monkeys and woolly spider monkeys, exhibits a broad spectrum of
suspensory behaviors and associated morphologies. Thus, this family of monkeys
provides a useful model for understanding the relationships between anatomy and
behavior in a group of closely related species that rely on suspensory behaviors
to different degrees. This study examines the anatomical and behavioral gradient
exhibited by atelines and may ultimately inform our understanding of locomotor
evolution which is of particular importance in interpreting the behavior of
primates, such as the Miocene apes, which are known only by their fossil
remains. Although positional frequency data are available for some atelines,
differences in functional anatomy and locomotor style are not well quantified.
This study analyzes the frequency of specific locomotor modes and examines video
based motion analysis data of 3 species of wild atelines including: Alouatta
seniculus (howler monkeys), Lagothrix lagothricha (woolly monkeys) and Ateles
belzebuth (spider monkeys). These data will be used to generate predictions
relating differences in positional behavior to variation in the anatomy of the
shoulder, elbow, back, tail and hip. Ten months of behavioral data have already
been collected at Tiputini Biodiversity Station in the lowland rainforests of
eastern Ecuador. Postcranial skeletal data will be collected, using museum
specimens, allowing for the examination of functional anatomical differences
among atelines and hominoids. This study is innovative in that it integrates
traditional approaches quantifying morphology and locomotor frequencies with
canopy level, video based motion analysis techniques previously underutilized in
wild primate studies. The overall goals of this research are: (1) to provide
comparable, detailed, quantitative documentation of ateline anatomy and
locomotor behavior; (2) to illuminate the functional significance of
upright/suspensory postcranial features; (3) to further pioneer the use of video
based kinematic analyses under non-laboratory conditions; and (4) to evaluate
"hominoid" vs. "ateline" adaptations to below branch suspensory behavior. The
broader impacts of this study include the mentoring of Ecuadorian and American
undergraduates participating in tropical ecology programs at Tiputini
Biodiversity Station (TBS), and the prominent participation of women who tend to
be underrepresented in the scientific community. Data from this and other
ongoing research at TBS also contributes to conservation policies impacting the
pristine forests surrounding the station.



