* 0452457
* RIDGE2000 Postdoc:  Dynamics of Coupled Tectonic/Hydrothermal Systems at Mid-Ocean Ridges; a Damage Rheology Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2008
* Marc Spiegelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2008
* USD 131,170.00

ABSTRACT (Spiegleman - 0452457)&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a fully
coupled theory and mathematical basis to explain fluid flow, dike emplacement,
and crustal deformation in deformable/permeable and reactive media using seismic
strain data and hydrothermal observations. The approach adopted is based on the
recently developed theory of evolving damaged materials generated by one of the
investigators that has recently been validated at small scales against
laboratory experiments. The research involves development of a set of numerical
and conceptual models of increasing complexity that address coupled deformation
and hydrothermal circulation in brittle/fractured/fracturing ocean crust at mid-
ocean ridges. To constrain and verify these models, there will be collaborations
between researchers at the Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia
University in New York who have data and first-hand knowledge of the geography
of fractured-seafloor hydrothermal systems at intensively studied RIDGE 2000
integrated study sites and the corresponding chemical, hydrological, and
geophysical characteristics in these areas. These observational data will be
used to parameterize the final models and simulations will be carried out and
ground truthed using data from natural systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project provides cross-disciplinary training for a young scientist
and fosters international and interdisciplinary collaboration in the marine
geology and geophysics community. It also develops a more general framework for
understanding the behavior of fluids in deformable brittle media, which is a
fundamental problem in engineering with potential applications to earthquake
dynamics, volcanic eruptions, landslides and other natural
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;