* 0452269
* National Congregations Study, Wave II
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2007
* Mark Chaves, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2007
* USD 104,838.00

SES-0452269&lt;br/&gt;Mark Chaves&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will complete a second wave of the
National Congregations Study (NCS). The 1998 NCS was the first high quality
nationally representative survey of American congregations from across the
religious spectrum. It collected data about a wide range of congregational
characteristics and activities. This project will generate data from a national
sample of congregations derived from the 2006 General Social Survey (GSS), and
it will survey them in order to study how American religious congregations have
changed over time. The replicates the sampling strategy, data collection
methods, and many of the items used in the 1998 survey. In this way the d
project is uniquely situated to discover how congregations have and have not
changed between 1998 and 2006. The data collected will enable the PI, for the
first time, to assess how much stability versus change there is in
congregations' core characteristics and activities, including their social
composition, size, social service involvement, political activity, neighborhood
embeddedness, connections with other religious and secular organizations, and
many other things. Where there is change, it will now be possible to assess how
much of that change is produced by organizational adaptation (existing
organizations changing what they do) and how much is produced by cohort
replacement (new generations of organizations with different characteristics
entering the population). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Data and results from this
second survey will be disseminated broadly to scholars, journalists, policy
makers, and leaders of both secular and religious nonprofit organizations. Study
results could potentially contribute to public debate and policy formulation
concerning the evolving role of religious congregations in the nation's social
welfare system. . The National Congregation Survey data set is currently
available in two public data archives. It serves as a benchmark by which other
congregational samples are judged and sometimes corrected. In addition to
appearing in scientific and scholarly books and articles, NCS results have been
reported in major media and have been written about in outlets aimed at policy
makers and leaders of nonprofit organizations. &lt;br/&gt;