* 0452720
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Mechanisms of Coexistance in Communities of Ant-plant Mutualists
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Brian Inouye, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 01/31/2010
* USD 271,299.00

A major goal of ecology is to understand the factors promoting coexistence
among&lt;br/&gt;competing species. Chief among the hypothesized mechanisms is
habitat&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneity, but alternatives include temporal fluctuations
in resource availability,&lt;br/&gt;spatially restricted dispersal, and
tradeoffs among fecundity, dispersal, and competitive&lt;br/&gt;ability. Only a
handful of these mechanisms have ever been shown to operate in
the&lt;br/&gt;field, and experimental tests simultaneously evaluating multiple
mechanisms are rare.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will evaluate alternative
coexistence mechanisms in an emerging&lt;br/&gt;model system in community
ecology - ants that compete to establish colonies in&lt;br/&gt;specialized plant
structures known as domatia. Three species of ants colonize
the&lt;br/&gt;domatia of the Amazonian trees Tococa bullifera and Maieta
guianensis. Using this&lt;br/&gt;system, non-mutually exclusive mechanisms that
may promote ant coexistance will be&lt;br/&gt;tested with a combination of field
observations, manipulative experiments, and&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models.
Because this system is composed of two specialists that coexist&lt;br/&gt;with a
generalist on two resources, our results could provide unique insights into
the&lt;br/&gt;evolution of specialization in ecological communities. The project
will provide ample&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for students at multiple stages of
their academic careers to develop&lt;br/&gt;research, modeling, and mentorship
skills. Furthermore, the collaborating PI's are at&lt;br/&gt;institutions with
large minority enrollments, which will allow them to continue
mentoring&lt;br/&gt;students from underrepresented groups. Finally, this project
will strengthen a dynamic&lt;br/&gt;and productive international collaboration,
and allow US students to gain their first&lt;br/&gt;experience working in
Amazonian ecosystems.