* 0452419
* The Impact of Informal Science on Girls' Interest, Engagement and Participation in Science Communities, Hobbies and Careers:  A Research and Dissemination Project
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2013
* Lynn Dierking, Franklin Institute Science Museum
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 03/31/2013
* USD 1,205,758.00

The Franklin Institute (TFI), in collaboration with the Institute for Learning
Innovation (ILI), will conduct a research effort that explores the role that
informal science learning plays in supporting girls' long-term interest,
engagement and participation in science communities, hobbies and careers. Five
longstanding programs for girls, begun 5-20+ years ago, will be the focus of the
proposed study and include the National Science Partnership (NSP), Girls at the
Center (GAC), Wonderwise, and Women in Natural Sciences (WINS). The selected
study projects have access to girl participants who are high-school aged or
older and represent diverse race, ethnicity and SES. A national Research
Advisory Council will ground the investigation and review the findings at each
stage of the research. The Community of Practice (CoP) literature (Lave and
Wenger, 1991) will provide the theoretical frame for the overarching research
question. Findings will document long-term impacts of girls' participation in
identified informal science programs, determine how informal contexts in general
contribute to girls' science learning and achievement, and develop a model for
understanding the impact of informal science learning initiatives. Deliverables
will include specific examples of informal learning experiences that support
girls' long-term participation in science and evidence of the types of
influences, including significant adults and particular activities, that
contribute to girls' trajectories of participation. Dissemination tools will be
a national conference, a research monograph and a series of workshops conducted
in conjunction with professional conferences for informal science educators. By
better understanding the impact of informal programs in science, specifically
and more generally, and by developing and demonstrating an effective model for
understanding such impact across projects, the proposed research stands to
inform the field and provide a base for future project development and research
efforts. The research results will improve the understanding of practice in
these arenas and will document the significant role that informal programs place
in influencing girls' vocational and avocational choices and participation in
STEM fields. The study will also demonstrate the applicability of the CoP
research model and its lessons to other informal science programs.