* 0452814
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Intraspecific Variation and Plasticity in Primate Behavior and Ecology
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2006
* Charles Janson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 06/30/2006
* USD 6,867.00

Researchers have been conducting interspecific comparisons for over twenty-five
years to seek explanations for primate ecological variation. The purpose of this
project is to expand on this decades-long tradition by incorporating
intraspecific variation in a quantitative fashion. As such, this study will
serve as the first comprehensive comparative study incorporating quantitative
analyses of primate behavior and ecology variation at the population level. This
approach allows the following questions to be addressed: 1) What is the
relationship between geographic distance and ecological similarity among
populations, 2) What factors are important in affecting primate ecological
plasticity, 3) Do less ecologically plastic species have a higher risk of
extinction? Previously published data from over 100 populations of approximately
30 primate species will be gathered to create a comprehensive ecological
database. These data will be grouped into five datasets: 1) environmental, 2)
diet, 3) activity budget, 4) social organization, and 5) social behavior.
Multivariate techniques will be used to quantify the variation in each dataset
for each species. Comparative analyses will control for species' evolutionary
relationships and Geographic Information System software will be employed to
investigate the above questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study
will have important scientific ramifications. Examining the patterns and
processes of primate behavior and ecology at this finer level of analysis can be
an important method of identifying why certain behavioral and ecological traits
are present in some species and not others. Also, understanding the significance
of variation at the interspecific level will greatly benefit from the results of
this intraspecific study. Finally, identifying the factors influencing primate
ecological plasticity can lead to more effective models of primate socioecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the scientific merit, this project has
considerable broader impacts. The ecological database of primate populations
will be available to the public on the Internet. This will allow researchers
easy access to a wealth of information for future studies. Training and research
opportunities will be available to undergraduate students that assist in the
data collection and organization. Finally, identifying the role that ecological
plasticity plays in affecting primate extinction will assist in the conservation
of primate species that are vital to the maintenance of forest structure and are
viewed as a flagship species for many conservation
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;