* 0452961
* Collaborative Research:  Individual and Taxonomic Discrimination Through Laser Scan Analysis of Joint Congruence in Extant Hominoids
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2005,12/31/2006
* William Harcourt-Smith, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 12/31/2006
* USD 87,428.00

The allocation of fossil specimens to a taxon, and in some cases to an
individual, is a frequent and important problem of paleontology. When multiple
individuals of one (or more) species are recovered from a site, it is often
vital to associate elements of a single individual in order to determine the
number of individuals preserved, as well as examine proportions, functional
adaptations and other factors. In this project, the PIs propose a relatively new
approach to these problems, combining laser surface scans of opposing joint
surfaces with advanced statistical analyses to examine ways to differentiate
taxa and associate elements of unique individuals using a sample of extant
hominoids where individuals are known. Previous studies using a laser scanner
suffered from the lack of suitable computational power and statistical
methodology. Delson and colleagues will build upon that work in combination with
their own extensive familiarity with high-resolution scanning, geometric
morphometric analysis and joint surfaces of extant and extinct catarrhine taxa.
This work also has implications for analyses of forensic and archaeological
accumulations of multiple-individual human remains. This study will focus on the
bony components of two important joints: the elbow (humero-ulnar) and ankle
(tibio-talar). Both of these joints are relatively "tight" showing a high degree
of congruence where the proposed method has a higher chance of success. The
elbow joint is "tighter" than the ankle, further allowing some evaluation of how
tightly a joint articulates influences how well the method works. Finally, both
of these joints are of functional interest among hominoids and are also well-
represented in the human fossil record, the planned focus of later phases of
research. Preliminary analysis of limited data has demonstrated that this basic
approach can successfully discriminate between tibio-talar surfaces of different
human individuals and among joints belonging to different hominoid species. The
present study will collect additional data and concentrate on development of
statistically powerful methods for their analysis. In addition to these
questions, this work has broader impacts in that it will: 1) recruit Lehman
College undergraduates from groups underrepresented in science to be research
assistants; 2) enhance infrastructure through collaboration with other
universities as well as British colleagues and by developing and freely
distributing algorithms and software with which to analyze congruence patterns;
3) expand collaboration with computer scientists in the development of software
and analytical methods; and 4) integrate research, teaching and wider
dissemination of results by developing and freely distributing three-dimensional
virtual models and visualizations of joint surfaces for use in teaching.