* 0452972
* Global Atmospheric Nutrient Deposition and Ocean Biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Charles Zender, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2009
* USD 499,001.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0452972&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
biogeochemical cycles of silicon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and iron involve
substantial transfer of materials from the continents to the oceans through
atmospheric transport of natural and anthropogenic aerosols. To date, these
important land-ocean links and their influence on ocean ecosystems and
biogeochemical cycling have only been studied for individual elements. In this
study, investigators from the University of California at Irvine will couple
models of atmospheric chemistry and aerosol transport to a global ocean
biogeochemical model. They will simulate the atmospheric deposition and
dissolution in the oceans of the nutrients silicate, nitrate, ammonium,
phosphate, and iron, and the crustal tracer aluminum. These key nutrients
regulate phytoplankton growth rates, community structure, and primary production
in the oceans and hence are intimately linked with carbon cycling and air-sea
CO2 exchange. The ocean model includes key phytoplankton functional groups and
explicit treatment of the biogeochemical cycling of C, O, N, P, Si, and Fe.
Mineralogy of both natural and anthropogenic aerosols will vary by source region
and particle size, and the nutrient solubility upon deposition will vary
dependent on aerosol heterogeneous chemistry, chemical weathering and aging
during transport, and whether the deposition is wet or dry. The scientists will
produce and disseminate global maps of deposition to the oceans for each of
these nutrients. In addition, they will estimate the impact of each nutrient on
phytoplankton community structure, spatio-temporal patterns of nutrient
limitation, carbon export from surface waters, and air-sea CO2 flux at regional
to global scales. Their studies will be among the first to estimate the ocean
sensitivity to these patterns globally and to quantify their roles in driving
the ocean carbon cycle in a coupled Earth System model framework.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, a better understanding of the
links between the biogeochemical cycling of Si, Fe, N, P, and C will improve our
understanding of how the Earth system works today and enhance our ability to
predict future climate change under different emission and nutrient loading
scenarios. The model tools developed and the results will be valuable to a wide
array of public and private entities interested in the effects of nutrient
loading (from atmospheric sources) on water quality, and for those interested in
secondary production, fisheries and marine resource management, and ocean
ecosystem dynamics. In addition to the scientific merit, two graduate students
will be trained in the latest modeling techniques. &lt;br/&gt;