* 0452687
* Field Parameterization and Experimental Tests of the Neutral Theory of Biodiversity
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* John Wootton, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2010
* USD 425,364.00

A persistent challenge for ecology is to connect a mechanistic understanding of
population dynamics with the generation of large-scale aggregate patterns of
community structure, such as species-abundance and species-area relationships.
Hubbell's Neutral Theory of Biodiversity has shown promise in its ability to do
this in both marine and non-marine systems. If the theory is correct, then a
radical shift is needed in the perspective of how communities are organized,
with minimal role for species differences (niche variation) and an emphasis on
metacommunity dynamics, dispersal/recruitment control, and the interplay of
speciation and extinction dynamics. Past evaluations of the theory have depended
on asking whether the neutral theory can fit aggregate patterns, such as
species-abundance distributions. This approach is relatively weak, involving
tuning of two critical model parameters. This project will provide a strong test
of the theory in a rocky intertidal community by reformulating the theory to
make it more empirically accessible, extending a dataset on the transition
dynamics of space use, parameterizing the model with this dataset, and then
using several species deletion experiments to provide an independent test of the
theory. The experimental approach will also relax several key assumptions of the
neutral theory, including no recruitment limitation or variation and differences
in species and their interactions, and explore the consequences of these
assumptions. Aside from providing a strong test of an important synthetic
theory, the research will expand knowledge of metacommunity dynamics, which are
particularly relevant for understanding marine systems with oceanic transport,
and will provide empirical information on the consequences of chronic species
deletion in nearshore environments. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project
will train undergraduate, graduate, and post-Ph.D. scientists at the interface
of quantitative and field-based ecology, will involve interaction with tribal
natural resource managers, and will facilitate access to a unique long-term
multi-species dataset for probing transition-based approaches to environmental
science that may provide some predictive insight into the consequences of
biodiversity loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;