* 0452908
* REU Site: Mentored, Cutting Edge Research Experiences in the Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* David Hackney, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2009
* USD 407,483.00

This REU site in the Department of Biological Sciences at Carnegie Mellon
University runs concurrently with the department's Summer Undergraduate Research
Program (SURP), which has been in existence since 1987. With NSF support, this
10-week residential summer program provides intensive, mentored research
experiences in molecular biology and genetics, cell and developmental biology,
biochemistry, biophysics, and structural biology, and computational biology and
bioinformatics. Target REU students include rising juniors or seniors from small
colleges and universities that do not have extensive research programs, and
students from groups underrepresented in the sciences. Ten selected students
receive a stipend, meal allowance, housing, and reimbursement for travel costs.
The core of the program is the opportunity to carry out an individual mentored
research project, tailored to students' interest. The program includes faculty
research talks, presentations and discussion by students of articles from the
scientific literature, presentations on career options and scientific ethics,
and a concluding symposium in which all students give formal talks about their
research. Students are encouraged to consider careers in biological research,
and are taught experimental, communication, ethical, and critical thinking
skills needed for success. The Mellon Institute and other university facilities
provide all necessary resources for conducting research, and an abundance of
professional and social events enfolds REU participants into the Carnegie Mellon
experience. More information is available at
www.cmu.edu/bio/undergraduate/research/SURP/reu.shtml.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;