* 0452383
* Collaborative Research:  Disease Dynamics in Degraded Nurseries:  A Viral Disease in Spiny Lobster
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2005,11/30/2008
* Robert Ratzlaff, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2008
* USD 445,214.00

The problem of emerging infectious diseases is particularly acute in marine
ecosystems where studies lag behind those in terrestrial systems. Reports of
emerging diseases in marine organisms are increasing worldwide, particularly in
coastal environments, where the evidence is compelling that these events are
associated with the degradation of water quality and habitat integrity. Yet, few
of these studies have produced epidemiological models capable of integrating
local environmental change with disease dynamics, and none involve motile marine
fauna. A lethal, pathogenic virus has recently been discovered that infects
juvenile Caribbean spiny lobster (Panulirus argus) in the Florida Keys, the
first virus reported for any species of lobster. Transmission of the disease is
primarily via contact and infectivity is associated with ontogeny; juvenile
lobsters are susceptible to infection, adults are not. A remarkable facet of the
disease is that it not only kills infected individuals, but also alters the
behavior of healthy individuals who are normally social, but actively avoid
contact with diseased conspecifics. The underlying causes for the emergence of
the disease remain a mystery, but human-caused transformations of nursery
habitat and declining water quality in south Florida preceded its emergence. One
hypothesis is that deteriorating water quality, including that anticipated with
Everglades restoration, acts as a subtle stressor that compromises lobster
resistance to infection and facilitates the spread of disease. At the same time,
poor water quality alters nursery habitat structure, thereby indirectly
influencing disease dynamics by increasing host encounter rates and thus disease
transmission. Potentially counter-balancing the effects of these environmental
changes are ontogenetic shifts in host behavior, susceptibility to infection,
and avoidance of diseased individuals that may constrain transmission of the
disease. This project will include an ambitious program of laboratory, field,
and modeling research with the goal of building a predictive understanding of
the multifaceted role that diminished habitat integrity plays in the spread of a
viral disease among social animals in degraded coastal marine ecosystems. The
project builds on prior NSF sponsorship and draws together the talents of a
multidisciplinary group of scientists with experience in lobster biology,
ecological modeling, invertebrate pathology, and molecular biology. Although the
focus is on the emerging PaV1 virus in spiny lobster in Florida as a model
system, the results of this project will provide a better understanding of the
role of habitat structure, ontogenetic changes in host resistance, and host
behavior in regulating disease transmission in natural populations subject to
anthropogenic insult. The project objectives are: (1) To explore the underlying
mechanisms that control the spread of disease and to predict viral prevalence in
relation to changes in nursery habitat structure and water quality stressors by
incorporating ontogenetic aspects of host behavior, susceptibility to disease,
and disease transmission into the existing spatially-explicit, individual-based
lobster population model. (2) To quantitatively test in mesocosm and field
experiments the effect of altered nursery habitat structure on ontogenetic
differences in host movement, host spatial distribution, and viral transmission.
(3) To determine in laboratory experiments whether potential environmental
stressors such as extreme temperatures and salinities, or poor water quality
alter host suceptiblity to viral infection or infectivity. (4) To characterize
in a laboratory study host disease states and to determine their prevalence in
nature using molecular and histological techniques. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This project will include continued involvement and cross-training of
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs, including participation of
undergraduates in NSF REU programs at VIMS and ODU. Association with local
resource management agencies ensures that the basic science results of this
project will find application in management decisions. The PIs will co-host a
semi-annual one-day workshop in Key West for fishermen, scientists,
environmental managers, and the interested public where recent scientific
findings and environmental concerns in the Florida Keys will be discussed.
Continued molecular work will yield new assays for detection of viral infected
tissue, which may aid officials in monitoring the potential spread and shipment
of infected lobsters around the world. Also, the modeling component will aid
managers in predicting the spread of the disease in wild populations.
&lt;br/&gt;