* 0452844
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Corporate Governance: Effects on Shareholder Litigation and Directors and Officers Insurance
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2007
* Thomas Fomby, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2007
* USD 4,450.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prop ID: SES-0452844 &lt;br/&gt;P I: Fomby, Thomas
B. Organization: Southern Methodist University &lt;br/&gt;Title: Doctoral
Dissertation Research in Economics: Corporate Governance: Effects on Shareholder
Litigation and Directors and Officers Insurance &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
contributes to understanding one of the oldest conflicts in corporate finance:
the agency problem between shareholders and managers, which has significant
implications for the efficiency of market-oriented economies. Shareholders
cannot always observe the actions of the managers and the latter may not always
act in the best interest of the shareholders. Therefore, shareholders have to
design mechanisms to ensure proper behavior by the managers. Those mechanisms
are generally implemented through proper corporate governance. The ultimate
failure of corporate governance is when it is not able to resolve the grievances
of shareholders with internal mechanisms and they have to resort to litigation.
Theoretically, good governance should be associated with less shareholder
litigation and bad governance should be associated with more litigation. But is
that conjecture empirically true? This study addresses this question for the
first time, using a comprehensive database of shareholder litigation in the US
over the years and a corporate governance database. The question to be answered
ultimately is whether better corporate governance results in less litigation and
whether better governance is really the solution to the shareholders-managers
agency problems. A related issue is the amount of insurance companies purchase
to protect themselves from shareholder litigation. That study applies various
dynamic panel data models to test several corporate insurance theories, which
have not been tested in the past with US data. Another part of the study
addresses the impact of filing securities lawsuits on the company's stock
returns, employing event study and more advanced intervention methodology. Event
study methodologies have not previously been applied to analyzing the impact of
securities litigation on stock returns. There is an important distinction
between this and other types of litigation, because shareholders may also be
still owners of the company they are suing. If the lawsuit decreases firm value,
are they really better off by filing a lawsuit? This is an important academic
and practical question, given the prevalence of securities litigation in this
country. Do securities lawsuits really create or destroy investor
wealth?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is expected to have an impact on
practitioners, such as shareholders and managers, as it will reveal the true
impact of securities lawsuits on company value. Knowing the negative impact, if
confirmed, shareholders may be less likely to file lawsuits against companies
they still own. Managers can better manage the impacts of such lawsuits. The
issue of whether better governance results in lower probability of litigation
will have an important impact on the academic literature, which has dealt with
corporate agency problems for a long time. If it turns out that governance does
not lead to less litigation, this will open many theoretical and empirical
questions that may challenge existing theory and practice. Both studies have
implications for the level of shareholder wealth and whether securities lawsuits
ultimately increase or decrease that&lt;br/&gt;wealth. The support we are
seeking through the current grant application is crucial to the successful
completion of this research vis the two databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;