* 0452895
* Dissertation Research:  Ghost in the Machine: Phantom - Prosthetic Relations
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2005
* Adele Clarke, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 12/31/2005
* USD 8,000.00

Interested in the relationship between technological advance and the nature and
classification of disease, this Science and Technology Studies Dissertation
Research Improvement Grant will examine innovations in prosthetic science and
the medical phenomenon known as phantom limb syndrome (PLS). Broadly, this work
will constitute a socio-cultural and historical analysis of the modernization of
dismemberment, interested in the expansion and sophistication of technologies
used to replace parts of the body lost to amputation, and the modification of
PLS in terms of classification, causal assumptions and treatment options. This
qualitative project will employ a number of research methods including semi-
structured, open-ended interviews; analysis of historical and archival data;
content analysis of medical literature published on phantom limb from 1930 to
the present; review of online resources and documents; and review of mainstream
and alternative media. NSF funds will support interviews with key researchers
working on aspects of PL including aspects of theorizing, characterizing,
prevalence, pain, and treatment, will be conducted in person. Efforts will be
made at each site to visit lab space, observe work and interview other relevant
persons. The intellectual merit of this project includes a socio-cultural
analysis of dismemberment. Dismemberment is an issue extensively discussed in
the clinical literature, implicated in the disability literature, and alluded to
within the recent wave of theories of embodiment interested in experiential or
lived accounts. Notably absent is a theoretically informed socio-cultural
examination of the intersection of dismemberment and technologies of the body.
Further, this work contributes to the sub-discipline of medical sociology.
Medical sociology takes seriously the role of sciences, technologies and
medicines in the production of contemporary epistemological and ontological
concerns. Projects that theorize and investigate the cultural, discursive,
institutional and/or relational aspects of health, healing, wellness, illness
and death, are considered core contributions to the field. The proposed work
integrates an examination of the knowledges, techniques, and technologies
relevant to part-loss, part-replacement, and lived partiality. More broadly, in
recent years, social scientists have begun to theorize both about and from the
body. This project attempts to connect these concerns directly with the study of
science and technology. Thus, this work will contribute to: 1) the analytic
import of the body as an object and site of inquiry; and 2) the theoretical
juxtaposition of technologies of the body with both the social body and
individual bodies (in this case-amputees). In addition, this project is
sensitive to epistemological, ontological, ethical/moral and political concerns
regarding bio-technological joinings and engages directly with the multifaceted
techno phobic/philic divide. Practically, the synthesis and analysis of
knowledge concerning dismemberment, phantom limb syndrome and prosthetic
science: 1) will function to inform future research in this area; and 2) may be
valuable as a resource to amputees and others.

