* 0452883
* Interactions of Cobalt and Iron with in situ Cyanobacterial Physiology in the South Atlantic and the Benguela Upwelling Region
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Eric Webb, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2008
* USD 553,462.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0452883&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
geochemistries of dissolved cobalt and iron in the oceanic water column share
several characteristics such as extremely low concentrations, redox chemistry,
low solubility, and utilization as micronutrients by marine microbes. Iron has
been the subject of considerable research focus in recent years due to its role
in limiting phytoplankton productivity in oceanic and coastal upwelling
environments. Cobalt has been much less studied, but recent data shows it may be
important in influencing primary productivity or phytoplankton community
composition in certain geographical areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will apply
state-of-the-art geochemical and molecular biological techniques to study the
biogeochemical cycling of these two trace metals in the South Atlantic. There
will be 27-day 2007 cruise to the south Atlantic to study cobalt and iron
biogeochemistry focusing on four major hypotheses: 1) Large fluxes of labile
cobalt are associated with upwelling systems even in Aeolian dominated
environments. 2) Cobalt and phosphate show correlations in (and only in) surface
waters due to micronutrient utilization and rapid remineralization. The slope of
the correlation is dependent on the chemical speciation of cobalt. 3) The
absence of Trichodesmium populations in the subtropical and tropical South
Atlantic is caused by iron limitation. 4) Based on work from the California and
Peru Upwelling regimes, primary productivity in the Benguela upwelling regime
off of South West Africa may be iron limited or iron-cobalt colimited.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - In addition to increasing our
understanding of the biogeochemistry of two important trace metals (Fe and Co)
in a region with little data coverage, this project will support the development
of a Co stress assay that will be disseminated to the oceanographic community.
This project will conclude the thesis work of one graduate student and initiate
the work of another. These students will partake in analytical measurements and
molecular studies. Three undergraduate research fellows will also work on
molecular studies during summer internships. Priority will be given to students
from underrepresented groups at small colleges that typically do not offer
hands-on research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;