* 0452692
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics Of  Ocean Climate Changes in the Gulf of Alaska
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Arthur Miller, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2009
* USD 234,635.00

OCE-0452692/0452743/0452654&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gulf of Alaska is a
complicated physical oceanographic system that supports economically important
fisheries and ecologically important wildlife areas. The Alaska Current, which
runs northwestward along the eastern shelf-slope boundary, and the Alaskan
Stream, which runs southwestward along the western shelf-slope boundary, both
support an energetic open-ocean mesoscale circulation. These mean flows are
thought to be driven mainly by wind-stress curl forcing, while the eddies
develop as a consequence of baroclinic instability of the mean flows,
fluctuating wind stress forcing, and the arrival of remotely driven coastal
waves. The Alaska Coastal Current, which winds and meanders along the shelf
through numerous straights and islands, is thought to be driven by both coastal
fresh-water discharge and wind stresses. An interesting aspect of the large-
scale circulation of the Gulf of Alaska is that the open ocean interior is
generally an upwelling region, while the coastal regions are generally
downwelling. Even so, primary productivity is highest in the coastal regions,
which sustain a rich and diverse ecosystem. The mechanisms by which the physical
environment affects the productivity of this biological system are complicated
and poorly understood. Some of these mechanisms involve cross-shelf mixing
processes in which mesoscale eddy variability mix open-ocean nutrient rich
waters with shelf waters that contain iron.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The ocean circulation of the Gulf of Alaska will be studied using a
combination of eddy resolving ocean models, observational analyses and ocean
data assimilation products to elucidate the dynamics that control the mean,
mesoscale variability and interannual to interdecadal climate variations of the
Alaska Current, the Alaskan Stream, as well as the broader-scale interior gyre
flows. The eddy-resolving model runs (using the Regional Ocean Modeling System)
will incorporate the effects of wind stresses, surface heat fluxes,
surface/coastal fresh-water fluxes, and open-ocean boundary fluxes in various
combinations to establish the sensitivity of the model mean and mesoscale fields
to changes in these forcings as part of the seasonal cycle and as components of
climate variations. The study of the ocean analysis products will provide a
baseline of model-data compatibility to help link the very limited hydrographic
dataset to the dynamically consistent eddy-resolving simulations. The results of
the physical oceanographic analysis will be applied in several ways to
understand the complicated biological oceanography of the region. This will
include analyzing mixed-layer depth variations, computing cross-shelf particle
transports, allowing passive tracers to advect and diffuse laterally and
vertically, and incorporating simple ecosystem models in the physical model
runs. The results will help us to understand the mechanisms that control the
seasonal variability of the productivity of the Gulf, the processes that
maintain high productivity on the shelf, and the reasons for interannual to
interdecadal variations in productivity that affect higher trophic levels, like
pelagic fish populations and Steller sea lions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This research has broader impacts in that it is relevant to commercially
important fisheries management (which must deal with decadal variations in fish
populations), it may help to untangle the mysteries behind the decline of
Steller sea lion populations (a protected marine mammal), which in the 1990's
were reduced to 20% of their numbers of the 1970's, and it may contribute to a
better understanding of climate variability and predictability (which may
influence socially important industries like agriculture and energy production).
A graduate student and post-doc will receive training is sophisticated numerical
modeling and data assimilation techniques.&lt;br/&gt;