* 0452235
* REU Site: Integrated Software Radio and Radio Frequency Test Bed for Wireless Research in Dynamic Spectrum Access
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Yu-Dong Yao, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 04/30/2008
* USD 296,754.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CNS-0452235&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yu-Dong Yao&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Stevens Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU Site: Integrated
Software Radio and Radio Frequency Test Bed for Wireless Research in Dynamic
Spectrum Access&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a new Research
Experience for Undergraduates site focused on wireless research in dynamic
spectrum access. The research aims to increase spectrum utilization
significantly for both military and commercial applications. Students develop
software defined radio frequency transmitters and receivers, develop and
integrated test bed, and conduct research using the test bed. The project
involves collaboration between the host institution and Jackson State
University, with half the students and one mentor coming from Jackson State.
Undergraduate students participate in a ten-week summer research program at the
host institution. The project includes mentorship by experienced computer
science faculty members, weekly presentations and seminars, laboratory visits
and other professional development opportunities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in strong research basis and the
expertise of the faculty. The projects are in major current research areas that
are of interest to the community at large and that have clear practical
applications. The research related to dynamic spectrum access techniques may
significantly improve the spectrum utilization for future wireless
networks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include
providing a quality research experience to undergraduate students, particularly
students from underrepresented groups. The project develops strong collaborative
ties between the host institution and Jackson State University that will enable
the students to continue their research and professional growth after the summer
experience. Thus this project has the potential to produce new computer science
graduate students and faculty members and to advance discovery and understanding
while promoting learning. &lt;br/&gt;