* 0452984
* Managing Radical Organizational Change: The Role of Leadership and Affective Experience
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* M Taylor, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 02/29/2008
* USD 273,175.00

0452984 Seo Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the effects of
senior and middle managers' leadership on employees' emotional experiences,
attitudes, and behavior in work groups during radical organizational change.
Drawing on theories of organizational change and leadership in the field of
organizational behavior and of emotion in the fields of psychology and
neurobiology, we predict how and why middle managers' leadership behaviors
(transformational, transactional, and emotional intelligence) will influence
their employees' affective experiences during radical organizational change,
either by alleviating negative affect (e.g., anxiety) and/or by inducing
positive affect (e.g., excitement). Further hypotheses address a resulting chain
of relationships from their affective experience to their attitudes toward
change (openness to change and commitment to change), to their behavioral
support for the change, defined in terms of cooperativeness and innovativeness,
ultimately to employee enactment of the change, a performance outcome at the
work group level, defined as the extent to which a radical, significant, and
sustainable change is established in their daily work processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multi-disciplinary research team combines a strong
knowledge of the organizational change, emotion, leadership, and teams
literatures with more than two decades of experience in conducting large-scale
field studies. This team will empirically test these hypotheses on a number of
work groups within a large US government agency undergoing radical
organizational transformation. The research methodology will include an
experience sampling procedure to assess employee affective experience, employee
self-reports of attitudes and behaviors in support for the change, the employee
assessment of middle managers' leadership behaviors, and the middle managers'
assessment of their senior managers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this research lies in its explication of the rarely studied, but
critical role of employees' affective experience and senior and middle managers'
leadership in radical organizational change. Findings will also enrich and
inform theories of emotion in the field of psychology by examining attitudinal
and behavioral consequences of affective experiences in a real- time, high-
stress situation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research also will have an
important and broad impact at the societal level for those who face the enormous
challenge of radical organizational change in the private, non-profit, and
public sectors. In addition to students' dissertation research, presentations at
national conferences, and scholarly publications, results will be disseminated
through a three-day research-to-practice conference on the role of middle
manager leadership and work group affective experience in successful
organizational change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;