* 0452020
* REU Site: Algorithmic Combinatorics on Words
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2008
* Francine Blanchet-Sadri, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 05/31/2008
* USD 309,329.00

This three-year REU project entitled "Algorithmic Combinatorics on Words"
involves students in research at the crossroads between Mathematics and Computer
Science. Words, or strings over a finite alphabet, are natural objects in
several research areas including group theory, number theory, automata and
formal language theory, coding theory, and theory of algorithms. The Department
of Mathematical Sciences of the University of North Carolina at Greensboro will
provide unique opportunities for summer research for eight students per year for
an eight-week period each year.

A first objective of this interdisciplinary project is to investigate
challenging problems of current interest related in particular to coding,
primitivity testing, and computing periods in partial words, or strings that may
contain a number of "do not know" symbols. Two types of research opportunities
will be provided: (1) computer related research, with students writing programs
to perform experiments on partial words and to implement algorithms; and (2)
combinatorics related research, with students investigating properties on
partial words to generate conjectures. These opportunities will result in the
discovery of combinatorial algorithms on words. Students will be exposed to the
techniques of language theory since this is a natural framework for formalizing
and investigating strings and operations on them. While achieving this
objective, a second objective of the project is for students to develop superior
skills in mathematical writing and oral communication. A third objective of this
project is to submit the resulting original and high quality research on
algorithmic combinatorics on words done with undergraduate students to leading
journals and to encourage them to present it at national/international meetings
or conferences. A fourth objective is for students to gain experience in the use
of computers and their interaction in mathematical research. As a result, World
Wide Web server interfaces for automated use of the programs related to the
combinatorial algorithms will be established. Although student participants will
be selected based on merit after a nationwide recruitment from a broad range of
colleges and universities, a fifth objective of the project is to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups including minorities, women, and
students with disabilities. Through participating in this project, students will
get motivated to pursue graduate studies in mathematical sciences as they feel
the excitement and reward of making original contributions.