* 0452417
* Vanishing Voices
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2005,09/30/2008
* Seth Kramer, Ironbound Films, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 09/30/2008
* USD 518,230.00

Ironbound Films, Inc. is producing a one-hour PBS television documentary, with
ancillary Web site, curriculum and program guides about the causes of language
loss, how it affects science and how scientists are responding. Vanishing Voices
takes viewers from Native Siberia to Native America, from ancient texts to
cutting-edge technology, to demonstrate how scientists record -- even help
revive -- the world's tongues. Vanishing Voices is the first film about language
loss that addresses the issue as important to science. The ancillary program
guide will be designed for use by Native Americans who are interested in
studying or reviving their languages. A formative evaluation of the program and
a summative evaluation of the program and outreach materials will be conducted
by RMC Research Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program is supported in conjunction with the
NSF/NEH Interagency Partnership to Document Endangered Languages. The topic is
timely and compelling. The production team is well qualified, and they have
sought out the support and involvement of the linguistic community and Native
Americans involved in reviving their languages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
project has the potential to educate the public about the crisis of language
loss, the scientific and cultural value of linguistic diversity, and the ways in
which that diversity can be maintained. With the program's use in classrooms and
the program guides targeted to Native Americans, the project has the potential
to inspire young linguistic students to get involved in field work and to
encourage Native American communities to work with scientists in preserving
their dying languages. The teachers guide will imbue science material into the
social science curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;