* 0452096
* Trade Policy, Child Labor and Schooling in Developing Countries
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Nina Pavcnik, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2010
* USD 191,757.00

&lt;br/&gt;Few issues are more controversial in the contemporary globalization
debate than&lt;br/&gt;the effects of trade liberalization on poverty and well-
being in low-income&lt;br/&gt;countries. The question of how changes in trade
policy affect child labor and&lt;br/&gt;schooling is particularly contentious.
Yet, the current debate over&lt;br/&gt;globalization and child labor is being
framed in a setting where empirical&lt;br/&gt;evidence is extremely scarce. This
research project empirically considers how&lt;br/&gt;trade policy affects child
labor and schooling in a low-income country using&lt;br/&gt;micro-survey data
from India. Child labor pervades India with roughly 34&lt;br/&gt;million
children 5-14 who work as a principal activity at the start of
our&lt;br/&gt;data, and the incidence of child labor varies widely across
regions. Starting&lt;br/&gt;in 1991, India launched a drastic trade
liberalization that lowered the average&lt;br/&gt;tariff rate from 83% in 1991
to 30% in 1997 and also changed the structure of&lt;br/&gt;protection. We
explore the causal link between liberalization and changes in&lt;br/&gt;child
labor and schooling by relating child labor to district and
intertemporal&lt;br/&gt;variation in tariffs surrounding this reform. India is
divided into almost 450&lt;br/&gt;districts and there is vast heterogeneity
across districts in terms of&lt;br/&gt;industrial composition before
liberalization and thus exposure to trade reform. &lt;br/&gt;This provides ample
variation in schooling, child labor, and trade policy in&lt;br/&gt;the data to
identify the effects of India's trade liberalization.
&lt;br/&gt;Methodologically, this study will make two broad contributions. In
general,&lt;br/&gt;considering the impact of trade policy on poverty related
outcomes is plagued&lt;br/&gt;by the political economy of changes in trade
policy, but the nature of India's&lt;br/&gt;reforms allows us to address these
concerns. Consequently, this study will&lt;br/&gt;provide rare evidence on the
effects of changes in trade policy on child labor&lt;br/&gt;and schooling.
Second, this study illustrates how within country heterogeneity&lt;br/&gt;in
exposure to an economy-wide trade reform can be used to evaluate the
effects&lt;br/&gt;of a large scale policy change on child labor and schooling.
Finally, by&lt;br/&gt;contributing to our understanding of how and why trade
policy changes affect&lt;br/&gt;child labor and schooling decisions, this
research will contribute to the&lt;br/&gt;policy debate on child labor and
schooling in low income countries.&lt;br/&gt;