* 0452103
* A Foliar Geographic Study of Leaf Water Repellency as an Adaptation to Cloud Forest Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,06/30/2006
* Curtis Holder, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2006
* USD 64,983.00

Fog persistency contributes to the unique biogeography and hydrology of tropical
montane cloud forests. The presence of fog droplets on leaf surfaces may inhibit
photosynthetic carbon exchange. Previous studies have reported that carbon
dioxide diffuses approximately 10,000 times slower in water than air. The
beading of water on leaf surfaces enables the maintenance of high photosynthetic
rates. In cloud forest environments with a high persistency of fog, increased
leaf water repellency may be a selective strategy to promote photosynthetic
efficiency during cloudy periods. The significance of leaf characteristics such
as leaf water repellency as a mechanism that influences hydrological processes
is an unexplored research topic in geography and hydrology. Information on the
interaction between the physical properties of the leaf surface and fog or water
droplets on the leaf surface is useful to develop enhanced models of cloud
forest hydrological processes that investigate throughfall, stemflow, and fog
precipitation totals. Species with highly repellent leaf surfaces may increase
the quantities of throughfall, stemflow, and fog precipitation at a site and may
result in greater hydrological inputs beneath the cloud forest canopy. This
comparative foliar geography study will examine leaf water repellency of 24
dominant species in cloud forests of the Sierra de las Minas Biosphere Reserve
and in lowland forests near the community of San Jose La Arada, Guatemala. Leaf
water repellency is measured by calculating the contact angle between a water
droplet and the leaf surface. A greater contact angle indicates a more spherical
water droplet and a more water-repelling surface. The investigator and two
students will measure leaf water repellency and will collect data on leaf
characteristics (leaf area, leaf thickness, leaf mass, specific leaf mass,
specific leaf area, leaf toughness, stomatal density, trichome density,
presences of epiphylls, and evidence of herbivore and pathogen damage) of each
species. The objective of this project is to examine whether tropical cloud
forest species have a higher degree of leaf water repellency than lowland
tropical species. Furthermore, this project will identify leaf characteristics
that contribute to leaf water repellency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of
hydrological processes within cloud forests can be used to guide environmental
policy on the management of these endangered ecosystems. Defining the spatial
patterns of leaf water repellency between different habitats and species is an
important missing link in hydrological research. With clearer understanding of
the differences between leaf water repellency among dominant species at a site
and between sites, more meaningful models of forest hydrology processes can be
formulated that incorporate leaf surface variables. Furthermore, this study will
provide a basis for exploring the potential hydrologic impact of land use
changes that result from changes in leaf characteristics. The hydrological
inputs in cloud forests and an understanding of the hydrological processes that
increase water resource availability from the cloud forests are vital to the
livelihood of people in the arid lowland regions of
Guatemala.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;