* 0452279
* A Proposal to Continue "A National Data Program for the Social Sciences"
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Tom Smith, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2010
* USD 10,053,668.00

SES-0452279 James Davis Peter Marsden Tom Smith National Opinion Research Center

This project continues the National Data Program for the Social Sciences
(NDPSS), more specifically the General Social Survey. The NDPSS is a social
indicators, infrastructure, and data dissemination program. Its gather data that
allows us to (1) monitor and explain trends, changes and constants in attitudes,
behaviors, and attributes and examine the structure and functioning of society
in general as well as the role of various sub-groups; (2) compare the United
States to other societies, by developing cross-national models of human society;
and (3) make high quality data easily accessible to scholars, students, and
others with minimal cost and waiting. NDPSS data are collected through the
General Social Survey (GSS) and its allied surveys in the International Social
Survey Program (ISSP). The GSS is a regular, ongoing interview survey of U.S
households conducted by the National Opinion Research Center. The mission of the
GSS is to make timely high-quality scientifically relevant data available to
social science researchers. Since 1972 the GSS (with NSF support) has conducted
25 in-person, cross-sectional surveys of the adult household population of the U
S with approximately 44,000 respondents. GSS content is wide ranging with
approximately 4,500 variables overall. There is broad base participation in the
development of the GSS. Many prominent scholars help develop topical modules.
For example, 74 researchers from 48 universities and research institutes have
served on the GSS Board and 253 social scientists in a dozen disciplines from
147 institutions have participated in the design of the last 28 topical modules
in the GSS.

The GSS has spurred cross-national research by inspiring other nations to
develop data collection programs modeled on the GSS and by joining with the
International Social Science Program (ISS). Since 1984 ISSP has grown to 39
nations. The GSSDIRS website is extremely popular with users, having over
4,000,000 visits in 2003. The ISSP website was visited over 203,000 times during
the last 12 months. The user community includes researchers, college teachers,
university students, business planners, media and public officials.
Sociologists, political scientists, economists, statisticians, survey
methodologists, anthropologists, geographers, biologists, engineers,
psychologists, criminologist, legal scholars, medical/health researchers and
business administration and management scholars use GSS data. This use of the
GSS is widely documented in publications. The PIs have able to document over
8,500 uses of the GSS: approximately 4,862 journal articles, 1,664 books, 1,364
scholarly papers, 568 reports, and 188 dissertations and theses. Most users
(82%) have been academics with college affiliations. Research usages reached 200
per annum in the late 1980s and 300 per annum in the early 1990s. Current use is
now at over 600 per annum.

This renewal includes several enhancements, upgrades and innovations to the GSS.
Specifically, it will 1) add contextual data to supplement individual-level
information to place the individual in a social context; (2) expand our coverage
of America's ethnic and cultural diversity by the development of Spanish
versions of GSS instruments and conducting interviews in Spanish: (3) introduce
a panel component to study change among individuals with a prospective panel;
and (4) facilitate the collection of auxiliary data on other social units
besides individuals and households.

Broader Impacts

The NDPSS has already had enormous impact beyond the boundaries of the survey
itself. The GSS is held as the gold standard by which many other survey data
collection activities are measured, and the ISSP program has led to innovations
and developments in cross-cultural and cross-national research. The GSS thus
serves as a model that is being emulated elsewhere, such as in the newly created
European Social Survey program. The contributions of the GSS to the teaching of
quantitative social science analysis are unprecedented. Its accessibility and
ease of use has added value far beyond the original data collection efforts, and
researchers in the social sciences continue to mine the data both old and new to
advance knowledge and test theories. The GSS and ISSP program is part of the
core infrastructure of social science research in the U.S.