* 0452159
* Collaborative Research: Behavioral and neural mechanisms for predator evasion in crustacean zooplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Edward Buskey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2010
* USD 286,943.00

In this project the Investigators will examine the ontogeny of predator-evasion
behavior in marine calanoid copepods. Neuroethological mechanisms underlying
predator-prey interactions are fundamental to the success of planktonic species
at all developmental stages. The approach will be interdisciplinary, integrating
behavioral, morphological and neurophysiological studies. The specific
objectives are: a) to document the development of the escape response in
different life stages, from nauplius to adult, and correlate changing escape
performance with the development of the sensory, motor and central nervous
systems; b) to characterize the effect of variable environmental conditions on
the escape of the different life stages; and c) to characterize the development
of escape behavior to natural predators. &lt;br/&gt;Predation is often the
greatest source of mortality for planktonic organisms. Different marine taxa
have met this challenge in different ways. In calanoid copepods, it has led to
an escape performance matched by few other organisms. Underlying this
performance is an array of unusual neuromotor characteristics evolved in
response to the predation pressure, including high mechanoreceptive sensitivity,
high neuronal firing-frequency capabilities and the occurrence of myelinated
nervous systems in about half of all calanoids. Behaviorally it includes fast
reactions to mechanical stimuli, high output of muscle energy and high cycle
rates of muscle action. Conventional crustacean physiological properties cannot
account for copepod escape capabilities. How these animals achieve their
remarkable behavioral and physiological performance and how the performance
develops from nauplius to adult, are key questions in understanding their
success. Because calanoids invest so heavily in escape, the answer to these
questions relates strongly to the general issue in all organisms of the role
played by the neuromotor system in ecological and evolutionary adaptations. An
integrated approach can shed light on this. Focus on the developmental stages
will achieve several goals. As for many animal groups, overall predation risk
for younger individuals (nauplii and copepodites in copepods) is higher than for
adults. Studies of this susceptibility, especially as a neuroethological issue,
are relatively few. The proposed work will map out the copepod's developmental
strategy for increasing behavioral competence as it matures. Secondly, through
studies comparing morphological and physiological features of developmental
stages with those in adults, it will help us determine how and when different
aspects of the neuromotor systems appear during development and how these
correlate with escape performance. Finally, it will give the scientific
community a much better understanding of predator-prey interactions in the
younger stages. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include training of graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as providing learning opportunities for the
general public and K-12. The project will support the training of two graduate
students in marine science, who will be cross-trained in areas of
neurophysiology, morphology and behavioral testing. At the level of K-12 and the
community we will develop a short video on biological interactions in plankton
communities for public presentation and continue to develop and maintain a
website on zooplankton sensory ecology&lt;br/&gt;