* 0452874
* Environmental Risk Perceptions and Market Valuation
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* Hank Jenkins-Smith, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/29/2008
* USD 274,177.00

The advent of spent nuclear fuel shipments from over 100 temporary storage sites
across the country to a proposed permanent geologic repository at Yucca
Mountain, Nevada, would involve thousands of shipments or highly radioactive
materials. Both stakeholders and scholars have raised concerns that these
shipments will stigmatize properties along the transport routes, imposing costs
on residents and landowners. This study will employ experience with an existing
spent fuel shipping program in South Carolina to empirically test for the
magnitude and longevity of stigma impacts on property values from highly
publicized spent fuel shipments. Using as a point of departure our earlier
research that found the South Carolina shipments to reduce residential property
values adjacent to the route by approximately 3%, this study will include a
large geographic sample and decade-long time series analysis to refine estimates
of the impact (including the gradient of that impact) on prices, and the
temporal stability of that impact. The project will develop a consistent
Bayesian framework to empirically evaluate the formation of risk perceptions and
the manner in which risk perceptions translate into market determined real
estate prices. This framework will provide the basis for estimating hedonic
models in order to understand how individuals form and update beliefs about the
risk of personal harm due to low probability events. A combination of market and
survey data will be used to assess the impact of risk perceptions about the
transportation of spent fuel through both urban and rural areas on home prices
in those areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The public policy implications of the study
are significant in that the transport routes under consideration for shipment of
spent fuel from generator sites to the proposed Yucca Mountain, Nevada
repository would funnel shipments through large urban areas in which the
potential property value impact is enormous. Opponents of the Yucca Mountain
repository have argued that these potential losses should be considered in the
evaluation of transport routes and, indeed, in deciding how to manage spent fuel
more generally. Yet the magnitudes of these potential losses remain largely
speculative. This study will provide more definitive information about (a)
whether the negative impact of the shipments of property values persists over
time under normal operating conditions and (b) the shape of the gradient in the
price reductions along the route.