* 0452350
* Authoritarianism from Below: Crime, Insecurity and the Challenge to Democracy
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2005,08/31/2005
* Daniel Goldstein, College of the Holy Cross
* Continuing grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2005
* USD 65,000.00

This research in cultural anthropology studies the effect of personal insecurity
on people's attitudes toward and tolerance of democratic values and human rights
in a democratizing context. The central hypothesis is that insecurity and lack
of access to a democratic rule of law create conditions that threaten the
preservation of democracy in societies recently transformed from authoritarian
governance. The research hypothesizes that personal security correlates with
tolerance for basic democratic principles and human rights, and that urban
residents of Cochabamba, Bolivia who lack personal security are more likely to
adopt violent remedies to address their situations than are those who have
access to other ways to ensure security. Using ethnographic methods of
investigation (including participant-observation, focus groups, and personal
interviews), the research compares the responses of residents of three different
communities in Cochabamba, all of whom lack access to official justice, but who
have compensated for this lack in three different ways: by employing private
security firms; by maintaining a system of community justice brought through
migration from the countryside; and by resorting to vigilante violence. It
hypothesizes that in the two communities that have developed non-violent
alternatives to compensate for the lack of official policing and judicial
services, tolerance for democracy and human rights will be greater than in the
community that employs vigilante violence as a crime-control measure. Broader
Impacts: The new knowledge produced by this research will be useful to
governments and planners concerned with improving the democratic transition, to
support not only formal democratic measures like elections but the
implementation of a rule of law in newly democratic societies, and so reduce the
violence and insecurity with which so many of the world's people now live.