* 0452664
* Collaborative Research:  CI Isotope Systematics of Back-Arc Spreading Systems:  Insights into Geochecmical Cycling of Volatile Elements Between Crust, Hydrosphere and Mantle
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2005,09/30/2011
* Graham Layne, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 09/30/2011
* USD 147,319.00

This research supports researches at two institutions: WHOI in Massachusetts and
Oregon State University. The work involves the development of techniques and
protocols to analyze a promising new tracer (chlorine stable isotopes) of
volcanic volatiles in subduction zone volcanic rocks on a secondary ion mass
spectrometer. Chlorine stable isotopes are suspected to be important tracers of
volcanic fluids and this study examines this possibility using samples from a
variety of volcanic glasses. The research program includes the identification of
matrix and other effects in the samples that can compromise analytical precision
and accuracy of the method and analyzes a suite of twelve samples that have also
been measured and calibrated on thermal ionization mass spectrometers. This
duplication allows a quantitative determination of the accuracy and precision of
this new in-situ technique and a comparison with results obtained by standard
mass spectrometry to assess the level of confidence that can be placed on these
analyses. Additional samples, that include glasses in melt inclusions trapped in
crystals from volcanic rocks from back arc spreading centers in the Lau Basin in
the western Pacific Ocean, will also be examined. The analyses represent the
first time in-situ analyses have been made on melt inclusions in volcanic
glasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this
work are to develop new techniques and protocols to permit the analysis of
chlorine stable isotopes on a secondary ion mass spectrometer. It will also
support analytical infrastructure at WHOI as well as foster collaboration
between two universities in the US and the NORDSIM analytical facility in
Stockholm, Sweden. &lt;br/&gt;