* 0452791
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics--Trade and Travel:  Insights to be Gained from the Survey of International Air Travelers
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2007
* James Rauch, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2007
* USD 15,600.00

The researchers propose to use a unique data set, the Survey of International
Air Travelers (SIAT),&lt;br/&gt;that will make possible the doctoral
dissertation of the co-PI on the subject of the interaction
of&lt;br/&gt;international trade with international travel. The SIAT covers all
overseas air travel from the&lt;br/&gt;U. S., by destination country, purpose of
trip, and characteristics of the travelers including&lt;br/&gt;country of
residence. These data are available quarterly for the period 1993 to the
present.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. In her dissertation the co-PI will use
the SIAT to investigate at least&lt;br/&gt;three topics. First, the direction of
causality between trade and travel will be examined. Using&lt;br/&gt;appropriate
panel estimation techniques, it will be determined whether bilateral business
travel&lt;br/&gt;helps to forecast bilateral trade and vice-versa. Second, the
dissertation will explore the&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms that underlie the
increasingly well-established positive relationship
between&lt;br/&gt;immigration and bilateral trade. The interactions between
immigrant stocks and bilateral&lt;br/&gt;business and leisure travel by
immigrants will be estimated for both U.S. exports and U.S.&lt;br/&gt;imports.
The hypothesis will be tested that the interaction with leisure travel will be
stronger&lt;br/&gt;relative to the interaction with business travel for
bilateral imports than for bilateral exports.&lt;br/&gt;This would confirm the
conjecture in the literature that the stronger impact of immigrants
on&lt;br/&gt;imports than exports reflects the effect of immigrant taste for
goods from their countries of origin&lt;br/&gt;over and above their promotion of
trade through business contacts and provision of market&lt;br/&gt;information.
Third, the co-PI will use the SIAT to extend recent results showing that
business&lt;br/&gt;and social networks have a stronger positive impact on
bilateral trade in differentiated than&lt;br/&gt;homogeneous products. It has
been conjectured that these results reflect the more
informationintensive&lt;br/&gt;nature of differentiated products. If this is
true than differentiated products should&lt;br/&gt;require both greater sales
effort and more after-sales service, and we expect to find
stronger&lt;br/&gt;causal relationships running from bilateral business travel
to bilateral trade and vice-versa for&lt;br/&gt;differentiated than for
homogeneous products.&lt;br/&gt;Because the SIAT is an unknown data set and we
were concerned about its quality, the PI's&lt;br/&gt;obtained a small seed grant
and purchased data for the first quarter of 2000 for the purpose
of&lt;br/&gt;preliminary testing. The PI's added bilateral business travel to a
standard cross-sectional gravity&lt;br/&gt;model of bilateral U.S. trade. If
bilateral business travel had no explanatory power it would&lt;br/&gt;augur
poorly for the usefulness of the full SIAT data set. In fact, the PI's found
that bilateral business&lt;br/&gt;travel has a strong positive association with
both U.S. bilateral exports and bilateral imports,&lt;br/&gt;especially the
former. These preliminary results are a positive indicator for the quality of
the&lt;br/&gt;SIAT data and suggest there is much insight to be gained from use
of the complete data set.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The qualitative nature and
quantitative importance of informal barriers&lt;br/&gt;to international trade
remains an important question in international economics. The study
will&lt;br/&gt;help to gain a better understanding of how informal barriers to
trade work and how large they&lt;br/&gt;are. By quantifying the extent to which
international business travel causes international trade,&lt;br/&gt;the study
could also help to evaluate the many government programs worldwide that
promote&lt;br/&gt;business travel for the purpose of creating trade, including
trade missions sponsored by the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;Department of Commerce.