* 0452557
* Migration and Ethnoreligious Hate Crime in the Russian Federation: Risk Profiles 2000-2010
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2007
* C. Hofstetter, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2007
* USD 212,890.00

Intellectual Merit. The relationship between demographic change and ethnic
violence has been one of the basic research questions in social sciences and the
one that has not been studied systematically in comparative settings. This
investigation study focuses on Russia where ethnoreligious hate crime has been
an increasingly prominent social problem since the late 1990s. &lt;br/&gt;The
researchers examine demographic, socioeconomic, and policy contexts that give
rise to violence such as skinhead riots and street raids by chain-and-rod
wielding toughs; torchlight marches and attacks on mosques and synagogues;
murders and beatings of foreign residents and diplomats; desecration of Jewish
cemeteries and intimidation of Chinese traders by whip-cracking Cossack gangs.
Explanations of these events by Russian experts have evoked well-known social
science theories emphasizing rebellious youth subculture, rapid social change,
prejudice, and political "normalization of violence." These factors, however,
fail to explain regional variation in hate crime rates across Russia's
provinces, cities, and counties over time. Addressing important gaps in
empirical and theoretical knowledge, the current study for the first time models
and tests the combined effects of migration and demographic trends on
ethnoreligious violence and militant interethnic hostility in the Russian
Federation. The study examines new hypotheses derived from an adaptation to the
Russian context of the multicausal "defended neighborhood" model of hate crime
and the security dilemma model of anti-migrant hostility. By estimating the
effects of demographic change in Russia's political and social context-
particularly the influx of migrants into ethnically homogenous areas and
association of migrants with threats to territorial integrity-the investigation
contributes to research on violence in psychology, sociology, and political
science. &lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the researchers (1) consolidate the
data scattered in reports of human rights groups, government agencies, and the
media, to provide the first panoramic overview of multi-year trends in
ethnoreligious hate crime in Russia's 88 constituent regions and republics and
in a sample of approximately 100 of its 2,416 cities, towns, and counties; (2)
create a new dataset on migration rates and ethnic composition change in Russia
from 1989 to 2002 based on the census data and residency records reported to
government statistical agencies; (3) conduct opinion surveys based on multistage
probability sampling in areas with varying demographic trends across the Russian
Federation (700 respondents) and within the provinces of Krasnodar and
Primorskii (700 respondents each); (4) construct and evaluate the consistency of
new measures of ethnoreligious hate crime and the militant hostility; (5) assess
the impact on these measures of ethnic balance shifts; the interaction between
1989-2002 migration rate and ethnic homogeneity in 1989; territorial threat
associated with migrant groups; and regional contiguity/isolation, while
controlling for macroeconomic conditions, migration policy, and civic activism;
(6) model the risk of ethnoreligious violence for 88 constituent regions of the
Russian Federation and a sample of smaller areas in 2005-2010 holding the
2000-2004 trends constant, projecting best- and worst-case scenarios by
manipulating the variables responsive to public policy; (7) assess the effects
of demographic trends, political campaigning, and local policies on interethnic
hostility by comparing descriptive statistics, multiple regression, and path
analysis results from the proposed surveys in Primorskii and Krasnodar, as well
as by comparing the results of the proposed Primorskii survey and the 2000
Primorskii poll (N=1,010) conducted by the PI as part of the project on Chinese
migration in the Russia. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The project is designed to
have broader impacts through informing public policy and civic activism, and
improving human security in any society facing the challenges of ethnoreligious
hate crime. More than previous research, the study examines the impact of
migration policy, law enforcement, and civic activism on hate crime, including
the effects of regional deportation laws, residency requirements (propiska);
frequency of hate crime prosecution; government support for minority and
interethnic civic associations and activities (e.g., ethnic societies and
festivals); and the density of human rights organizations. The findings-and, in
particular, risk-assessment methodology-will be disseminated through academic
journals, conference papers, think-tank memos, and the media in the United
States and Russia. Researchers will examine the reliability and contextual
relevance of the risk profiles first-hand using ethnographic observations,
interviews, and focus groups with local officials, civic activists, and ordinary
residents in high-, medium-, and low-risk neighborhoods in Russia. The risk
assessment model will benefit societies in the United States, Russia, and
elsewhere by helping NGOs and government agencies to channel scarce resources
more efficiently; to select locations where the needs for hate crime monitoring
and public intervention campaigns may be more acute than they appear; and to map
out long-term demographic strategies, including settlement and integration of
minorities. The project will establish new international research partnerships
between San Diego State University and the Center for Geographic-Political
Research of the Moscow Carnegie Center, the Institute of Geography of the
Russian Academy of Sciences (RAN), Russian human rights' monitoring groups and
the Far Eastern Branch of RAN. It will enhance course offerings in comparative
politics and research methodology at SDSU, where approximately 40% of students
come from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;