* 0452045
* Design of advanced sensing materials
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Miroslawa Josowicz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 02/28/2011
* USD 746,037.00

Professors Jiri Janata and Miroslawa Josowicz of Georgia Tech University are
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program to work on
"chemically-sensitive field-effect transistors" (CHEMFET). The idea is to tune
organic semiconductors for optimization of their electron transfer properties
for use as gas sensors and novel devices for information processing. The group
has previously utilized chemical, electrochemical and photochemical means to
change the Fermi level of the solid, with most studies focusing on polyaniline.
The group is now pursuing other properties needed in a sensor, for example, long
term stability and fast response time of the selective layer. The use of
additional secondary dopants is being explored, including ionic liquids. A
magnetic quartz crystal microbalance (MQCM) is being developed to simultaneously
monitor changes in magnetic spin density and the mass dopant uptake by the
solid.

Organic electronics is a new technological area that offers a wide range of
applications not feasible with conventional silicon electronics. However,
understanding and controlling the chemical environmental factors is critical for
both solid-state sensors and organic electronics intended for signal and
information processing. Additionally, new chemical sensors are required to
detect ambient vapors. Inexpensive, long-lasting and easily manufactured gas
sensors are needed in the interest of national security, for example.