* 0452917
* Impact of Atmospheric 30-60 Day and Quasi-biweekly Oscillation on Tropical Indian Ocean Dynamics, Heat Transport, and Upper Ocean Heat Content
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Weiqing Han, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2010
* USD 261,713.00

0452917&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The climatic importance of atmospheric
IntraSeasonal Oscillations (ISOs) in the tropical Indian Ocean has been
receiving increasing attention. Reflecting this importance, extensive modeling
studies, together with a few newly deployed mooring observations, have
significantly advanced our understanding of various aspects of Indian Ocean
variability induced by atmospheric ISOs in the past a few years. This
understanding, however, is far from complete and many outstanding science issues
remain unaddressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the proposed project
are to explore: (i) How and why do the surface and subsurface meridional
currents in the equatorial Indian Ocean respond to atmospheric ISOs (especially
the dominant 30-60 day and quasi-biweekly oscillations), and how does that
response impact multi-timescale variability of cross-equatorial heat transport?
(ii) What are the seasonality and interannual variability of the upper Indian
Ocean response to atmospheric ISOs? (iii) How do atmospheric ISOs affect the
variability of tropical Indian Ocean (especially the warm pool) heat
content?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary tool for this project is an ocean
general circulation model. Satellite data combined with daily reanalysis from
the European Center for Medium range Weather Forecasts will be used as the model
forcing fields. The realistic representation of physics in the ocean model
allows for a direct investigation of how the ocean responds to the intraseasonal
atmospheric forcing. To provide insights into the key oceanic processes
involved, a linear continuously stratified model and a nonlinear intermediate
ocean model will also be used. Available data in the Indian Ocean will be
analyzed, compared with, and interpreted by the model solutions. The proposed
research is scientifically important because interannual variability of the
tropical Indian Ocean (the part that is independent of ENSO) is not well
understood, and the cross-timescale impact of atmospheric ISOs has been
suggested. The project addresses a central theme of climate research and is
essential for understanding the role of atmospheric ISOs in causing multi-scale
climate variability in the tropics. The intellectual merit of the proposed
project lies in its contribution to advancing our understanding of, and
providing new insight into, how and why the tropical Indian Ocean responds to
intraseasonal atmospheric forcing, a study that will build a solid foundation
for identifying the role played by atmospheric ISOs in causing climate
variability in the tropical coupled ocean/atmosphere system. By integrating the
research with education, the project will have a broader impact on our society
through both advancing climate research and promoting graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;