* 0452685
* Petrology of Southern Valu Fa Ridge Lavas
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* David Christie, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 02/29/2008
* USD 155,206.00

Exchange of volatiles and other chemical elements between the earth's crust,
mantle, and ocean drive the composition of the atmosphere and ocean and tell us
a great deal about the processes of subduction, mantle heterogeneity, and other
deep earth processes. This research uses the chemistry of glassy seafloor
volcanic lavas, recently collected by an Australian research vessel along the
Valu Fa Ridge and its associated back arc in the western Pacific Ocean, to
evaluate the nature and variability of mantle source components including arc-
related fluids and parental magmas. Samples come from an area that is adjacent
to the NSF-funded Integrated Study Site in the Lau Basin where subduction and
mantle processes are presently under intense study. The Valu Fa Ridge lies at
the southern end of the East Lau Spreading Center within the Kingdom of Tonga.
The Valu Fa Ridge is important because it is rapidly propagating southward,
creating new, deep-water volcanic systems that become progressively closer to
the "ring-of-fire" volcanoes of the Tofua (Tonga) volcanic arc. This rapid
evolution provides a unique opportunity to investigate a back-arc volcanic
system, as it evolves.&lt;br/&gt; This research involves completing major and
trace element analyses of glasses from lavas that have been dredged from the
seafloor from a closely spaced transect along the Valu Fa Ridge. A wide suite of
volatiles (H2O, CO2, etc.) and companion isotopes will be analyzed and
interpreted. Isotope data will be analyzed and provided by international
collaborators at no cost. Geochemical data will allow mapping of the
distribution of key elements and element-ratios that are diagnostic of the key
mantle source characteristics and components. Potential sources for this source
material include deep-sea sediments and seawater-altered volcanic rocks from
subducted ocean crust; water- and carbon dioxide-rich fluids or molten rock
material formed in a distinct melting region that supplies the "ring-of-fire"
volcanoes; and "original" mantle material that was present before subduction
began. Questions addressed by this study are: (1) At what depth, temperature,
and pressure are magmas forming?; (2) What is the chemical and mineralogical
composition of melting mantle material in the area?; (3) How much water, carbon
dioxide, and other volatile species are present when melts are formed and what
is the role of volatiles in the melting process?; (4) To what extent is material
derived from the subducted ocean crust in the melting region?; and (5) How do
these characteristics vary along Valu Fa ridge?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will be fully integrated into NSF-
funded RIDGE 2000 Integrated Study Site research. The work will also support a
graduate and undergraduate student, both of whom will be trained in geochemical
analyses. It will also support NSF-funded analytical infrastructure at the
Oregon State University. In terms of dissemination of results, material will be
provided to the RIDGE 200 office for education and outreach activities focusing
on the Lau Basin. All geochemical data will be submitted to the RIDGE 2000
research database. The work also engages international collaboration with
scientists from Australia, Germany, Tonga and other southern Pacific island
nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;