* 0452485
* ZOOM 8/Hot Spot
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Kate Taylor, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 01/31/2007
* USD 2,199,696.00

WGBH Educational Foundation is requesting funds to produce 20 new shows and new
outreach and Web activities for "ZOOM," which will be renamed "Hot Seat." "Hot
Seat" is a daily half-hour PBS television series targeted to kids ages 8 to 11.
Uniquely by and for kids, the program gives its viewers a chance to explore, to
experiment and to share their creativity. The series, along with its far-
reaching outreach, offers its audience an innovative curriculum that promotes
the acquisition of basic math and science knowledge and the development of
problem solving skills called "Habits of Mind." The intended impacts are to: (1)
establish a project that uniquely integrates television, the Web and outreach as
a model for how media can teach science and math; (2) engage kids and teach them
science and math content and process skills; (3) provide curriculum and
professional development to organizational partners. Innovation includes
developing three new content areas for the series -- Invention, Space Science
and Earth Science -- and evolving the project design by incorporating new
production techniques that enhance the "reality factor" of the science
programming. Outreach for the project will include printed materials for kids,
families and educators. A new collaborative partnership is being developed with
the American Library Association to help distribute the new afterschool
curricula to librarians across the country. "Hot Seat" will support the existing
network of "ZOOM" outreach partners and convert the museum "ZOOMzones" to "Hot
Seat Spots." "ZOOM" currently is carried by 269 public broadcasting stations and
is viewed by 4 million children each week. &lt;br/&gt;