* 0452036
* Collaborative Research: Coalition Policymaking and Legislative Review in Parliamentary Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Lanny Martin, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2007
* USD 83,369.00

Collaborative Research: Coalition Policymaking and Legislative Review in
Parliamentary Democracies

Three features distinguish politics in Europe from politics in the United
States. The first is that individual parties rarely win a majority of
legislative seats. The second is that European parliamentary systems do not
strictly separate the legislative and executive branches. To stay in office, the
leaders of the executive branch (generally called "governments" or "cabinets")
must enjoy majority support in parliament. The third feature is a direct
consequence of the first two: To secure the necessary majority support in the
legislature, most European governments include several parties that agree to
govern as a "coalition." This project examines the central role played by
coalition government in European politics. Other political scientists have
already addressed important aspects of coalition politics. For example, we have
a good understanding of which parties are likely to be included in coalitions,
and we know much about the circumstances under which coalitions break down. But
there remains a huge gap in our knowledge concerning how coalition governments
make policy between their formation and termination. This gap is significant
because coalition policy-making poses a challenge: The parties making up a
coalition have different views about desirable policies. But a coalition can
adopt only one government policy on any given issue, and so coalition government
requires parties to agree on a common position. Once selected, however, such a
compromise policy must be implemented by the cabinet minister with jurisdiction
over the relevant policy area. As a result, parties that participate in a
coalition are constantly confronted by the possibility that ministers with will
deviate from compromise positions and pursue policies that favor their party at
the expense of their partners. Overcoming this tension between the need to
pursue common compromise positions and the risk posed by attempts to undermine
these compromises poses a central challenge for coalition governments. It is
impossible to understand how policymaking works in European democracies without
understanding how parties are able to deal with this challenge. The goal of this
project is to explain how coalition governments make policy in light of this
tension. The Investigators' argument focuses on legislative review - the key
institutional mechanism that allows partners to "police" the coalition bargain.
Coalition members can make use of the legislative process to scrutinize and
amend legislation introduced by "hostile" ministers. As part of this project,
the research team demonstrates the empirical relevance of such parliamentary
scrutiny by gathering detailed data on the treatment of government bills in
France and Denmark. Together with similar data they have already collected for
Germany, Ireland, and the Netherlands, they will be able to conduct a detailed
study of the legislative process in five major European democracies. They will
be able to investigate how bills are changed, which parties are able to exercise
influence over the content of legislation, and how these dynamics relate to the
tension between coalition members. This is the first cross-national study to
trace the evolution of a large number of government bills on a variety of issues
from introduction to final passage.

Broader Impacts: Two features of this project provide significant contributions
to our understanding of European politics. First, the project contributes to
moving scholarship beyond its current focus on the formation and termination of
coalitions to an understanding of the actual process by which coalitions govern
jointly. Second, and more importantly, our analysis suggests a novel perspective
on European legislatures that challenges the existing scholarly wisdom.
Conventional wisdom holds that European legislatures exercise only marginal
influence in policymaking. In sharp contrast, this argument stresses an aspect
that has largely been ignored: the possibility of legislative scrutiny plays a
central role within coalition governments by enabling parties with divergent
preferences to successfully pursue compromise policies. In other words, the
project shows that the legislative process provides an institutional mechanism
that is central to the ability of coalition governments to solve intra-coalition
conflicts and to contain the effects of delegation to cabinet ministers. In
short, this research project provides a deeper understanding of how policy is
made under multiparty government. At the same time, it helps us understand (and
appreciate) the central role played by legislatures in European political
systems.