* 0452081
* Wealth Inequality and the Great Shocks of the Twentieth Century; Evidence from France 1912-1946
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2005,03/31/2007
* Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2007
* USD 268,994.00

Until World War I wealth inequality in most industrialized economies was high.
Then, in the next half century, it collapsed. In Paris, for instance, the share
of wealth owned by the top 1% fell by half (from 70% to 35%). Although there has
been significant variation in wealth concentration in developed economies since
the end of World War II, in a historical perspective we have been living in a
world of diminished inequality. In collaboration with Thomas Piketty and Gilles
Postel-Vinay, I propose to investigate the collapse of wealth inequality by
examining estate tax records from Paris in the period from 1912 to 1946. To do
so the PI plans to collect detailed information of the composition of estates
for individuals who died in Paris during the years 1912, 1922, 1927, 1932, 1937
and 1946. These years will provide access to one cross section before and one
after each of the great shocks this era such as WWI, the Great Depression, and
WWII). Intellectual merit of the proposed activity: Although there has been
increasing recognition of the importance of the changes in inequality that
occurred between 1914 and 1950, relatively little is known about how the process
unfolded. These data will complement data sets we have already collected from
1807 to 1902 and will permit the compilation of homogeneous series on wealth
concentration in Paris and France from 1807 to 1946 that complement published
series that run from 1902 to 1984. The data offer detailed information on the
identity of the decedents and on the nature of the wealth they left behind. This
will permit a better understanding of why the very rich failed to maintain their
relative position, and why the middle class started to accumulate assets at a
much faster rate after rather than before WWI. Broader impacts resulting from
the proposed activity: Understanding the decline in inequality that occurred
during the first half of the twentieth century is important in its own right.
More recently however, a number of economists have become interested in the
consequences of the great shocks of the first half of the twentieth century on
institutions. For some, these set back the development of private financial
markets in those countries where the shocks were worst. Yet, to understand the
political economy of institutional change, it is necessary to know exactly what
kinds of people were affected by the shocks and how that may have changed their
preferences for one set or another of institutions. On another level, we suspect
that older cohorts had a much more difficult time overcoming the adverse
consequences of the shocks than did younger ones. Beyond the lost generations on
the battlefield, WWI and WWII may also have destroyed a generation of savers. As
such, studying the first half of the twentieth century may provide some
important clues at to the persistent effects of very large shocks and thus be of
relevance to present day concerns. Indeed the impact on developing economies in
Eastern Europe,Latin America, Africa and elsewhere of very large shocks that
have had important effects on wealth accumulation can only be understood by
turning to history.