* 0452765
* Physiological and Stoichiometric Studies of Marine Diazotrophs
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Douglas Capone, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2009
* USD 508,314.00

Over the last decade, marine N2 fixation has emerged as an important component
of the nitrogen (N) cycle of oligotrophic marine ecosystems, and the number of
recognized diazotrophic microorganisms has increased dramatically. The
planktonic cyanobacterium Trichodesmium was once thought to be the predominant
diazotroph in the open ocean, and it is still thought to account for possibly
half of the N2 fixation inferred by several geochemical indices. However, we now
know that cyanobacterial symbionts of diatoms, and other components of the
bacterioplankton also contribute substantially to this process. Current efforts
are underway to explicitly represent N2 fixation in marine biogeochemical
models, but key parameterizations required for these models are relatively
primitive. Photosynthetic parameters for both CO2 and N2 fixation by
Trichodesmium have only been coarsely characterized and are non-existent for
other photosynthetic diazotrophs. Geochemical analyses that have assessed the
extent of excess N formation (i.e. excess relative to P) have assumed a non-
Redfield N:P ratio for diazotrophs, the presumed source of the excess N. The
value assumed greatly affects the derived rate of N2 fixation, especially when
extrapolated to the global ocean. However, the N:P ratio of diazotrophs is
poorly constrained. The principle aim of this project will be to systematically
evaluate factors that limit diazotrophic growth and N2 fixation in situ. The
investigators will examine two photosynthetic marine diazotrophs, Trichodesmium
IMS 101 and coccoid cyanobacteria, as model organisms. The investigators will
define the fine scale controls of light and P on growth and diazotrophic
activity of the model organisms, their interaction with light and nutrients, and
their responses with respect to photosynthetic parameters and cellular N:P
stoichiometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data and ideas produced in this study
will increase understanding of the complex interactions between light and
nutrients with respect to the globally significant process of nitrogen gas
fixation. A better understanding of the physiological controls on N2 fixation in
Trichodesmium and diazotrophic coccoid cyanobacteria will in turn lead to a
better understanding of controls on global N2 fixation as a whole. Results
derived from this study are being sought by and will be of direct use to the
marine ecosystem and biogeochemical modeling community, which is attempting to
forecast ocean C cycle dynamics. This project will support training of two
senior female graduate students, as well as undergraduates. The investigators
will also participate in the COSEE-West program, which disseminates recent
findings in oceanography to high school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;