* 0452155
* Ecogeographic Variation in Neandertal Diet:  Evidence from Occlusal Microwear
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2007
* Frederick Grine, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 02/28/2007
* USD 11,970.00

For over 100,000 years, the Neandertals inhabited a variety of ecological zones
across western Eurasia, between glacial and interglacial times. To elucidate the
still poorly understood effects of climatic change and variability versus
competition on Neandertal subsistence patterns, this study will employ occlusal
microwear analysis to reconstruct the dietary habits of Neandertal groups from
numerous widely dispersed sites in Europe and the Middle East. These wear
patterns will be compared to those of Pre-Neandertal and early Upper Paleolithic
groups from the same regions. The microwear signatures of modern hunter-gatherer
populations with known and diverse dietary habits will be used for comparative
and interpretive purposes. This project is significant because it will shed
light on the controversial issues concerning aspects of Neandertal behavior and
fate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have broader impacts in that it
will result in the assembly of a large collection of high-resolution casts of
Neandertal and early Upper Paleolithic dentitions. Because these fossils are
scattered throughout Europe and parts of the Middle East and are often
inaccessible, this collection, which will be housed at Stony Brook University,
will provide an invaluable resource to a broad range of researchers interested
in the Paleolithic. In addition, this project entails collaboration with
scientists and graduate students at other universities and institutions in both
the United States and Europe, and all molar microwear images and data resulting
from this project will be made broadly available through a website maintained at
Stony Brook University. This project will integrate research and education by
involving undergraduate students in the data collection and analysis process.
Finally, the proposed activity promotes the participation of under-represented
groups in paleoanthropological research inasmuch as the co-PI is a Lebanese
woman. &lt;br/&gt;