* 0452561
* Welfare Analysis of Legislative Redistricting
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Stephen Coate, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2009
* USD 266,346.00

Recent Supreme Court cases involving both racial and partisan gerrymandering
have intensified a national debate over legislative redistricting. There is
little agreement, however, in this debate over how alternative redistricting
plans should be evaluated from the perspective of promoting the interests of
voters. At its most fundamental level, the relevant question is: how should
legislatures represent different groups of voters, and how should voters be
allocated across districts in order to implement this prescription? This project
develops an approach based upon traditional welfare economics in order to
address this question and related questions from both a theoretical and
empirical perspective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a normative benchmark, the
principal investigators begin by examining how ideological groups should be
represented in legislatures. The key findings are that the seats-votes curve,
which relates the fraction of seats held by the leftist party to its national
support, should be linear, have a positive slope, and be biased in favor of the
dominant party. They then examine how voters should be allocated across
districts in order to implement this optimal seats-votes curve. The key findings
here are that, if the optimal seats-votes curve can be implemented, then
districts should be heterogeneous in their allocation of voter ideologies and
that some districts should be "safe seats". Finally, the project will develop
conditions under which the optimal seats-votes curve can be implemented and then
tackle the difficult question of how voters should be allocated across districts
when these conditions are not satisfied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will also develop an integrated theoretical and empirical approach to evaluating
legislative redistricting from this welfare perspective. It first develops a
methodology for estimating seats-votes curves; this methodology requires only
data on district-by-district support for the leftist party in legislative
elections. The researchers then demonstrate that voter welfare can be directly
measured for this observed seats-votes curve as well as for any other possible
seats-votes curve. Thus, observed voter welfare can be compared with voter
welfare under the optimal seats-votes curve, permitting measurement of any
welfare losses from sub-optimal redistricting. In addition, observed voter
welfare can be compared with voter welfare under proportional representation, an
alternative voting system commonly used in other countries. The methodology also
permits a comparison of voter welfare under alternative redistricting regimes,
including bipartisan, partisan, and independent commissions. Finally, these
ideas are illustrated in an application to voting in U.S. state legislative
elections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third project aims to generalize the ideas
developed in the first two parts to a framework in which both voters and
candidates are defined by their ideology as well as by their race. This
generalized framework will be used address several normative questions related
to race in redistricting. For example, how should black voters be represented in
legislatures and allocated across districts? While black majority districts tend
to elect black candidates, they also concentrate liberal voters, potentially
leading to the defeat of leftist candidates in other districts. Thus, we plan to
examine this and other potentially interesting interactions between race and
ideology. &lt;br/&gt;