* 0452033
* Dissertation Research: An Investigation of Citizens' Transactional use of Web-Sites in Public Libraries
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Raghav Rao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 7,235.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Research Improvement Grant will
examine the determinants of the transactional use of websites in public
locations by considering the facilitating conditions in a public library, user
characteristics, social influence and individual affect toward the public usage
behavior. It is hypothesized that these four dimensions will impact the
transactional use websites from computers in this public environment. Prior
research has established a direct relationship between the actual use of IT and
the facilitating conditions which support the use of technology. Past work has
also established a link between psychological privacy, architectural privacy and
task privacy with respect to the activities that people feel comfortable
pursuing in a workspace; however there is no work to date which examines these
attributes with respect to computers located in public libraries. The research
question will be tested by gathering data from people actively using public
computers and the results will be statistically analyzed. Another dimension of
privacy that has emerged from the PIs preliminary discussions with actual users
is the individual concern about third party tracking of activities on the web.
This new dimension will also be explored during this project. Two of the
dimensions that define the digital divide are the socioeconomic status (SES) and
the geographical location of the individuals. People with lower SES tend to be
regular users public computers in libraries as they do not have access to
computers in other areas. The lack of computers in homes is somewhat higher in
rural than urban areas, and the quality of the internet connections are poorer
in rural areas, therefore public libraries provide a source of quality access to
technology and online resources. People with lower SES and people who live in
rural areas exhibit more concerns about privacy in the workplace. These concerns
may extend into their willingness to transact business with a website in a
public location. Considering that these two groups tend to be regular users of
public computing facilities, the physical environment of the public computer in
a library may inhibit people in these groups from fully participating in
government and commercial services delivered electronically. The project
hypothesizes that the SES level will be related to the public transactional use
of websites and in addition, the geographical residence location will also
impact the transactional use of websites in a public environment. The sampling
plan will be devised so that data will be gathered from these different groups
and these hypotheses will then be tested using statistical methods to evaluate
differences between the groups. A combined web and paper survey will be utilized
to maximize the responses. Governments and private enterprises are spending vast
amounts of time and resources to provide a wide range of services to citizens
through web sites, however if the citizens are not willing to fully use all
aspects of the services then the efforts are in vain. Literature addressing the
problem of the digital divide indicates that public libraries are a primary
source of service provision for citizens who do not have private computers
and/or internet connectivity. The determinants of usage within this public
context have not been investigated or quantified in prior research. This project
is an effort to empirically investigate and quantify some of these determinants.
This research proposes to examine citizen's use of computers in public locations
for completing informational and monetary transactions with websites. The scope
of this dissertation improvement proposal encompasses New York State, includes
both rural and urban areas and has received the support of the NYS State
Librarian and the Director of Technology in addition to the support from the
director of the local library system. The impact of this research reaches from
the individual public computing space up to organizations seeking to
electronically provide services to citizens. If we are to bridge the digital
divide by providing access to government services through public computers, then
the computers need to be provided in such a manner that citizens will be willing
to use the full range of functionality provided on the web sites. Differences
between rural and urban residents and differences between different
socioeconomic status members will be considered within this project. These
results will impact the established public access infrastructure found in New
York State and in the future could apply to other states across the US. The
results of this research will be disseminated in journals and websites and also
be used in courses in Library Science and Information Systems that are taught by
the co-PIs. Statistics indicate that low income and minority citizens are the
heaviest users of public library computers, therefore this investigation clearly
targets this group.