* 0452800
* Collaborative Research: Coupled Carbon and Phosphorus Cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Stephen Monismith, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2009
* USD 368,116.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0453117&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the
relationship between carbon and nutrient fluxes, and the resulting elemental
ratio of dominant biomass has been reasonably well-studied for planktonic
systems, little is known about the extent to which carbon and different nutrient
cycles are coupled in benthic ecosystems. Coral reefs are excellent examples of
benthic-dominated ecosystems in which coupling of carbon and nutrient cycles, in
particular phosphorus, could be very strong or very weak. Thus, the fundamental
question arises of whether the kinetics of net carbon production and phosphorus
assimilation by reef communities are independently forced, resulting in widely
varying C:P on reefs, or whether net carbon production simply follows rates of
phosphorus assimilation through the C:P ratio of the dominant biomass in a
classic model of nutrient limitation. This project combines the expertise of two
coral reef biogechemists from the University of Hawaii, with that of a
hydrodynamicist from Stanford University, in an interdisciplinary approach to
resolve this issue. Over a year-long period, carbon and phosphorus fluxes will
be measured from changes in the chemical composition of seawater moving through
a control volume on a reef flat on the Kaneohe Bay Barrier Reef, Hawaii. The
secondary objective is to better understand the fundamental role of wave-driven
currents and Stokes drift in the net transport of water across coral reefs.
These results would extend knowledge gained from prior work using flumes, with
their defined flow characteristics, to the field where there has only been
limited data taken prior to the advent of modern instrumentation capable of
resolving water flows across the control volume boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;The
broader Impacts of this project include improving understanding of how the
productivity and composition of benthic reef communities vary under different
conditions and will, therefore, provide useful knowledge to agents and agencies
responsible for their management as natural resources. The project will also
find mutual support with an existing NOAA program for which the University of
Hawaii scientists are participants that promotes and develops the exchange of
technological expertise between coastal marine scientists throughout the entire
Pacific region. Finally, this project will provide valuable field experience to
graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Hawaii and Stanford
University. &lt;br/&gt;