* 0452809
* REU Site: Integrated Bioengineering Research, Education, and Outreach Experiences for Females and Underrepresented Minorities at WPI
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* David DiBiasio, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 02/28/2009
* USD 271,255.00

Abstract for REU Site: Integrated Bioengineering Research, Education, and
Outreach Experiences for Females and Underrepresented Minorities at WPI,
Camesano, 0452809 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site offers integrated
research, education, and outreach experiences for 8 undergraduates in
bioengineering at Worcester Polytechnic Institute. The objectives of this
program are to provide 1) research opportunities for undergraduate students in
bioengineering; 2) personal and professional development training to help
increase the retention of females and minority undergraduate students in
engineering; and 3) involvement in outreach to middle-school students. This
experience as mentors provides a form of civic engagement that helps the REU
students realize their ability to influence and aid the next generation of
engineers and scientists. For the middle-school students, participation
increases their interest in science and their retention in essential math and
science courses that will allow them to pursue engineering as an academic
discipline. This is especially important for females and students of color, who
may fall behind in math courses in the middle-school years, thus limiting the
future educational opportunities available to them. The interaction with middle-
school students occurs partly through a two-week (half-day) internship program
for middle-school students and also through involvement in existing summer-camp
programs organized and run through the WPI Office of Diversity and Women's
Programs (ODWP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The intellectual
merit of the proposed work is that 8 undergraduates/year are engaged in research
in one of the most exciting and rapidly developing areas of engineering ---
Bioengineering. Six faculty members from Biomedical Engineering, Chemical
Engineering, and Electrical and Computer Engineering have created research
opportunities in areas that include biomedical signal processing, control of
bioprocesses, tissue engineering, oxygen transport in the body, and microbial
infections. Each student conducts research in the laboratory with the faculty
mentor on a project specifically designed for his or her abilities and also
participates in professional development activities. The assessment plan focuses
on desired outcomes, uses multiple measurements, has formative and summative
elements, and uses published evaluation instruments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. For the undergraduates, this experience
not only exposes them to academic research but also helps them to see how a
scientific career can be possible for them, is not inconsistent with a rich
personal life, and can be used to benefit the next generation of students.
Weekly seminars involve workshops and discussions on topics including ethics in
science, balancing work and family life, how to choose a graduate school, etc.
In addition, the undergraduates become engaged in the recruitment of new
engineers. Each undergraduate in the program is assigned an 8th grade "intern"
for a period of two weeks. The intern is given a small portion of a research
project to work on, and the team makes a poster presentation at the end of the
summer. As a separate activity, the undergraduates also work with the ODWP to
develop bioengineering activities for two (already existing) summer camps for
females and students of color. &lt;br/&gt;Undergraduates from Bioengineering,
Chemical, Biomedical, Electrical, and Computer Engineering are recruited from
U.S. institutions, especially from schools that lack graduate research programs
and from institutions with large minority enrollments. The recruitment program
derives from published best practices for recruiting underrepresented groups.
These practices comprise a process that is highly personal and visible and a
program that includes project-based, hands-on learning, mentoring, and creation
of a learning community in the research labs that engages students of all types
and backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;