* 0452599
* Monetary and Fiscal Policy Switching:  Theory and Empirics
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Eric Leeper, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2009
* USD 203,649.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates-both theoretically and empirically-the
implications of ongoing random switches in monetary and fiscal policy regimes of
the sort observed in many countries. More specifically, the proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;o derives qualitative implications in simple models that
permit analytical solution;&lt;br/&gt;o uses computational methods to obtain
quantitative implications in environments in which monetary and tax policies can
affect both inflation and real economic activity;&lt;br/&gt;o jointly estimates
monetary and fiscal impacts in fixed and varying regime models;&lt;br/&gt;o
obtains maximum likelihood estimates of parameters of a dynamic, stochastic
general&lt;br/&gt;equilibrium model with regime
switching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research finds that the key principles
guiding the development of models of monetary and fiscal policy can change in
critical ways when agents embed the possibility of regime change in their
decision rules. Incorporating regime change, therefore, can fundamentally alter
existing views about what constitutes good policy. The research develops models
with regime-switching monetary and fiscal policies that can be solved
analytically and it extends existing linear numerical methods. The project also
develops Fortran code that will be publicly available. Finally, the research
advances existing work by fitting to data a DSGE model with non-trivial regime
switching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research derive
primarily from the influence of the findings on the practice of policy. By
probing the robustness of existing principles that inform monetary policy
behavior, the research contributes directly to improving actual policy
performance. By studying them jointly, the research advances empirical work on
monetary and fiscal policy, leading to better estimates of the impacts of policy
actions on the economy. The research directly addresses questions that concern
policy authorities. How important are fiscal policy shocks? What constitutes
good monetary policy when fiscal behavior is subject to on-going shifts?
Research findings will be disseminated through professional outlets and through
the investigators relationships with central banks in North America, Europe, and
Japan. Findings will be presented directly to policymakers and published in non-
technical policy forums. The research establishes research collaborations with
three early-career economists.&lt;br/&gt;