* 0452779
* REU Site in Ecology, Environmental Science and Conservation Biology in Ghana
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* David Brakke, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2009
* USD 283,238.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of James Madison University's REU program
is to expand the educational experience of participants through research in
ecology, environmental science, and conservation biology in tropical sub-Sahara
Africa. Each cohort of participants will comprise of seven undergraduate
students and a high school teacher. Participants from U.S. universities will
travel to the University of Cape Coast, Ghana during the summer to work on
defined research projects under the mentorship of Ghanaian scientists for eight
weeks. They will acquire skills in ethnobotany, tropical biology, ecology,
entomology and taxonomy. They will improve their skills in critical thinking and
problem solving while gaining a better understanding of the Ghanaian culture.
This program has two main thrusts: i) bioprospecting for potentially useful
plants and ii) ecological and environmental studies. The carefully selected
projects will focus on screening plants for their potential economic importance
and for ecological studies in the Cape Coast area (such as the Kakum National
Forest). Participants will design experiments in collaboration with their
mentors, collect and analyze their data, and present their results at the end of
the program in Ghana and at regional and national meetings upon their return to
the U.S. Seminars and workshops will be led by Ghanaian professors to provide
participants opportunities to learn beyond their disciplines. They will be
encouraged to publish their results in peer-reviewed journals. In addition to
covering cost of travel to the host site, room and board, participants will also
receive a stipend. More information is available at
http://csm.jmu.edu/wubah/UCC/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;