* 0452247
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Local Price Variation and Local Labor Market Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2006
* Lowell Taylor, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2006
* USD 500.00

&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation research described in this proposal explores the
intersection of labor &lt;br/&gt;economics and urban/regional economics. The
work is motivated by two key &lt;br/&gt;observations: (1) Theoretical work in
urban economics provides good reasons to expect &lt;br/&gt;price variation
across locations, and empirical evidence verifies that this variation is
&lt;br/&gt;substantial. (2) Standard economic models of labor market behavior,
such as human &lt;br/&gt;capital investment, labor supply, or discrimination,
are derived under the assumption &lt;br/&gt;(implicit or explicit) that
individuals face the same prices. More importantly, empirical &lt;br/&gt;work
based on these models nearly always uses data from national data sources, but
&lt;br/&gt;ignore the fact the individuals live and work in local labor markets
and thus face different &lt;br/&gt;local prices. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
researcher proposes to revisit standard theories of the returns to education,
labor &lt;br/&gt;supply, and racial discrimination in models that recognize that
people live in different &lt;br/&gt;locations and thus face different prices.
She then intends to evaluate the likely empirical &lt;br/&gt;importance of these
theoretical insights. The empirical work will entail evaluations of
&lt;br/&gt;local labor markets, and thus will require the use of very large data
sets. The researcher &lt;br/&gt;is requested funding from the National Science
Foundation to support her use of the &lt;br/&gt;long-form files of the U.S.
Census at the Michigan Research Data Center. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Preliminary theoretical work, presented in this
proposal, shows how local price variation &lt;br/&gt;is likely to affect
important objects of study in labor economics, including the return to
&lt;br/&gt;education and labor force participation. Preliminary empirical work
demonstrates that &lt;br/&gt;there are indeed very large differences in the
measured returns to education across cities &lt;br/&gt;in the U.S., and also
substantial systematic differences in female labor supply. It is quite
&lt;br/&gt;possible that if researchers ignore this variation, resulting
empirical work will lead to &lt;br/&gt;serious misunderstandings. There appears
to be little literature on this issue. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Empirical labor economics is an important enterprise,
providing key inputs to policy &lt;br/&gt;analysis on such important issues as
the impact of income taxes, the advisability of &lt;br/&gt;subsidizing
education, and the analysis of welfare policy. The research outlined in this
&lt;br/&gt;proposal holds promise of improving our ability to conduct this
valuable research. &lt;br/&gt;