* 0452387
* Chemistry REU Site at the University of Cincinnati
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Bruce Ault, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2009
* USD 200,250.00

This Chemistry Division award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at the University of Cincinnati for the summers of 2005-2007. The
program director is Bruce Ault who is assisted by co-PI Anna Gudmundsdottir. Ten
students will solve scientific problems that are from one of the five major
areas of chemistry: analytical chemistry, biochemistry, inorganic chemistry,
organic chemistry and physical chemistry. These students will work closely with
one of the 12 participating faculty members, individuals who have been carefully
selected for their research accomplishments and successful experiences in
working with undergraduate researchers. The projects will be planned in such a
way as to permit tangible accomplishments in a ten-week period, yet be
sufficiently open-ended that fresh research challenges will arise. Educational,
activities will include hands-on enhancement of research skills, guidance in
professional abilities such as resume' writing and interviewing, workshops on
career options and planning, and discussions of issues of overarching importance
in science. A focus on minority recruiting, combined with the involvement of a
faculty member from an HBCU in the program, will expand and strengthen the pool
of underrepresented minorities in the workplace. Interaction with on-campus
groups, including the Chemical Engineering REU program, Project SEED students
and students in the University's WISE (Women in Science and Engineering) Program
will further broaden the perspectives of students in this REU program.