* 0452220
* Technician Support: Ohio State University, Radiogenic Isotopes Laboratory - Phase II
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2007
* Kenneth Foland, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

EAR-0452220&lt;br/&gt;Foland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides
technical support to the Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory in the Department of
Geological Sciences at Ohio State University on the main campus in Columbus.
This laboratory conducts varied research that receives essential assistance and
service by two skilled technicians with many years of experience. NSF funds
together with matching from Ohio State University provide one FTE of combined
annual technician salary. The Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory is housed in first-
class physical space. It has facilities for sample processing and preparation,
including a cleanroom suite, and for analysis with thermal-ionization and noble-
gas mass spectrometers, plus a full array of ancillary equipment to support the
research measurements. The laboratory conducts isotope geochemical and
geochronologic research on diverse and wide-ranging issues. The principal
isotopic systems of current investigation are Rb-Sr, Sm-Nd, U-Pb, and K-Ca and
also K-Ar especially with the 40Ar/39Ar technique. Studies include both isotope
tracer research, using the radiogenic isotopes (e.g., Sr, Nd, and Pb), and
geochronologic determinations (e.g., 40Ar/39Ar and Rb-Sr). Overall, the research
objectives range from the fundamental and methodological to the applied and
topical. A broad cross section of the varied research activities are undertaken
by the PI and Ohio State University colleagues as well as a number of external
scientists with on-going collaborative and cooperative projects. The central
scientific objectives are both methodological and applied with current subjects
ranging from environmental and hydrologic (e.g., Pb in drinking water, Sr in
stream water) to paleoclimatic (e.g., Recent to Paleozoic) to diverse geological
(e.g., basalt petrogenesis, thermochronology, micron Au deposits) to purely
geochemical (e.g., Ar retention and behavior in minerals).&lt;br/&gt;