* 0452324
* Multiple Nitrogen Utilization Strategies and Phytoplankton Species diversity:  Nitrate Assimilation in N2-fixing Bloom-Forming cyanobacteria
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Hans Paerl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2009
* USD 399,990.00

Excessive nitrogen (N) loading supports eutrophication in many aquatic
ecosystems. This study will assess the nutritional physiology and ecological
role of nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria, an algal group implicated in the
eutrophication process. These cyanobacteria support their N needs by fixing
atmospheric di-nitrogen (N2); however some species can also utilize nitrate, a
dissolved form of combined nitrogen. Whether invasive N-fixing cyanobacteria
successfully compete with native species in systems experiencing increased
nitrate loading may depend on species-specific ecological trade-offs between
nitrate and N2 utilization. To test this hypothesis, the roles of N uptake and
utilization mechanisms potentially promoting dominance of the invasive and toxic
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii over native Anabaena spp. in Florida lakes, will
be investigated. In-situ field manipulations and culture-based studies will be
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will improve the ecological theory on
which the regulation and management of phytoplankton communities is based.
Because of the complexity of their nutritional physiology, N2-fixing
cyanobacteria are problematic when managing water quality. This study will
provide valuable information to managers developing nutrient reduction
strategies to control eutrophication in systems with nuisance (e.g. toxic)
cyanobacteria. Additionally, toxic cyanobacterial blooms are undesirable in
waters used for drinking and recreation. The impacts of toxic cyanobacteria can
ultimately be felt up the food chain, including humans. Graduate students will
play an integral role in the research, and undergraduates in the Carolina
Environmental Program will utilize the project in coursework and participate in
the research through independent study.&lt;br/&gt;