* 0452768
* Support for Institutes in Qualitative Research Methods
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* David Collier, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2008
* USD 71,122.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project provides support for the Institute for Qualitative
Research Methods&lt;br/&gt;(IQRM), an annual training program that provides
intensive instruction in state-of-the-art&lt;br/&gt;methods and technologies for
qualitative research. This program, sponsored by the Consortium on Qualitative
Research Methods at Arizona State University, addresses the growing interest in
and debates about qualitative research methods, and provides an invaluable
opportunity for discussion and collaboration among the nation's leading
qualitative researchers in political science and cognate
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;Since 2002, IQRM has successfully filled a critical
pedagogical and intellectual need. Although much political science research uses
qualitative methods, these methods are not consistently taught at an advanced
level even in top graduate programs. IQRM thus addresses several complementary
goals. First, the annual two-week sessions train graduate students and junior
faculty in qualitative methods so that they can improve the use of these methods
in their own work, as well as teach graduate courses on qualitative methods at
their home institutions. Second, IQRM allows faculty to present recent and
ongoing work on qualitative methods and get feedback from other faculty as well
as participating students. Third, the classes and discussions provide direct
feedback to institute students on their current research designs (in most cases,
the research design of their Ph.D. thesis). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: IQRM offers networking opportunities among and between students and
faculty and encourages collaborative efforts to disseminate innovations
in&lt;br/&gt;qualitative methods. To date, IQRM has taught advanced qualitative
methods to nearly 200 graduate students and junior faculty drawn from across the
political science subfields, as well as from several cognate disciplines. This
is a diverse group. In 2004, 25% of the attendees were non-White. In the same
year, 54% were women-a remarkable participation rate when compared with women's
involvement in methodological programs in other venues. (For example, the
American Political&lt;br/&gt;Science Association reported on 7 April 2004 that
only 19% of members of the Political&lt;br/&gt;Methodology organized section
were women.) The sessions scheduled for January 2006, 2007, and 2008, will
continue to draw on a diverse pool of participants and are each expected to
bring together approximately 70 graduate students and junior faculty and 15
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;