* 0452863
* Collaborative Research: Productivity Differences, Firm Evolution, and Worker Reallocation
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Rasmus Lentz, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2006
* USD 91,994.00

The purpose of the project is to construct and estimate an equilibrium model of
wages, employment and growth. The approach is based on a dynamic model of firm
innovation and evolution developed by Klette and Kortum (2002). In their model,
aggregate growth is viewed as the result of research and development investments
made by firms. The process is one of Schumpeterian .creative destruction. in
which new products replace old ones as in the theories of Grossman and Helpman
(1991) and Howitt and Aghion (1992). There are several reasons for interest in
the approach. First, it is consistent with empirical evidence on research and
development investment made and patents filed by firms as wells as the evolution
of firm labor force size. Second, it provides a model of labor demand that can
be used to match the essential characteristics of worker flows into an out of
employing firms as well as the size distribution of firms. Finally, the model
establishes a clear link between labor market policies, the evolution of
productivity and economic growth and employment. The first task among those
proposed is to complete a formulation of the model that can be estimated using
matched employer-employee data. The estimation strategy exploits the stochastic
structure of the model and the empirical fact that firms differ with respect to
the productivity of the inputs that they employ. These differences allow one to
estimate the cost of firm expansion as well as the production function
relationship between the quantity and composition of workers in the labor force
of a firm and its value of output. Although initially the PI's intend to use the
Danish Pay and Performance data to estimate the structure of the model, they
also hope to estimate it using Longitudinal Research (LRD) and Longitudinal
Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) U.S. databases. Cross country comparisons are
essential for the policy applications proposed. Given the structural parameter
estimates, the objective is to explore the model.s quantitative implications for
cyclical responses to aggregate shocks and for the welfare effects of labor
market policy. Does the model explain the observed magnitudes of cyclical
variation in investment, employment, wages, and worker and job flows and the
dynamic relationships among them? What are the implied magnitudes of the effects
of payroll taxes, unemployment benefits, hiring subsidies and employment
protection on wages, employment and growth? The answer to these questions is of
critical importance to society at large. For example, the research should
provide new insight into why employment and productivity growth in many European
countries has lagged that of the U.S. in recent decades. Broader Impact: The
principal investigators will offer the opportunity for undergraduates to engage
in the activities of the project. The principal way in which they will do so is
as research assistants. In addition, they would like to develop a macro-labor
economics course, suitable for upper class majors as well as graduate students
in economics and policy analysis, based on the project.s modeling approach and
results.

