* 0452129
* Collaborative Research on Small Business Network Creation and Outcomes for Change and Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2010
* Nancy Miller, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 04/30/2010
* USD 230,011.00

This research studies small business networks using the frameworks of both
institutional theory and social capital theory to explain formal network
formation and strategic network behavior. The objectives are to examine in these
emerging business networks: 1) how the network as an institution formalizes and
develops components of social capital, 2) why and how cooperative ties develop
and endure among members; 3) what type and quantity of resources flow along the
ties; and 4) how these ties impact adoption of innovation and organizational
change. This interdisciplinary research approach offers an extension of current
economic, social, and strategic management theories by examining how cooperative
relationships begin and develop among networks of independent business owners,
and by expanding the domain of empirical research to groups that have received
little attention in the literature - rural, Hispanic, and women-owned
businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigators, with a research
history in small business management and strategic networking, will partner with
network coordinators to conduct analyses of four new networks. Data collection
methods will include interviews with small business owners as they initiate
collective actions within the network, observation and measurement of
interactions taking place in formal network meetings and informal member
contact, and examination of archival documents. Change that is episodic,
discontinuous, and intentional will be measured within the network organization
and within the member firms. Measures of innovation will include the
introduction of products, processes, and services. This investigation is
particularly well-timed in that networking is a prominent, but newly emerging,
organizational form with little existing measurement of the internal structuring
and early development of actual networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
What is novel and theoretically interesting about the study of small business
networking is that it offers insight as to how cooperation can grow and persist
among traditionally non-cooperating firms. Networks, rather than mergers and
acquisitions, are said to be a more lucrative way to combine firm strengths in
collaborations that facilitate research and new product development. Linking
small businesses may provide opportunities encouraging change and initiating
innovation. Findings from this project will assist policymakers in their
programs to promote small business creation, retention, and expansion. The
alliances will facilitate dissemination of research-based information for small
businesses. Also, the research will contribute to graduate and undergraduate
college courses in rural and community development, social change, and small
business management at U Nebraska-Lincoln and Iowa State.&lt;br/&gt;