* 0452706
* Collaborative Research: The Influence of the Mediterranean Outflow Water on the Climatic Variability of the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2005,05/31/2006
* Eric Chassignet, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2006
* USD 158,342.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0452679/0452706&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convection in the Mediterranean Sea
produces a warm salty water mass that flows over the Gibraltar sill into the
Atlantic at mid-depth, forming one of the most pronounced property distributions
tongue in the global ocean. The impact of these overflow waters on the dynamics
and properties of the North Atlantic basin is disproportionate to its relatively
small volume flux. The high salinity contributes to the preconditioning of the
surface waters in the Nordic Seas for deep convection, either directly via
advection or indirectly via mixing. Additionally, these waters establish the
property fields in the eastern North Atlantic over a depth range that
considerably exceeds the overflow thickness, and of the entire mid-depth
subtropical basin, influence the dynamics of the eastern basin. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The variability of the Mediterranean overflow wagters has been
largely ignored. A recent study has shown increases in the temperature and
salinity over the past fifty years. The two main questions of this study are:
what is the spatial and temporal context for these changes, and what is the
impact of these changes on the property fields and dynamics of the eastern North
Atlantic and on the basin as a whole? To address these questions, data and
modeling analyses are proposed to assess not only the consequence of
Mediterranean overflow variability on the basin, but also the relative
importance of other sources of variability. While past studies have focused on
the mesoscale variability created by Meddies, our focus will be on interannual
and decadal time scales&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Overall, the salinification of the
Mediterranean overflow waters stands in sharp contrast to the observed
freshening of high latitude surface waters and of the convective water masses
emanating from the northern North Atlantic. If high latitude waters continue to
freshen, the bulk of the convective activity that sends heat to the deep ocean
may fall to source waters at mid-latitudes, providing added impetus for the
study of the Mediterranean overflow waters. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This work will determine the source of long-term variability for a water
mass that plays an important role for the properties of the eastern North
Atlantic, and for the climate of the global ocean. Additionally, the dynamic
response of a basin to a temporally varying overflow will be evaluated to
establish the spatial and temporal variability of the basin's property fields.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: An improved understanding of the fate of
the overflow will illuminate how changes in a marginal sea are transmitted
through the open ocean, and will help improive the modeling of overflow waters
throughout the global ocean. Finally, this work will train a graduate student in
modeling and data analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;