* 0452054
* Influence of Estuarine Topography on Longitudinal Dispersion
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Wayne Geyer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2009
* USD 677,595.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0452054&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
longitudinal dispersion rate sets the residence time of waterborne material in
estuaries, controls how far the salinity intrusion advances up-river and
determines the response time of an estuary to changes in forcing conditions. The
dispersion rate can vary by more than two orders of magnitude in different
estuaries and can vary by more than an order of magnitude in a particular
estuary depending on the forcing conditions. Furthermore, the mechanisms that
set the dispersion rate can change with location within an estuary depending on
the local geometry and the proximity to the mouth. In spite of its importance,
the physics which govern estuarine dispersion remain poorly understood.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will address the mechanisms of dispersion
with a study of three estuaries with a wide range of forcing conditions and
geometries. The research will include new measurements at two sites (the
Merrimack and the North Rivers) and analysis of existing data and model results
from the Hudson River. The field measurements will consist of 45 day deployments
of cross-channel and longitudinal instrument arrays to quantify the salt flux
and longitudinal salinity structure, and detailed shipboard measurements to
provide high-resolution flux estimates and document the overall spatial
structure of the current and salinity fields. Similar data sets from Hudson
River, and a numerical model will be used to determine the mechanisms that
control the dispersion rate over a broad range of forcing conditions and at
different sections of the river with distinct channel morphology. This multi-
system approach will allow the analysis to encompass some of the diversity of
estuarine environments, allowing these results to be generalized to many
estuaries worldwide. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Dispersion rate is
the most important physical quantity affecting estuarine and coastal water
quality. With increasing societal pressure on these waterways (e.g., nutrient
loading and other non-point-source discharges) and higher expectations for
environmental quality, understanding of the dispersion processes is an
increasing priority. Better understanding will lead to better prediction and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;