* 0452088
* Collaborative Research:  Examination of the Potential Sources for the Mid-Water Silica Anomaly in the NE Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* Douglas Hammond, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/29/2008
* USD 96,093.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0452565 /
OCE-0452088&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies have shown that the North
Pacific contains the highest deep-water concentrations of dissolved silica in
the world ocean, and Cascadia Basin appears to be the source region for this
global-scale anomaly. Data compilations indicate that a .plume. of dissolved
silica originates from within this small marginal Basin, which can be traced for
several thousand miles, from an origin in the NE Pacific to the Hawaiian Ridge
in the south and almost to Siberia in the west. Box model calculations based on
compiled data in the area indicate that the North Pacific deep-water silica
anomaly requires a flux from Cascadia Basin of nearly 2 Tmols/year to sustain
the observed concentration levels. If correct, this dissolved silica flux is an
astonishing 40% of the total riverine silica input to the oceans, but this
interpretation requires substantial verification. Although there are several
identified sources for dissolved silica within the Basin, including ridge-axis
vent fields, ridge-flank hydrothermal circulation, compression of sediments at
the accretionary wedge and the upward diffusive flux from sediment pore waters,
none of these processes, either individually or in aggregate, appear to be
adequate to produce the observed deep-water silica anomaly.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers at the University of Washington and the
University of Southern California will conduct a field program to provide the
required spatial distribution of CTD and Niskin/nutrient measurements needed to
construct a reasonable silica inventory and geostrophic bottom water flux. They
plan to (a) compile all existing CTD/nutrient data from Cascadia Basin, which is
substantial in number, but limited in location, (b) add new data from cruises-
of-opportunity in 2004, (c) map the geographic distribution and inventory of
deep-water silica with 40 new hydrocast profiles from areas not sampled by
existing data, (d) use the new data to determine the basin-scale pattern of
bottom water circulation and (e) determine the Ge/Si ratios of the bottom water,
to distinguish biological from geological source regions. The primary goals of
the program are to quantify the flux of dissolved silica into the Basin and
identify the source regions that are responsible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Large ocean-going field programs at UW support graduate and
undergraduate students in their academic research, allow participation of
additional non- Oceanography students from UW and from other institutions on the
cruises, acquire data for student theses, and provide substantial out-reach in
public awareness about scientific research. Further, although Cascadia Basin was
poorly sampled by WOCE, the few data collected suggest a disproportionate role
for this small basin in determining properties of the entire Pacific Deep Water.
&lt;br/&gt;