* 0452422
* Collaborative Research: Development of Phytoplankton PCNA Antibodies for Use in Growth Studies: Emiliania huxleyi and Karlodinium micrum as Model Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Senjie Lin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/2008
* USD 46,140.00

Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is a cell cycle marker that is
potentially useful for assessing phytoplankton growth status and estimating in
situ growth rate. However, its application has been hindered by the lack of
effective antibodies for phytoplankton PCNA. PCNA-encoding genes for major
classes of phytoplankton have been cloned and sequenced recently, permitting
production and characterization of effective antibodies. This project will
produce a suite of ten phytoplankton PCNA antibodies. Three universal algal PCNA
antisera and three dinoflagellate-specific PCNA antisera will be produced using
synthetic peptides, in collaboration with an antibody producing company. This
arrangement will reduce production costs and will provide a supply of antibody
that can be made available to other researchers. Four antisera will be produced
for the coccolithophorid species Eminiliania huxleyi (2) and the ichthyotoxic
dinoflagellate Karlodinium micrum (2) based on purified PCNA overexpressed in
bacteria from respective PCNA genes. This project will include the development
of an optimized protocol for immunofluorescence using these antibodies, based on
both epifluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry, with E. huxleyi and K.
micrum as model systems. Expression of PCNA in E. huxleyi and K. micrum will be
characterized using Western Blots. Association of PCNA with the cell division
cycle will be characterized by means of immunofluorescence labeling of PCNA,
coupled with flow cytometric, DNA-based analysis of the cell cycle. Comparisons
of PCNA-based growth rates of these species to actual growth rates in culture
(using cell counts) will allow assessment of the accuracy and precision of the
new method. A total of 10 polyclonal antibodies will be available to interested
researchers worldwide. These PCNA antisera will prove extremely useful for
assessing the growth status of phytoplankton populations and for estimating in
situ gross growth rates (GGR) using various detection formats atr the discretion
of the researcher. Examples include Western Blotting, immunofluorescence, or
potentially, enzyme linked immunoabsorbent assays (ELISA).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of PCNA antibody products will facilitate
future applications including studies of the cell cycle and growth
characteristics of the two model species and other phytoplankton, as well as
field applications of the PCNA approach to in situ growth rate estimation. This
project includes training for graduate and undergraduate students in molecular
techniques and flow cytometric analyses. Travel between the two participating
institutions will allow both PIs and their students to expand their expertise.
Results of the research will be integrated in courses taught by the PIs. This
project will also provide an excellent opportunity for the PIs to continue with
their commitment to encourage minority and female students to participate in
scientific research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;