* 0452574
* Seasonal-to-Interannual Modulation of Fine-Scale Thermohaline Structure
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Daniel Rudnick, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2010
* USD 966,951.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0452574&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
studyl is sustained sampling of upper ocean hydrography to resolve the seasonal-
to-interannual modulation of meso- and fine-scale thermohaline structure.
Underwater gliders will be deployed to make repeated occupations of a 1300-km
meridional section northward from Hawaii to 35 degrees N along 158degrees W. The
observations will quantify the modulation of: (1) the horizontal density ratio
in the mixed layer and upper thermocline, (2) spice variability in the
thermocline, (3) horizontal variability in mixed-layer depth, (4) horizontal
variability in the deep chlorophyll maximum, (5) depth-average velocity and
vorticity. Using two Spray gliders deployed near the Hawaii Ocean Time-series
(HOT) site off Hawaii, the section will be repeated on a roughly monthly basis.
After making repeated sections for four months, the gliders will be recovered
and freshly serviced glider will be redeployed. The gliders will carry sensors
to measure temperature, salinity, depth, and fluorescence. Sampling
characteristics of the relatively slow gliders will be assessed by comparison
with data from a rapidly towed vehicle .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental goal of quantifying low-frequency modulation
of fine-scale structure is relevant for climate dynamics concerns such as
CLIVAR. The observations will address the problem of parameterizing "sub-grid-
scale" processes in climate models. The glider sections will benefit from, and
extend, the activities at the HOT site. Education and outreach activities
include the training of a graduate student, the establishment of a web site, and
dissemination of data. The graduate student will be involved in every aspect of
the glider operation and data analysis. A web site will be developed with a
purpose of making simple plots available to the public. The PIs will participate
in community discussions on how to archive and distribute glider data to
interested scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;