* 0452980
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Trends in Executive Compensation 1936-2002
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* Caroline Hoxby, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/2008
* USD 24,975.00

Corporate executives comprise a small but important part of the labor market. As
the&lt;br/&gt;main decision makers in public corporations, top officers have
been responsible for a large&lt;br/&gt;fraction of assets in the economy ever
since the separation of ownership from control at the turn&lt;br/&gt;of the
century. Although finance and labor economists have analyzed the market for
managerial&lt;br/&gt;personnel extensively during the past 20 years, far less is
known about the evolution of the&lt;br/&gt;market during earlier times. This
project fills in the gap by constructing the first consistent
panel&lt;br/&gt;dataset on executive compensation to extend from the 1930s to
the present. These data are&lt;br/&gt;essential for understanding the evolution
of managerial pay and the rise of professional managers&lt;br/&gt;over the
course of the twentieth century.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits&lt;br/&gt;Although recent changes in executive compensation are well
documented, an&lt;br/&gt;understanding of longer run trends has been hampered by
a lack of consistent data. Previous&lt;br/&gt;researchers have studied
managerial pay for short periods of time, but variation in
methodologies&lt;br/&gt;across studies prohibits using these data to construct
consistent trends over a long horizon. This&lt;br/&gt;project solves this
problem by collecting data on executive compensation from
historical&lt;br/&gt;corporate reports. Due to requirements imposed by the
Securities and Exchange Commission,&lt;br/&gt;these documents have provided
annual information on the compensation of top officers in&lt;br/&gt;publicly
traded firms ever since the late 1930s. Because the reporting requirements have
not&lt;br/&gt;changed significantly over time, these data will allow for
different components of executive pay&lt;br/&gt;to be measured consistently for
most of the twentieth century.&lt;br/&gt; Obtaining consistent estimates of both
the level and components of managerial pay will&lt;br/&gt;contribute a
significant new insight into how the market for corporate executives has
changed&lt;br/&gt;over time. Furthermore, this project will be the first to
provide consistent estimates of how the&lt;br/&gt;relationship between pay and
firm performance has changed over time, thereby improving
our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the optimality of contracts and their effects on
the long-run performance of the&lt;br/&gt;economy. Finally, this project will
shed light on the interaction between tax policy and trends in&lt;br/&gt;income
inequality during the past 70 years. By studying how top officers have been able
to shift&lt;br/&gt;income out of taxable forms during different tax regimes,
this project will advance the current&lt;br/&gt;knowledge on the behavioral
responses to taxation from top income earners.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Historical data on executive compensation are necessary to
address numerous questions&lt;br/&gt;that span a wide range of subjects
including the market for managers, organizations, contract&lt;br/&gt;theory,
corporate finance, and tax policy. Because these topics exceed the scope of the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;research agenda, the data will be of interest to many other
social scientists. Once this project is&lt;br/&gt;complete the dataset will be
made available to the public, providing other researchers with
an&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to expand their own work.&lt;br/&gt;This project also
has several important implications for public policy. An
improved&lt;br/&gt;understanding of how high-income earners respond to tax rates
can inform the discussion on&lt;br/&gt;optimal tax policy, tax revenues, and
income redistribution. Corporate executives have always&lt;br/&gt;been among the
top 1% of the income distribution. Thus, understanding the response of
these&lt;br/&gt;high income individuals to changes in tax rates is critical for
determining whether changes in tax&lt;br/&gt;policy will have the intended
consequences. Moreover, a study on the long-run trends in&lt;br/&gt;executive
pay adds an important historical perspective to the unprecedented levels of
income&lt;br/&gt;inequality between executives and workers that have been
experienced during the past decade.&lt;br/&gt;The effects of past policies on
the absolute and relative levels of pay should be an
important&lt;br/&gt;consideration in the current debate concerning the recent
excesses in executive compensation.