* 0452933
* A Comparison Study of Batterer Intervention and Restorative Justice Programs for Domestic Violence Offenders
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2005,09/30/2009
* Linda Mills, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Martinek
* 09/30/2009
* USD 215,753.00

Every state now criminalizes domestic violence, and most jurisdictions rely on
Batterer's Intervention Programs (BIPs) -- which bring groups of male offenders
together for educational programs related to that violence -- as the primary
means of combating recidivism. Recent NIJ research raises serious questions
about BIPs' effectiveness, noting little evidence of attitudinal and behavioral
change, high attrition rates, and inconsistent contact with victims. The current
study uses a randomized design to compare the effectiveness of an existing BIP
and an experimental restorative justice intervention for domestic violence
offenders. The latter, dubbed CCP, uses a restorative justice approach to reduce
violent behavior by bringing the offender together with a facilitator and a
professional to develop a specific treatment plan that initiates the offender's
behavioral change. The research will be conducted over two years in a criminal
court in Santa Cruz County, Arizona, a predominantly low-income Latino community
near the Mexican border. This study randomly assigns 60 offenders to one of two
interventions: BIP (control group) or CCP (experimental group). The objective of
this research is to determine whether CCPs are more effective in reducing
violence than BIPs, given that CCPs are tailored to the offender and related
parties and acknowledge that a variety of influences must be addressed in order
to achieve a sustainable reduction in violence.