* 0452494
* Collaborative Research -- Theoretical Investigations of Some Empirical Puzzles Regarding Behavior in Relationships with Asymmetric Information
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Avinash Dixit, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2008
* USD 102,408.00

This project will develop formal microeconomic models to address two important
questions that cannot be answered with current models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first project will consider cooperation and enforcement in ongoing
relationships. The goal is to develop explanations for important and poorly
understood behavioral patterns in how partners punish bad behavior. For example,
the criminal justice system is structured with more severe punishments for
repeat offenses, a pattern we have observed in other relationships as well.
Another example is seen in price-fixing cartels; firms refusing to adhere to a
pre-existing cartel agreement by stealing business from cartel partners are
often not punished by the cartel as a whole. Again, such non-punishment has also
been observed in other contexts. While these patterns are widespread, standard
economic theories of on-going relationships do not do an adequate job of
predicting when we will observe such behavior. These theories predict instead
that punishment should be of constant severity and should always be carried out.
The principal investigators will develop a new theory to address these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project attempts to explain why a
"50-50" norm is influential in a wide range of practical circumstances - such as
joint ventures among corporations, share tenancy in agriculture, the division of
restaurant tabs among friends - as well as in a variety of laboratory settings.
The leading economic theories, which attribute this behavior to preferences for
fairness, fail to provide a complete explanation for existing experimental
evidence. The investigators will develop and analyze a new theory that
postulates that people like to be perceived as fair, as well as preferring fair
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;