* 0452726
* Mass Media, Emotions, and Responses to Globaliztion
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Ted Brader, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2010
* USD 365,907.00

Debate about America's proper role in the world and concerns about immigration,
trade, and international terrorism are not new. These issues might be loosely
classified under the heading of globalization, and they are linked in four
important ways: (1) they produce cultural, economic, and social changes that
profoundly affect ordinary citizens; and (2) they readily evoke
images&lt;br/&gt;of the "other"; but (3) the issues themselves are far removed
from the experience of most citizens; and, as a result, (4) politicians have
enormous power to frame the debate and thereby arouse emotions that shape
attitudes and behavior. Rising pressures of economic globalization coupled with
the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2000, have wrenched debates about
globalization out of corporate boardrooms and chambers of government and dropped
it into the living rooms of ordinary citizens. But public opinion on these
issues seems uninformed, highly volatile, and thus open to manipulation by
politicians both here and abroad. Most Americans are likely to depend heavily on
information received through mass media to make sense of these issues. This
project explores the impact of the political debate about immigration, trade,
and responses to terrorism on public opinion and political behavior. The
researchers investigate how the prevalence of certain information or cues in the
mass media affect the ability of citizens to make sense of these important but
remote issues. &lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have shown that emotions play a central
role in shaping how people respond, attitudinally and behaviorally, to the world
around them. But despite the recognition that politicians and events can
influence emotions, little research has been done to document the capacity of
specific threats and other political stimuli to elicit emotions. The
investigators test how a number of key dimensions to public discourse about
globalization influence opinion formation and motivations to take action by
evoking anxiety, anger, compassion, and other emotions. They expect group cues
e.g., racial, ethnic, national) to be particularly powerful. Their preliminary
research indeed shows that cueing specific group identities can alter responses
to otherwise identical information about immigration, a process that is mediated
by emotions. The researchers also examine other factors that may modify the
emotional and behavioral&lt;br/&gt;impact of messages, including an emphasis on
costs or benefits, the locus of blame for problems, the degree of control over
problems, the severity of a threat, and what is at stake (e.g., economic vs.
cultural concerns, freedom vs. security).&lt;br/&gt;This project employs
multiple methods of data collection to explore the impact of
political&lt;br/&gt;communication on opinions about globalization. The central
pillar of the project is a set of survey&lt;br/&gt;experiments administered to
representative national samples to determine how public discourse affects the
responses of ordinary citizens. However, the researchers are also keenly
interested in the process whereby people choose to become more informed, the
mechanisms that underlie the process of opinion formation, and actual behavioral
change. Their laboratory is equipped with instruments for measuring
physiological (emotional) arousal and cognitive accessibility, allowing them to
pursue research on mechanisms further.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Globalization
may well be the defining feature of the contemporary era. Recent years have
witnessed significant opposition to further liberalization of trade and
immigration. The 9/11 terrorist attacks and subsequent "war on terror" have
exacerbated tensions over the free movement of people and commerce. These trends
will only continue with increasing economic interdependence and political
integration. Politicians, journalists, and interest groups have the ability both
to educate and to mislead public on this complicated set of issues. Public
opinion can in turn constrain the actions of policy makers and, depending on the
forces aroused, fan the flames of either conflict and intolerance or prosperity
and mutual understanding. Rigorous investigation is required to uncover the
impact of elite political debate on mass opinion, so that the investigators may
shed light on the capacity of political discourse to guide public responses
during periods of social transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;