* 0452738
* The Impact of Crack Cocaine
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Steven Levitt, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 203,490.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;A wide range of social indicators turned sharply
negative for Blacks in the late 1980s. The PI's intend to examine whether crack
cocaine can explain these patterns. Despite a general appreciation of the
potential importance of crack, very little empirical analysis has been done to
date, due in part to the absence of quantitative measures of crack. The proposed
research agenda proceeds in three steps. The first two of these are concerned
with intellectual merit and the third with the broader impact of the proposed
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;First, the PI's
develop an identification strategy for constructing an index of crack
that&lt;br/&gt;can be estimated annually at the city, county, or state level.
The basic insight underlying&lt;br/&gt;the index is that the arrival of crack
causes a wide range of previously uncorrelated&lt;br/&gt;outcomes (e.g. youth
homicide, cocaine-related emergency visits, low birth weight&lt;br/&gt;babies,
fraction of children in foster care, etc.) to covary. Changes in these
correlations&lt;br/&gt;before and after crack provide an indirect means of
measuring the prevalence of crack.&lt;br/&gt;The PI's formalize this intuition
using the tools of factor analysis. Preliminary estimation&lt;br/&gt;using a
subset of the available data demonstrates that the crack index reproduces many
of&lt;br/&gt;the spatial and temporal patterns described in ethnographic and
popular accounts of the&lt;br/&gt;crack epidemic.&lt;br/&gt;The second part of
the research agenda is to use the crack index to examine how&lt;br/&gt;much of
the reversal of black fortunes in the late 1980s and early 1990s is attributable
to&lt;br/&gt;crack. Preliminary analysis suggests that the rise and fall of
crack had an enormous&lt;br/&gt;impact on youth homicide, but much smaller
effects on homicide rates of adults, as well&lt;br/&gt;as violent and property
crime more generally. The PI's find important effects of crack on
fetal&lt;br/&gt;death, low birth weight babies, the placement of children into
foster care, and the death&lt;br/&gt;rate of children aged one to four. Crack
does not, however, appear to have an impact on&lt;br/&gt;poverty or unemployment
rates.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the timing of crack's rise and fall, and the
corresponding social&lt;br/&gt;impact is the intellectual merit of the
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The third aspect of the research
agenda is to analyze the extent to which failure to&lt;br/&gt;adequately control
for crack may have led to spurious results in prior research.
For&lt;br/&gt;instance, it has been claimed that apparent crime reductions
induced by concealed&lt;br/&gt;weapons laws or legalized abortion are actually
due to the omission of crack as a control.&lt;br/&gt;Because crack appears to be
an important determinant of outcomes, and the impact of&lt;br/&gt;crack is not
uniform across states or years (or even within a state and year), the types
of&lt;br/&gt;controls typically included in empirical studies will not properly
control for crack. In&lt;br/&gt;addition to the PI's reanalyzing a number of
prior studies, the crack index will be made&lt;br/&gt;freely available to other
researchers for inclusion in future analyses, increasing the&lt;br/&gt;potential
for the work to have broad impacts.