* 0452825
* REU Site in Proteomics and Functional Genomics
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Lisa Dorn, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2009
* USD 260,829.00

The University of Wisconsin Oshkosh will host an REU Site in Proteomics and
Functional Genomics. Nine students will work on their own research project with
faculty mentors and utilize techniques in proteomics and functional genomics to
investigate diverse, interdisciplinary questions in microbial physiology, plant
biology, plant physiology, plant biochemistry, molecular parasitology,
vertebrate vision physiology, environmental microbiology, cell and developmental
biology, and virology. REU students will become familiar with state-of-the-art
instrumentation housed within the Proteomics and Functional Genomics Core
Facility at UW Oshkosh. A two-week laboratory course at the beginning of the
program provides students with the necessary set of basic skills to succeed in
their research projects. Students are expected to make presentations of their
research results, participate in research group meetings, professional
development seminars, and journal clubs. Additional activities are included to
ensure collegiality. The specific objectives of this REU Site are to: 1) provide
undergraduates with practical experience in the timely and powerful
methodologies that define the frontiers of life science research today, 2)
increase the global competitiveness of tomorrow's life science workforce by
augmenting the number of undergraduates trained in essential techniques in
proteomics and functional genomics, 3) increase numbers of members of under-
represented groups pursuing careers in advanced biological research, and 4)
foster development of diverse, collegial research communities of aspiring
scientists. Interested students are invited to visit http://reu.uwosh.edu. The
point-of-contact for interested students is Dr. Todd Sandrin (phone: (920)
424-1104; email: sandrin@uwosh.edu).