* 0452301
* Community-based Multicultural After-school Science Discovery Program Targeted for Urban Youth
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* John Zuman, Intercultural Center For Research In Education
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia James
* 03/31/2008
* USD 1,471,188.00

This five-year project is designed to provide urban youth in grades 4-8 with
innovative, hands-on science experiences in an after-school environment that
will enhance their science competencies, while increasing the capacity of after-
school leaders. In Years 1-3, nine science modules will be developed, field-
tested and evaluated in collaboration with 12 after-school programs in Boston,
Massachusetts, serving diverse populations of low-income youth. Each module
includes a full color activity book, comprehensive facilitation guide and
guidelines that enable students to share results of their investigations on the
project website. Topics to be addressed include electricity, planets, invention
and habitats. A comprehensive training program will include training for coaches
who will provide assistance with the implementation of science modules and offer
ongoing professional development for after-school providers. In Years 4-5, the
project will be disseminated to after-school programs in Los Angeles, CA,
Columbus, OH, and Philadelphia, PA. Additionally, the PI will partner with the
National Institute on Out of School Time (NIOST) to disseminate the project
nationally using the Cross-Cities Network. All materials will be printed in both
English and Spanish, while the website will offer the option of downloading
materials in a variety of other languages. It is anticipated this project will
serve more than 3,000 youth and 400 after-school providers.