* 0452635
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Social Stress and Reproduction in Female Phayre's Leaf Monkeys (Trachypithecus phayrei)
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Carola Borries, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jean E. Turnquist
* 04/30/2008
* USD 11,920.00

Glucocorticoids (GCs) are adrenal hormones produced by the body in response to
stress. Within social animals that form dominance hierarchies, it has been
classically hypothesized that low-rankers have higher GCs because they
experience stressors more frequently and have reduced access to social
affiliation. Furthermore, elevated GCs are thought to impair reproduction,
leading to individual and rank differences in fitness. Recent studies in the
wild, however, have questioned both hypotheses, suggesting that high-rankers
also experience stressors (e.g. aggression and social instability), and that
reproduction is rarely affected by GCs. These results suggest that our current
understanding of social stress and its associated consequences is inaccurate.
More specifically, (1) the relationship between rank and GCs may be dependent on
the specific correlates of rank (which may vary across species), rather than
rank per se, and (2) chronically elevated GCs, at least at the level present in
natural populations, may not lead to fitness consequences, at least from a
reproductive perspective. &lt;br/&gt;The present study aims to refine our
current understanding of the causes and consequences of social stress by
evaluating stress, behavior, and reproduction in female Phayre's leaf monkeys
(Trachypithecus phayrei). Because female Phayre's leaf monkeys are characterized
by a dominance hierarchy in which rank is both unstable (changes frequently),
and maintained individualistically, with little agonistic support from others,
the stressors associated with high rank are hypothesized to outweigh those
associated with low rank, leading to greater GCs amongst high-rankers.
Furthermore, because high-ranking individuals (across species) commonly have
improved reproductive success compared to low-rankers, the effects of GCs on
reproduction in female Phayre's leaf monkeys are likely to be negligible.
&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to accomplish three major goals: (1) to quantify the
distribution of stressors and social affiliation in relation to rank, (2) to
evaluate how this distribution explains GC patterns, and (3) to assess the
effect of GCs on reproductive function. Focal animal observations and urine
sampling will be conducted on 16 females in two groups (n=5, n =11) at Phu Khieo
Wildlife Sanctuary, Thailand. Behaviors will be used to calculate rank,
stressors, and social affiliation, and evaluated in relation to GCs measured
from urine samples. Progesterone metabolites will be analyzed in cycling females
to help address the effect of GCs on a variety of reproductive parameters such
as number of cycles to conception and probability of conception. &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the present study are two-fold. First, the study is
internationally collaborative, and involves development and training of local
Thai people in animal behavior and ecology. The knowledge imparted in this
training experience advances the appreciation of nature and encourages
conservation efforts in Thailand. Secondly, the results of the present study may
have an important societal impact on our understanding of the causes and
consequences of social stress in humans. This contribution is extremely
valuable, as social stress has been identified as the causal factor for several
forms of mental illness, as well as infertility. Therefore, furthering our
understanding of the behavioral and reproductive correlates of GCs becomes
critical for our efforts to improve human health.&lt;br/&gt;