* 0452686
* Optimal Security Design, Capital Structure, and Investment Policies in a Dynamic Agency Setting
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2013
* Michael J. Fishman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 371,589.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prop ID: SES-0452686&lt;br/&gt;P I: DeMarzo, Peter
Organization: National Bureau of Economic Research Inc &lt;br/&gt;Title: Optimal
Security Design, Capital Structure, and Investment Policies in a Dynamic Agency
Setting &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standard models of security design are static in
nature. Many prior analyses of investment and optimal dynamic capital structure
begin by assuming a coupon and maturity structure for debt and a dividend payout
policy for equity. This research brings the latest techniques of dynamic
contract theory to the study of corporate finance. It solves for optimal long-
term contracts, and shows conditions for which debt and equity are optimal
securities. Moreover, it derives the coupon/maturity structure of the debt and
the dividend payout policy for the equity. This project's contracting model also
has implications for the dynamics of investment and firm growth. In particular,
it shows that optimal investment will be positively correlated with past growth
and current cash flows, independent of current investment opportunities. The
investigators propose to generalize and extend these techniques to ask still
broader questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will bring the
techniques of dynamic contract theory to the study of corporate finance, capital
structure, and investment. It will address many standard questions in corporate
finance from the standpoint of optimal contracts and can show that certain
empirical regularities in corporate finance may indeed represent optimal
behavior in an agency context. For example, the investigators have already
demonstrated optimal contracts imply a correlation between cash flow and
investment. This also implies a strongly history dependent capital structure, a
feature of the data that has puzzled researchers.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
expect to make significant methodological contributions as well. The techniques
of DeMarzo and Sannikov (2004) demonstrate a tractible method for analyzing
dynamic agency models in continuous time. By generalizing these techniques
further, and moving contracting theory into the continuous-time domain that is
more natural for asset pricing and empirical finance, this research provides a
bridge between these literatures that will stimulate future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The study will have a number of
useful policy implications. It will broaden our understanding of small firm
finance, which is important for economic growth and policy, especially regarding
the benefits of providing public subsidies to small business. The investigators
also propose to study securities and bankruptcy laws. One view of these laws is
that they serve simply as boilerplate provisions - since these provisions are
optimal for so many firms, codifying these provisions as law reduces firms'
transactions costs. If so, we might expect firms to have the ability to opt out
of these provisions. This, however, is not the case. There is no opting out of
securities or bankruptcy law. This project will ask under what circumstances
appropriately designed laws regarding default and liquidation can improve
contracting opportunities? By applying the new theory to hedge funds, this
research may also have implications for recently proposed regulations of this
sector. The results will have empirical implications for optimal managerial
compensation schemes. For instance, an agent's equity share will be dynamic in
nature. Normally, the agent's equity exposure will increase with performance,
much like stock options. But in times of financial distress, managers will be
given "high powered" incentive payments if they keep the firm from defaulting.
The use of such payments at a time when the firm and its investors are doing
poorly has been the subject of much recent public
scrutiny.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;