* 0452769
* Project Civil Strife: Multi-actor Models of Internal Conflict and Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2005,02/28/2005
* Stephen Shellman, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/28/2005
* USD 95,036.00

When and why do governments and dissidents escalate and de-escalate their
hostility towards one another? This project develops a theory to answer this
question and specifies empirical time series models to test a number of
hypotheses implied by the theory. Specifically, the project advances new theory
focusing on government and dissident leaders and the impact that their
motivations have on tactical decisions over the course of a civil conflict.
Drawing on theories of leadership and political survival, behavioral rules are
deduced that lead actors to make certain tactical choices under given contextual
conditions. Second, the theory is expanded to analyze behavioral exchanges among
multiple dissident groups in competition with a government. Recent data produced
from Project Civil Strife (PCS) is able to overcome present data limitations by
collecting information on the levels of behavior exchanged among multiple
domestic actors. Third, the project analyzes how outcomes of government-
dissident interactions affect the propensity of leader turnover and how critical
events such as leader turnover, coup d'etats, and regime changes affect
government-dissident interactions. Such empirical work aids in forecasting the
escalation and de-escalation of conflict and developing policy prescriptions to
reduce tensions between social actors and the government. Finally, the project
directly analyzes the relationship between leaders and their coalitions and
tests if and how leaders' tactical choices are influenced by their coalitions'
desires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Social Value: The study will make
contributions in both the academic and policy arenas ranging from improved
academic understanding of government and dissident leaders' tactical decisions
in domestic conflict to informing the efforts of practitioners involved in
confronting domestic challenges. As a secondary objective, the project also
develops research tools and data sets that can be used in a variety of other
research projects such as those focusing on trade and conflict, investment and
conflict, forced migration, and domestic-international conflict linkages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;