* 0452995
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Effects of a Dispersal Barrier on Cultural Similarity in Wild Orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii)
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2007
* Carel van Schaik, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 02/28/2007
* USD 12,000.00

This project will contribute broadly to our growing knowledge of great ape
behavioral ecology and genetics, while furthering the study of human origins
through an investigation of cultural behavior on two sides of a dispersal
barrier. The identification of arbitrary signal variation and rudimentary symbol
use in orangutans suggests that previous studies may only have scratched the
surface of existing cultural variation in this lineage, a phenomenon that is
inherently interesting to humans and therefore capable of generating significant
interest in orangutan conservation. Because animals cannot cross dispersal
boundaries, cultural variants should reflect the history of diffusion from the
locations(s) of innovation until blocked by a dispersal barrier. This project
will test the ability of a cultural interpretation to account for patterns of
behavioral variation exhibited by wild Bornean orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus
wurmbii) ranging on either side of a 150m-wide river in Central Kalimantan,
which currently serves as an effective barrier for orangutan dispersal in the
study region, but offers opportunities for gene flow at its more narrow
headwaters. The synchronized study of orangutans on opposite sides of a river
barrier offers an exceptional opportunity to empirically evaluate the
assumptions of a cultural interpretation for behavioral variation (based on
opportunities for social learning), while holding both ecological variation and
genetic relatedness constant. This project will assess the impact of social
learning on the presence of skills required for orangutan survival and local
adaptation, which are critical to the success of reintroduction efforts
currently underway. It will also give us a greater understanding of the
ecological and social contexts that favor cultural solutions for orangutans in
particular situations but not in others, which will give us insight into the
likely extent of culture in the last common ancestor of the great apes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, this project will aid conservation
initiatives by documenting the extent to which geographic variation in wild
orangutan behavior is maintained by social transmission and, therefore, the
extent to which reintroduced or translocated animals have difficulty achieving
full adaptation to local conditions. This research will provide numerous
opportunities for promoting student training and participation in research.
Preliminary data were collected with the help of a Duke University undergraduate
student as well as several local Indonesian assistants and university students.
The proposed research will continue to provide training for Indonesian students
and assistants and will promote international collaboration with Indonesian,
European, and American counterparts. The orangutan is presently confined to
highly fragmented populations in small forest patches on the islands of Borneo
and Sumatra. Despite its formally protected status, the orangutan has become a
critically endangered species, the extinction of which is anticipated within the
next two decades due to the continuing threat of timber exploitation and human
encroachment throughout its range. It is critical that this research be carried
out soon, because there is a danger that as habitat devastation continues,
individual orangutan populations with unique local traditions will vanish,
resulting in lost opportunities to document the full extent of cultural behavior
in wild orangutans.&lt;br/&gt;