* 0452315
* Discrimination of Paternal Kin in Wild Chimpanzees
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Anne Pusey, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye E. Reed
* 01/31/2009
* USD 267,245.00

This project investigates whether wild chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) recognize
and treat paternal relatives differently from other individuals. Kinship can
have a profound effect on the social behavior of animals and humans. By helping
and refraining from harming their kin, individuals will benefit through the
process of kin selection by increasing their genetic representation in future
generations. However, to achieve these benefits, individuals must be able to
discriminate kin from non-kin. In group-living mammals such as primates,
individuals have been shown to discriminate maternal kin from non-kin, grooming
them, aiding them in aggressive contests, and avoiding mating with them, thus
avoiding the deleterious consequences of inbreeding. Although individuals will
also benefit by discriminating paternal kin, this ability could not be explored
in wild populations until the recent advent of non-invasive genetic testing that
can now identify paternal relatives. This study will investigate three questions
about paternal kin discrimination in the chimpanzees of Gombe National Park,
Tanzania: (1) Do fathers discriminate and favor their genetic infants? (2) Do
adolescent males that have left their mothers to join the adult male group
preferentially associate with and receive protection from their fathers? (3) Do
females discriminate and avoid mating with their fathers and paternal siblings
as well as their maternal relatives? Genetic relationships will be established
by analysis of genetic markers detected in DNA collected from fecal samples.
Data on behavioral interactions will be extracted from the 44 year archive of
field notes collected during Dr. Jane Goodall's study of the Gombe chimpanzees
and stored in the Jane Goodall Institute's Center for Primate Studies at the
University of Minnesota, as well as new field data collected during the project.
Demonstration of paternal kin discrimination in chimpanzees will provide support
for the general importance of kinship in social behavior, a matter of current
debate. The study will fill an important gap in our understanding of the factors
influencing the behavior of our closest living relative. Evidence of paternal
kin discrimination in chimpanzees that live in patrilineally based societies
will complement recent evidence from matrilineally based societies, extending
the generality of the phenomenon. The study will also stimulate future research
on the mechanisms involved in kin discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms
of its broader impact, the project will contribute to the education of both
university students and the general public. It will employ both graduate and
undergraduate students, actively recruited from underrepresented groups, and
introduce them to the excitement of research on a species relevant to
understanding human evolution. An interactive page on the Center for Primate
Studies website www.discoverchimpanzees.org will allow the general public to
read updates about ongoing field research and pose questions to the researchers.
Web activities will be developed to explain kin selection, and paternity
determination, and games will illustrate kin recognition, and inclusive fitness.
Educational programs showcasing the project's research will also be developed
with Lincoln Park Zoo (Chicago) and made available to Minnesota zoos. Research
activities in Tanzania will employ and educate local people, and contribute to
the conservation of an important endangered species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;