* 0452089
* Nonlinear Models with Errors-in-Variables
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Susanne Schennach, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2009
* USD 122,000.00

The identification and the root n consistent estimation of nonlinear models with
measurement error in the regressors using instrumental variables is a long-
standing problem in econometrics and statistics. This project provides a
practical solution to this problem through extensive use of Fourier analysis and
the theory of generalized functions, combined with semiparametric estimation
methods. The methods investigated rely on parametric assumptions regarding the
regression function to achieve root n consistency, but avoid any parametric
constraints on the distribution of all the variables. Two alternative trade-offs
between the strength of the assumptions on the mismeasured covariates and on the
instruments are considered, one of which is directly applicable to panel data
settings. The usefulness of the proposed approaches is illustrated through
examples drawn from production function analysis, Engel curve estimation,
epidemiology and nutrition studies, for which public data are readily
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most econometrics and statistics textbooks
describe how to eliminate the bias due to the presence of covariate measurement
error in linear regression analysis through the use of so-called instrumental
variables. This project provides generalizations of this approach that are
applicable to nonlinear models. The methods devised during this study will be
helpful, because nonlinearity and measurement error are bound to be
simultaneously present in a number of applications in economics. For instance,
household expenditure on a given type of goods or services is typically a
nonlinear function of household income, a variable that is notoriously
misreported. Nonlinear responses to mismeasured quantities are also common in
biostatistics and epidemiology, where exposures (to pathogens or contaminants)
are typically measured with error and where the physiological response to the
exposure is typically nonlinear. More generally, whenever human subjects are
involved, a nonlinear response to mismeasured inputs is the rule rather than the
exception, and this holds equally for economic behavior as for physiological
responses to diseases or medications. A computer program implementing these
methods will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;