* 0452162
* Eukaryotic Phytoplankton Functional Diversity: Dynamics of Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Bess Ward, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2009
* USD 800,000.00

The fate of primary production, whether rapidly exported from the photic zone,
transferred up the trophic web, or recycled efficiently in the surface layer,
depends primarily on the kind of phytoplankton that assimilate the carbon. High
new production is associated with large cells, and most blooms are characterized
by dominance of a single species of large or protected cells (e.g., diatoms,
coccolithophorids). Episodic upwelling events typify conditions in which diatoms
are able to bloom, and in which a few species usually dominate. Although escape
(usually temporary) from grazing may be the ultimate reason that bloom biomass
accumulates, the ability of diatoms to grow rapidly when nitrate becomes
available must be a factor in allowing that escape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate the basis of the diatom strategy by focusing on the
regulation of genes involved in nitrate uptake and transport in eukaryotic
phytoplankton. By evaluating gene expression in response to the changing
nitrogen availability of a classic upwelling cycle in Monterey Bay, California,
the investigators will elucidate the genetic and physiological basis of the
largely predictable outcome of diatom dominance in such systems. This work
builds on the rich literature of oceanographic and field research into nitrogen
uptake dynamics in natural populations, and on the great body of research on
phytoplankton biochemistry and nutrient kinetics. The novel aspect of the
proposed research is the addition of the genetic level of regulation and
response. The time is right for this project because of the very recent
acquisition of gene sequences for nitrate reductase and nitrate transporter
genes in diatoms, and recent methodological progress on assays for gene
expression. Quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) and quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR
(Q-RT-PCR) will be used to quantify gene copy number and mRNA levels for nitrate
reductase and transporter genes in several ecotypes of diatoms, E. huxleyi and
marine chlorophytes. Initial work has demonstrated the power of these approaches
and already has led to insights into different strategies of eukaryotic
phytoplankton. In addition, preliminary results from a microarray containing
several dozen different nitrate reductase and rubisco gene probes has allowed
the investigators to determine the relative abundance of discrete ecotypes of
phytoplankton and, independently, to assess the relative level of gene
expression for each type. Thus the investigators have developed the initial
tools necessary for investigation of genetic regulation of phytoplankton
response to nutrient availability. Culture experiments will be used to
characterize the sensitivity, resolution and time scale of the assays before
application to field samples. In parallel with further assay development and
optimization, the project investigators will conduct an upwelling experiments in
which the assays for gene expression and cell activity will be deployed in
conjunction with 15N tracer incubation and size fraction experiments to measure
N transformations. This field exercise will be conducted in a dock incubation
using Monterey Bay water; over the time course of a simulated upwelling event,
the expression of reductase and transporter genes specific to certain ecotypes
(empirically defined on the basis of sequence similarity from field samples) of
the major groups (diatoms, E. huxleyi, chlorophytes) will be quantified. The
results of the study will allow a mechanistic understanding of the plankton
physiologies that are responsible for the reliable dominance of diatoms in
upwelling regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study will
develop from the efforts made by the PIs, post doc and students supported by the
project to involve undergraduates in the research and to enrich their teaching
and training opportunities by this experience. Plans are outlined to involve
undergraduates in senior thesis research related to both field and lab aspects
of the project. The interdisciplinary nature of this work lends itself to
attracting students from various departments (geosciences, molecular biology,
ecology and evolutionary biology). &lt;br/&gt;