* 0452143
* Semiparametric Efficient Estimation of Models of  Measurement Errors and Missing Data
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2007
* Han Hong, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2007
* USD 116,301.00

Many empirical studies in economics are complicated by the presence of relevant
variables that are not observed, either because they are only available in an
incomplete or corrupted way, or because they are unobservable by their own
nature. Important examples include attrition in panel data analysis and the
ubiquitous presence of measurement error which can potentially be correlated
with the true unobserved variables. The program evaluation literature is
concerned with the issue that one never observes individual outcomes with and
without treatment. In these circumstances, identifying assumptions become
necessary to overcome the lack of identification that results from the missing
information in what will be referred to as the primary data set. One common
solution to this identification problem is the assumption that the missing
information can be recovered using auxiliary data sources under a conditional
independence assumption. The key element of the identification strategy is that
the auxiliary data set must provide information about the conditional
distribution of the true variables of interest given a set of proxy variables,
where the proxy variables are observed in both the primary sample and the
auxiliary sample. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project derives semiparametric
efficiency variance bounds for the estimation of parameters defined through
generalized nonlinear method of moment models, where the sampling information
consists of a primary sample and an auxiliary sample. The variables of interest
in the moment conditions are not directly observable in the primary data set.
The primary data set contains proxy variables which are correlated with the
variables of interest. On the other hand, the auxiliary data set contains
information about the conditional distribution of the variables of interest
given the proxy variables. Identification is achieved by the assumption that
this conditional distribution is the same in both the primary and auxiliary data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results derived in this project are applicable to
both the "verify-out-of-sample" case, where the two samples are independent, and
the "verify-in-sample case", where the auxiliary sample is a subset of the
primary sample. Sieve based semiparametric estimators are developed to achieve
the semiparametric efficiency bounds when the propensity score is unknown, when
the propensity is known, or when the propensity is assumed to belong to a
correctly specified parametric family. These estimators only use one
nonparametric estimate of conditional expectation and do not require two
nonparametric estimates of both the conditional expectation of the moment
functions and the propensity score. They require weaker regularity conditions
than the existing ones in the literature. They also allow for unbounded support
of conditional variables and nonsmooth moment conditions, and do not require the
strong assumption that the propensity score function has to be uniformly bounded
away from zero and one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results will be extended to
conditional moment models in which either the dependent variables or the
conditioning variables are measured with errors. In these cases only a subset of
the variables that are suspected to be measured with error are observable in the
auxiliary data set. The estimators currently available require knowledge of the
semiparametric efficiency variance bounds. A second extension will consider
estimators based on nonparametric maximum likelihood principles that achieve the
semiparametric efficiency bound without knowledge of its particular form.
Extensive monte carlo simulations and an empirical illustration will be
performed to evaluate the finite sample efficiency implications of competing
estimators. The proposed project involves joint work with Professor Xiaohong
Chen from New York University and Professor Alessandro Tarozzi from Duke
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The results developed in this
project will be applicable to a wide variety of models, including non classical
measurement error models, missing data models and nonlinear treatment effect
models. This proposal is part of a larger research agenda in the econometrics
profession to develop methods to estimate models with latent variables. Many
empirical studies in economics are complicated by the presence of relevant
variables that are not observed, usually because they are only available in
incomplete or corrupted ways. Important examples include attrition in panel data
analysis and the presence of measurement error which can potentially be
correlated with the true unobserved variables. Another example is the program
evaluation literature, where the estimation of treatment effects has to overcome
the fact that one never observes individual outcomes with and without treatment.
In such circumstances, identifying assumptions based on conditional independence
relations become necessary to overcome the lack of identification that results
from the missing information in the primary data set. The proposed project will
also provide useful guidance to the design of survey data sets, which generate
the crucial data input for the analysis of econometric models.