* 0452991
* Empirical Tests of Neo-Classical Trade Theory Using a Natural Experiment: The Case of Japan
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Daniel Bernhofen, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2010
* USD 278,419.00

Intellectual inquiry in the field of international trade is firmly rooted in an
analytical paradigm: the comparison of an economy in a state of autarky relative
to a state of open international trade. In the context of the Arrow-Debreu model
of general equilibrium, this methodology has facilitated the formulation of some
of the most fundamental theorems in neoclassical economics: the law of
comparative advantage, the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem and the Stolper Samuelson
theorem. Since the price is the final primitive concept in the Arrow-Debreu
model, these theoretical theorems are usually formulated using goods and factor
prices under autarky and free international trade. The alleged impossibility of
employing goods and factor price data in autarky and free trade under the
ceteris paribus assumption has been a major difficulty to empirically test these
theorems. In the current research project, the PIs plan to continue their
empirical analysis of the most dramatic trade liberalization in recorded
economic history: Japan.s reopening to the world economy in 1859 after 200 years
of self-imposed isolation. In their previous research (Bernhofen and Brown,
2004, 2005a), the investigators establish the case of Japan as a natural
historical experiment compatible with the neoclassical trade model and
investigate the pattern and gains from trade related to the law of comparative
advantage. In the proposed project the PIs, together with a Japanese
collaborator, plan to engage in a substantial data creation effort which will
entail the collection of goods prices, factor prices and factor input
coefficients of tradable commodities before and after Japan.s opening up to
international trade. This will enable the PIs to provide new and unique tests of
the Stolper-Samuelson and the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem, which are expected to
make substantial contributions to the empirical international economics
literature. The proposed project consists of three parts. The first part will
provide the first direct test of a general version of the Stolper-Samuelson
theorem. It will investigate whether factor intensity weighted changes in goods
prices predict the observed pattern of changes in the prices of the
corresponding factors after Japan.s opening up. The second part will provide the
first direct test of the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem in its autarky price
formulation. A key advantage of using autarky factor prices as a measure of
relative factor abundance for a test of the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem is that it
allows for unequal factor prices and technologies between Japan and its trading
partners. The third part of the project will use the results from the first two
parts of this project and Bernhofen and Brown (2004, 2005a,2005b) to create an
account of the natural experiment of Japan that is accessible to a wide range of
audiences. The PIs expect this part of the project to have a broad impact on
teachers, undergraduate students and graduate students with an interest in
international economic issues. This theory-guided comprehensive case study will
include components designed to meet the pedagogic goals appropriate to a range
of student audiences from the introductory to the Ph.D. level. The PIs will make
this case study publicly available on their website. The website has the
potential to engage student audiences from around the globe.