* 0452409
* Viral Abundance, Production and Diversity During the North Atlantic Spring Bloom (NASB 2005)
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Steven Wilhelm, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 01/31/2009
* USD 357,269.00

During the North Atlantic spring bloom of 2005 (NASB 2005), investigators
supported by the NSF and the European Union CarboOcean project will address
questions about the impact of pCO2 levels and temperature on algal community
structure and biogeochemistry. Although phytoplankton vary greatly during the
North Atlantic spring bloom, no quantitative information is available on the
interactions between this community and native viral populations. The
investigators will join the NASB 2005 effort and will 1) examine viral
abundance, production and diversity in shipboard experiments, and 2) quantify
cyanophage and a major group of viruses infecting eukaryotic algae (the
Phycodnaviridae) during transects through waters dominated by cyanobacteria or
eukaryotic phytoplankton. The information collected during this study will be
critical to understanding the role of viruses during the NASB 2005 event. The
investigators will also examine the influence of changes in system trophic
status and diversity on changes in virus abundance, production and diversity.
They will work with NASB 2005 collaborators to determine how changes in pCO2 and
temperature (based on predicted conditions in the year 2100) will impact virus
parameters. Their working hypotheses are that viral abundance, production and
diversity will vary with system trophic status, with phytoplankton population
diversity, and during simulated global climate change conditions. To test these
hypotheses, quantitative PCR will be combined with a dilution approach to
estimating virus abundance and production, with TEM analysis of samples
collected from study sites and with high throughput sequencing of cyanophage and
Phycodnaviridae specific targets. The resulting information will provide insight
into virus diversity and activity in the region as well as supply the viral
component of the microbial food web to models generated for the NASB 2005
project. This project will include the training of graduate and undergraduate
research assistants as well as the facilitation of outreach and diversification
at an EPSCoR (Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research)
institution. Three graduate and four undergraduate students will be supported,
and information from this program will be directly incorporated into courses,
outreach events and web dissemination at the University of Tennessee.

In recent years it has become increasingly evident that viruses play an
important role in structuring the aquatic biological community, and in aquatic
biogeochemical cycles. This project will examine the role of viruses during a
field experiment designed to simulate the possible effects of a predicted long-
term increase in atmospheric CO2 levels that would affect ocean chemistry. The
field experiment (NASB 2005) uses the North Atlantic spring bloom of
phytoplankton as a proxy for the longer-term changes that would result from CO2
increases. This project will provide essential information to the NASB 2005
project to determine how communities in the North Atlantic may react to the
predicted changes in climate that may occur during the coming century.