* 0452274
* Collaborative Research: The Norrona Project: An International Collaboration for Sustained Studies of the Meridional Overturning Circulation Between Denmark, the Faroes and Iceland
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Charles Flagg, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2011
* USD 494,198.00

OCE-0452970/Rossby/Flagg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global meridional circulation,
the transformation of surface waters into deep waters in limited areas and the
presumed broad upwelling of deep waters throughout much of the rest of the
ocean, is extremely sensitive to climate changes. The deepest waters originate
principally in the Weddell Sea and in the Nordic Sea, in both cases as dense
water overflows. The Nordic Seas overflow is replaced by warm water flowing
north, principally between Shetland, the Faroes and Iceland, a flow of
exceptional importance for the mild climate enjoyed by central and northern
Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to establish a program to monitor
the exchange of waters between the North Atlantic and the Nordic Seas across the
Shetland- Faroe-Iceland ridge. The Scotland-Faroe-Iceland ridge is the natural
chokepoint for monitoring the strength of the MOC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
ferry, the Norrona, operated out of the Faroes, maintains year-round weekly
service to Iceland and to northern Denmark. The ferry also stops in the Shetland
and in Norway. Thus the vessel traverses all north-flowing warm water between
Iceland and Scotland weekly. We propose to equip the vessel with an acoustic
Doppler current profiler (ADCP) to measure currents as it operates between these
ports. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Repeat sampling of currents allows for accurate
estimates of transport, and hence allow to discern trends in transport. The
high-resolution horizontal sampling allows detailed studies of the spatial and
dynamical properties of the currents crossing the ridge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program is designed to address growing societal
concerns in the US and Europe about the stability of warm water transport to
high latitudes. Displays of the data gathering system will be maintained onboard
for public view and education. &lt;br/&gt;