* 0452206
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics and Engineering at Hope College
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Catherine Mader, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2011
* USD 306,638.00

The Hope College REU program is intended to provide students with an opportunity
to have a significant research experience which will enhance their desire to
undertake a research career. The projects available to the students come from a
wide variety of specialties in physics, astrophysics, engineering and
environmental science. The eight REU student researchers, and a similar number
supported by other sources, will work side-by-side with the faculty in the lab
with daily personal contact. Research with undergraduates has a long history at
Hope College and in the Department of Physics and Engineering. The involvement
in meaningful research cements and augments the basics learned in the classroom
and readies the student for a career in science. For over thirty years Hope
students have benefitted from the close association with faculty in the
laboratory. Working exclusively with undergraduates, these faculty understand
that the research lab is an extension of the learning process and also that the
research done by the students in invaluable in achieving research goals. The
students are involved in the planning, execution, interpretation and
dissemination of the research. Students will present their results and prepare
posters. Funds are available to support travel to a meeting. Special efforts
will be made to attract applications from qualified females and members of
underrepresented minorities and students that are less likely to have research
opportunities at their home institution.