* 0452835
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Phylogenetic Relationships and Gene Flow Among Southern African Baboons
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2005
* Clifford Jolly, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 12/31/2005
* USD 5,600.00

Common baboons (Papio) comprise a series of geographically distinct forms or
'semi-species' that, while recognizably different from one another in appearance
and behavior, are known to hybridize in the wild where their ranges meet. Papio
is particularly useful in the study of the processes of divergence and
reticulation that affect the evolution of closely-related, hybridizing species
because baboons are the only primates for which we have detailed behavioral,
genetic, and morphological data as well as long-term research in the dynamics of
hybridization. In addition to this, studies of Papio can provide more direct
insight into the evolution species, like early Homo, that occupy similar
econiches. Baboons, like early Homo, are terrestrial, ecologically generalist
primates that evolved in the savannas and woodlands of Pleistocene Africa. The
climate-driven changes in these environments that affected the evolution of
Papio may well have impacted Homo. However, baboons retain the genetic signature
of the timing and geographic placement of these events that more recently
evolved modern humans have lost.

Current knowledge of the evolution of Papio largely comes from studies of
eastern African baboons. However, it is unclear if these eastern African baboons
are representative of Papio as a whole. This study, therefore, will focus on the
evolutionary relationships and patterns of gene flow among southern African
forms, the yellow and chacma baboons, which come into physical contact with one
another in central Zambia. The evolutionary relationships among populations of
these two forms will be inferred from mitochondrial DNA sequence data, while
genetic exchange between populations will be discerned using both mitochondrial
DNA and an array of nuclear genomic microsatellite markers. Questions addressed
by this research include: what are the relationships among populations of
southern African baboons? Do these two forms hybridize, and if so, what pattern
does the resulting gene flow take? Is this genetic exchange driven by the
dispersal of males from their natal groups into other nearby groups, as in
eastern Africa? Answers to these questions will help clarify the taxonomy of
Papio, improve our understanding of the relationships among baboon species and
the factors that have affected their evolution, and provide insight into how
such processes may impact the evolution of similar primate species.

Baboons are commonly used in biomedical, behavioral, and genetic research. An
accurate understanding of the evolutionary relationships among these important
model organisms is necessary for such studies. This project will provide
scientific training opportunities for the co-PI and undergraduate students. It
will also promote professional contact and collaboration between scientists in
the United States and Zambia, which has not been a traditional geographical
focus of research by biological anthropologists.