* 0452102
* Evolution of the Kerguelen LIP: Insights from Crystal Stratigraphy & Crystal Size Distributions from Site 1137, Elan Bank
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Clive Neal, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 05/31/2008
* USD 162,625.00

ABSTRACT (Neal - 0452102) Understanding how magmas evolve is important for
knowing why volcanoes erupt. Analysis of whole-rock samples gives compositions
that reflect only an average of the processes that the lava has experienced
prior to eruption. Examination of individual crystals and crystal populations,
however, provides better insight into the dynamics of magma evolution. This
research involves researchers at the University of Notre Dame and utilizes
different populations of crystals in igneous rocks (i.e., crystal size
distributions) that have related nucleation and growth histories. It them
combines this approach with mineral-scale compositional studies (i.e., crystal
stratigraphy). This combined methodology constrains the timing and extent of
differentiation processes (i.e., magma mixing, crustal contamination) that
permits quantification the dynamics and timing of processes that have modified a
magma body since separation from its source and can lead to identification of
the source itself. The research uses samples from the Kerguelen Large Igneous
Province on the Elan Bank In the Southern/South Indian Ocean to develop a new
technique for reconstructing magma chamber evolution using crystal size
distributions and wavelet based correlations to determine different plagioclase
crystal populations in seven co-magmatic flows from Ocean Drilling Program Site
1137. Samples range in age from 107-108 Ma and encompass three distinct breaks
in magmatism, which are represented by volcaniclastic interbeds. These
volcaniclastic units divide the lave flow sequence into four parts. Each section
will be studied from the top, middle, and base. Representative plagioclase
crystals from different crystal zones will be analyzed for major, minor, and
trace elements via electron microprobe, SEM, and in-situ laser ablation ICP mass
spectrometry. These data will allow partition coefficients to be determined and
the reconstruction of parent liquid compositions and local crystallization
environments. Strontium isotope measurements will be made on a sub-set of
crystals to further constrain parent magma compositions and the extent of
crustal contamination. Independent estimates of crystal residence times will be
obtained from the crystal size and geochemical data.

Broader Impacts Broader impacts of this proposal include education of a graduate
student and involvement of a K-12 teacher and students at a school in a Hispanic
dominated high school in Deming, New Mexico. This effort will expose Hispanic
high school students to the excitement of geochemical and petrological research.
The research also involves international collaboration with researchers at the
University of Durham in the UK. Results of the work will be integrated into
graduate and undergraduate teaching at the University of Notre Dame. A "crystal
stratigraphy" web site will also be set up to inform the public and other
researchers about the technique and its potential applications.