* 0452416
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Compensatory and Noncompensatory Decision Making Strategies in Dynamic Task Environments
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2005,07/31/2007
* Ling Rothrock, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 07/31/2007
* USD 105,733.00

In the modern, evolving workplace there exists a need to support workers in
adapting to novel demands and opportunities. Traditionally, human judgments are
characterized by weighted strategies where tradeoffs between decision criteria
are made. For example, college admissions committees consider multiple facets of
an applicant and, often, a poor grade point average can be compensated by a
superior entrance exam score. However, on occasions in which time stress or high
workload exists, human judgments are typically rule-based where factors are not
weighted. For instance, an air traffic controller is likely to diagnose
potential problems in high workload situations based on a few salient
cues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will add to the growing body of
knowledge concerning the way in which a decision environment influences the
strategy used by decision makers. While characterizations such as weighted and
rule-based strategies have been deduced from a multitude of experimental
studies, no framework exists to model and predict shifts in judgment strategy in
individual decision makers. The central theme of this research is to create a
mathematical framework to model the shift from a weighted to a rule-based
strategy, and vice versa, in work environments where workload and stress levels
vary. This research will build upon existing work to create a model which infers
judgment rules from human data. Multiple experiments will be conducted to
compare the performances of the rule-based model with a commonly-used weighted
model under varying workload and time stress situations. It is hypothesized that
increasing workload and time stress will promote a systematic shift from
weighted to rule-based strategies. This work will make a valuable contribution
toward understanding decision making in complex, dynamic environments. One
potential implication of this research is the design of an aiding mechanism that
adapts to the needs of the user based on conditions of dynamic work
environments.&lt;br/&gt;