* 0452399
* Collaborative Research: An Integrative Study of Vulnerability and Cultural Response to Hurricane Hazards Among Indigenous Populations on the Miskito Coast of Honduras and Nicaragua
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Kam-biu Liu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2008
* USD 92,292.00

Collaborative Research: An Integrative Study of Vulnerability and Cultural
Response to Hurricane Hazards Among Indigenous Populations on the Miskito Coast
of Honduras and Nicaragua&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BCS-0452399&lt;br/&gt;Kam-biu
Liu&lt;br/&gt;Louisiana State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricanes are
significant environmental hazards that frequently impact coastal areas of
Central America. Hurricane Mitch, for example, caused over 10,000 deaths and
wrought an estimated 10 billion dollars in damage to Honduras, Nicaragua, and
neighboring Caribbean countries in 1998. However, no research to date has
assessed the societal vulnerability of this region to hurricane strikes. This
project will examine the vulnerability of the Caribbean coast of Honduras and
Nicaragua to intense hurricane strikes and the cultural responses of different
ethnic communities on the Miskito Coast to hurricanes during recent and
historical times. This research will use geoscientific techniques in
paleotempestology (an emerging field of science that studies past hurricane
activity by means of geological proxy techniques) to assess the hurricane risk
of the Miskito Coast in Central America. Several coastal lakes in Honduras and
Nicaragua will be cored, and overwash sand layers in the sediments will be
identified and dated to produce the first long-term record of intense hurricane
strikes on the Miskito Coast. Ethnographic techniques and participatory research
will then be used to construct oral histories and mental maps of hurricane
damage for selected hurricanes that have impacted the study area in the last 30
years. By documenting local inhabitants' cultural memory of hurricanes, this
research will be the first attempt to link ethnographic information concerning
the spatial extent of hurricane impacts with geological proxy evidence, thus
establishing a modern analog for reconstructing prehistoric hurricane impacts
and deciphering paleohurricane magnitude from paleotempestological data.
Ethnographic and participatory research will also be used to investigate the
human dimension of hurricane vulnerability, with particular focus on local
perceptions of hurricane threats and adjustment strategies among the different
ethnic populations (Miskito, Garifuna, Hispanic Ladinos, Creoles) of the study
area. The paleotempestological evidence will be incorporated into the
participatory research framework to educate and to promote collaborative
dialogue among local residents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
research is the first that integrates paleotempestological techniques with
ethnographic and participatory research methods to produce a comprehensive
assessment of societal vulnerability and cultural response to catastrophic
hurricane strikes on the Miskito Coast. This project will produce the first
proxy record of catastrophic hurricane strikes for Central America and the
Caribbean region. This record is important for deciphering the temporal and
spatial patterns of the "tropical-only" hurricanes and for testing the Bermuda
High hypothesis. The ethnographic component of this research will make a
significant contribution to the hazards literature by providing the first
information on how rural indigenous communities in Latin America respond to
hurricane hazards. Previous studies have only dealt with "modern" industrialized
societies, and primarily those of North America. The innovative use of
participatory methods in this research will provide an example of its potential
in integrated social and physical scientific research. In addition, this
research topic has major societal relevance. The results of this study have
significant practical applications for hurricane hazard assessment and disaster
mitigation in the developing nations of Central America. Information on
hurricane risk estimates and cultural responses by different ethnic groups will
be useful for decision-makers and stakeholders in disaster planning and
management.&lt;br/&gt;