* 0452281
* Balancing Competing Interests in American Regional Governance
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Clark Gibson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2009
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract: Balancing Competing Interests in American Regional
Governance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study regional governance in
the United States. Many public policy decisions taken at the local level have
implications for actors in other political jurisdictions, leading to calls for
greater regional coordination. However, all regional governance efforts face a
fundamental tension: local governments must give up some authority to achieve
regional benefits. Local actors may then be held accountable by their
constituents for regional outcomes. Regionalism thus compels local governments
to ask: what are the expected local benefits of regional policymaking, and how
do those benefits compare to the expected local political costs of delegating
power to the region? In other words, regionalism may be advocated to solve
problems that are essentially economic - externalities and economies of scale -
but its outputs are expected to also reflect its members' political and economic
interests and the rules by which those interests are
aggregated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the actions of
regional governance efforts and assess how these efforts strike a balance
between regional and local interests. The proposed study has three main
components. First, it draws upon theories of externalities, collective action,
and decision-making to generate hypotheses about how regional governance efforts
balance local and regional interests. Second, it involves the construction and
analysis of an extensive database of all 516 currently operating regional
councils in the United States. Regional councils are one class of regional
governance efforts that exist in 48 states and that represent an important form
of regional governance. The database will include information about each
regional council's activities, policy priorities, budgets, legislative mandates,
history, organization, rules and procedures, and resources; the political,
economic, demographic, and geographic characteristics of its region; and
comparable characteristics of its individual local government members (14,500 in
all). The analysis builds upon a pilot study of regional governance in the Great
Lakes area to conduct statistical tests of our hypotheses with data from this
national sample. Third, the project will include dissemination of the research
results in a variety of academic and applied venues, including writing,
distributing, and presenting research reports to non-academic audiences
including state, local, and regional policy-makers, interest groups, reformers,
and other policy professionals. By building and integrating theory, constructing
a unique database, employing appropriate statistical analyses, and widely
disseminating the results, the project will provide knowledge about the
structure, operation, and consequences of regional governance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This study will provide scholars with
theoretical and empirical bases for understanding regional governance, about
which little such interdisciplinary work currently exists. The questions are of
theoretical significance as they address how institutional arrangements combine
with individual and aggregate preferences to affect policy outcomes and the
quality of governance. The approach provides a theoretical framework that
integrates political and economic considerations, and that is applicable to a
wide range of regional governance efforts. The work is also relevant to numerous
other applications where individual governments engage in voluntary collective
action such as inter-state collaboratives, county-local relationships,
international alliances, and international economic agreements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research is of immediate
practical value as communities around the country struggle to construct
effective cooperative arrangements across a variety of issues. The research will
supply policymakers with tools for designing more effective regional
institutions and will provide the public with guidelines for evaluating regional
governance efforts. &lt;br/&gt;