* 0452579
* Chemistry of Nanostructured Porous Si
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2005,10/31/2008
* Michael Sailor, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 10/31/2008
* USD 239,999.00

This award from the Solid State Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research to University of California San Diego is to develop an understanding of
the effect of surface chemistry on the stability of porous silicon (Si) photonic
crystals. With this award Professor Michael Sailor will probe the effects of
chemical modification of the porous Si surface on its air and water stability
using reactions designed to attach functional species via Si-Carbon bonds. Two
related attachment chemistries would also be studied: electrochemical reduction
of alkyl halides; and hydrosilylation of terminal alkenes. These chemistries
have been found to impart remarkable stability to the porous Si surface relative
to Si-H or Si-O surfaces. The fundamental question to be answered is: what is
the reason for this improved chemical stability? A systematic study on the
effect of pore dimensions, chain length of the organic modifier, surface
coverage, and nature of the substituents on stability in air and aqueous media
will be performed. The project should lead to new understanding of the
reactivity of nanocrystalline silicon surfaces for potential applications in
number fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years there has been increased
interest in developing low-power, miniature sensors that can be used to detect
toxics, pollutants, or chemical and biological warfare agents in the
environment. There is similar high interest in portable sensors that can be used
to diagnose illness. One of the biggest challenges in this area is to place the
sensitivity and specificity of a laboratory-scale instrument into a palm-top or
smaller package. The goal of this research is to develop the chemistry of
nanomaterials that can enable such applications, among others. Starting with
crystalline silicon wafers, the same material used by the computer industry to
build microchips, the project will build nanoscale structures that can act as
sensors for chemical or biological compounds. The project should lead to a
better understanding of the chemistry of silicon nanomaterials that will enable
advances in the areas of medical diagnostics and therapeutics, remote sensors
for pollution monitoring and homeland security applications, information display
and optoelectronics. The primary product of this work will be to provide
graduate and undergraduate students with a highly interdisciplinary education in
materials chemistry and nanoscience. The students will be prepared for a variety
of challenging research positions in the high-tech and biotech sectors of
industry, government, and academia. &lt;br/&gt;