* 0452590
* `Collaborative Research: Estimation for and Inference on Causal Effects
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,08/31/2006
* Guido Imbens, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2006
* USD 130,735.00

The overall goal of this project is to advance knowledge on the estimation of
and inference for causal effects. The researchers propose three specific
projects. The first consists of three topics in program evaluation. In the
literature on estimation of average treatment effects several efficient
estimators have been proposed that require choices for smoothing parameters,
e.g., the bandwidth in kernel regression. Typically researchers have not given
specific data-driven choices, limiting the applicability of these estimators.
Here an optimal data-driven choice for the smoothing parameter will be derived.
Second, issues related to overlap between covariate distributions for treated
and control units will be analyzed. The lack of such overlap leads to
substantial sensitivity of most of the estimators used in the literature and has
led researchers to use ad hoc methods for imposing sufficient overlap. A
principled and optimal criterion for selecting the sample will be developed.
Third, bootstrapping methods for matching estimators will be considered. The
simple bootstrap will be shown not to be valid for matching estimators, and
alternatives that may have better properties will be studied.

In the second project the plan is to study the aggregate implications of peer
effects. If characteristics or actions of, for example, classmates in school
affect an individual's outcome, there may be both individual and aggregate
effects of reassigning individuals to classes. Whereas much of the literature
has focused on the identification and estimation of individual level effects,
under the current proposal new methods will be developed for estimation and
inference for the aggregate effects. Inference for the effect of full positive
assortive matching (where the individuals with the highest values of some
characteristic are grouped together), as well as tests for the effect of moving
towards more positive assortive matching will be studied.

In the third project the researchers plan to investigate the design and analysis
of randomized experiments in the presence of peer effects or interactions
between the experimental units. If units interact, standard experimental methods
do not apply. The researchers propose to study the equivalent of Fisher exact
tests for this setting, as well as the equivalent of Neyman's methods for
constructing confidence intervals. Preliminary results show that in general
these methods are not as similar to each other in the case with interaction as
in the case without.

Broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity are the availability of
ready-to-use software for the evaluation of causal effects in both academic
areas, including economics and other social sciences, and for policy makers.
Software will be developed in Matlab and STATA that will be made available to
other researchers.