* 0452563
* Carbon Sequestration: Tracing the Source and Fate of Marine Biopolymers using Proteomics and Antibody Display Technology
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Monica Orellana, Institute for Systems Biology
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2009
* USD 599,299.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0452563&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemical
identity and dynamics of dissolved biopolymeric material is a standing question
in oceanography. However, due to a prior dearth of techniques to study dissolved
biopolymers, we are only beginning to understand the source, composition and
reactivity at the molecular level. In this research, scientists from the
Institute of Systems Biology will develop innovative tools (biosensors) for
biopolymer research using high throughput proteomics and antibody display
technology. Rather than solely examining single amino acids after hydrolysis,
which erases the chemical-history of the proteins and the link between biology
and ocean chemistry, the application of proteomics to characterize the secretory
proteome of two model phytoplankton species will advance our understanding of
the composition and reactivity of these compounds at the molecular level.
Because secretory proteomes are thought to be conservative, knowledge of the
proteome for these two ecologically important species should aid in the
characterization of other phytoplankton secretory proteomes. High affinity
biosensors (monoclonal antibodies from phage) that recognize and bind to
specific molecular moieties will allow the identification and quantification of
chemical species at low concentrations in complex heterogeneous samples.
Ultimately this technology will allow in situ tracking of phytoplankton
proteins, their biosynthesis, transformation, and degradation in unconcentrated
seawater. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, combining the
direct monitoring of proteins released by phytoplankton and cyanobacteria and
tracking of phytoplankton and cyanobacterial proteins with monoclonal probes
should allow the linking of biological production and consumption to ocean
chemistry through understanding the dynamics and turnover of proteins released
by phytoplankton and cyanobacteria into the overall dissolved organic matter
pool. Furthermore, this will lead to improved knowledge of their role in global
carbon cycling and will greatly advance our knowledge of marine geochemistry and
marine ecology. Undergraduate students will be exposed to these new techniques
as part of this study. The PIs will play active roles in local and regional
school district science educational initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;