* 0452128
* How Do We Know What We Know?  Resources for the Public Understanding of Scientific Evidence
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Melissa Alexander, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,493,336.00

This project is designed to improve communication between scientists and the
public focusing on the role of evidence in science. It is a two-year project
that includes: 1) implementing a national survey on the public use of science
web sites; 2) conducting a national Science Education Outreach Forum bringing
together scientists and informal science educators; 3) implementing workshop
sessions at a national conference to disseminate lessons learned from the survey
and Forum; and 4) developing a prototype website on the role of evidence that
will be evaluated for audience engagement and understanding. This project builds
on the Exploratorium's prior NSF-funded project (ESI#9980619) developing
innovative strategies using the Internet to link scientists and the public using
Webcasts, annotated datasets and interactive web resources. Project
collaborators include the Pew Internet and American Life Project, Palmer
Station, Scripps Oceanographic Institute, FermiLab and the Society of Hispanic
Physicists among others. The research and evaluation of the project has the
potential for strategic impact by providing new information and models on how
science centers can more effectively use the Internet to improve communication
between scientists and the public while engaging learners more effectively.
&lt;br/&gt;