* 0452528
* Collaborative Research: The Generation of Geo-Referenced Video Mosaics in Support of Submersible and ROV Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Larry Mayer, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/29/2008
* USD 156,920.00

Project Title: The Generation of Geo-Referenced Video Mosaics in Support of
Submersible and ROV Operations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to develop an easy-to-use software
package for PCbased computers that is tailored to convert video imagery acquired
from any underwater vehicle, operated within both absolute or relative
navigation networks, and quickly produce a set of geo-referenced photomosaics,
whichcan then be directly layered within a Geographic Information System (GIS).
In developing this software, we hope to enable those collecting video imagery to
quantitatively explore relatively large areas of the seafloor in the same way
that land-based processes can be observed through aerial photographs or
satellite imagery. The initial approach will be to develop a system that is
suited to efficiently process video imagery from deep submergence vehicle dives.
Their objective will be to use and refine the proposed software developed by the
UNH group and generate geo-referenced mosaics within a few hours so that
subsequent diving and sampling programs can be optimized. They will focus on
establishing a robust, and well-documented software suite that will permit video
mosaicking by a wide range of personnel. The processing approach proposed will
also be equally applicable to the large amounts of video data already collected
and sitting in archives at numerous oceanographic institutions and with past
users of deep submergence vehicle systems. To test the mosaicking system for
near-real-time application, the PIs propose to construct video mosaics at sea
during two upcoming cruises. The PIs have assembled a multi-disciplinary group
of scientists to test the mosaicking system and apply it to questions relevant
to marine geology and marine biology at mid-ocean ridges, including the
integrated measurements of vent fluid chemistry and sampling of vent communities
on successive dives with the submersible Alvin at the EPR ISS. Shore-based
analyses of near-real-time and legacy mosaics will be used to aid in the
interpretation of temporal changes in community structure at EPR vents visited
repeatedly over the past decade. Geo-referenced video mosaics will be
incorporated into a GIS currently developed for the Galapagos Rift and the EPR
ISS.&lt;br/&gt;