* 0453404
* REU Site:    Nanoscale Science and Engineering for Materials Processing and Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* John Moosbrugger, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 06/30/2009
* USD 249,696.00

Abstract for Moosbrugger, EEC-0453404:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
establishes a three-year at Clarkson University focusing on the theme Nanoscale
Science and Engineering for Materials Systems and Materials Processing. During
this ten-week summer program, the twelve participating undergraduates conduct
self-contained research projects, mentored by faculty from the Chemistry,
Mechanical and Aeronautical, and Chemical Engineering departments. Projects
range in scope from polymer synthesis to the study and control of motion of
nanoparticles on surfaces. The program includes several additional activities
designed to expose students to topics associated with nanoscale materials
science and engineering as well as important issues associated with their
professional development, particularly focused on the research enterprise and
promotion of graduate studies. The objectives of the program are to expose
undergraduate students, especially those from underrepresented groups, to
scientific and engineering research in an area of national priority; to promote
graduate-level study in science and engineering among participating students and
their cohort; to build self-confidence and self-esteem among participating
students to encourage exploration and risk taking; to promote acceptance of
multidisciplinary research activity among participating students and academic
researchers; to promote the acquisition of skills necessary for scientific
inquiry and engineering synthesis among participating students as well as the
ethics of professional service and dissemination of knowledge; and to transform
student perspectives, such that they view themselves as potential graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research experience is built around
projects that are mentored by experienced faculty. The projects are augmented
with a nanoscale-materials engineering and science symposium, workshops on
communicating research results, graduate-studies workshops, conference-style
presentations and papers by students, and collegial activities (both technical
and social), such as plant trips, community-building workshops, and cultural and
recreational events. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The program is designed to focus
undergraduate research on an area identified as a national priority, thus
providing an excellent platform for promoting graduate study among participating
students. Proposed projects all fit within established research programs, and
they focus on either materials processing or materials-systems issues where
alteration and/or exploitation of structure at the nanoscale is critical for
achieving technological advances. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts are
directed toward achieving a diverse group of student participants. This is
accomplished by focusing recruitment efforts on students from demographic groups
that are traditionally underrepresented in science and engineering, with
priority placed on reaching students who are women, African-American, Native
American, and Hispanic. Special attention is given to creating an environment
that promotes and embraces diversity throughout program activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF REU program. &lt;br/&gt;