* 0453630
* REU Site: Tropical Conservation Biology, Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Science
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Donald Price, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2010
* USD 542,159.00

This REU program is a partnership of researchers at the University of Hawaii at
Hilo (UHH) and government agencies conducting research on the Island of Hawaii
(e.g., USGS-Biological Resources Division, US Forest Service). The Island of
Hawaii, with its diversity and high representation of almost all ecological
niches found in the archipelago, presents an excellent living laboratory in
which to train future researchers. The goal of this REU program is to provide an
exciting and challenging summer research experience for undergraduate students
in the interdisciplinary field of conservation biology and prepare them for
future careers in science. To increase the diversity of students entering this
field, this program targets those students with limited research experience,
first generation college students and under-represented minorities in science
due to ethnicity and geographic isolation. The program entails a summer
component and a continued effort during the academic year. Ten students will be
selected for 10-week research experiences during the summer. The program will
begin with a one-week orientation that will introduce the students to the
university, research design and analysis, and report writing and presentation.
The remaining nine weeks will consist of students working side by side with
researchers on their projects. In addition, one day a week will involve lectures
and field trips focused on different topics in conservation biology, sessions on
statistics, report writing and presentation, and graduate school and career
presentations. Students will complete a written research paper and make an oral
presentation at the undergraduate research symposium. More information is
available at http://www2.hawaii.edu/~uhintern/reu.htm or by contacting Sharon
Ziegler-Chong, Tel 808-933-0759, at ziegler@hawaii.edu.