* 0453119
* Productivity Risk and Employment Risk Over the Life Cycle
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2007
* Luigi Pistaferri, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2007
* USD 105,407.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prop ID: SES-0453119&lt;br/&gt;P I: Pistaferri,
Luigi &lt;br/&gt;Organization: Stanford University &lt;br/&gt;Title:
Productivity Risk and Employment Risk Over the Life Cycle
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Household spending is the driving force behind economic
booms and recessions. Understanding the determinants of consumption is therefore
of utmost importance. This proposal will look at the effect of labor market
risks on household consumption and saving. Consumers who perceive to live in
risky times may behave cautiously and defer spending; they may also respond to
risk by working longer hours. The aggregate and welfare effects of risk may
therefore be substantial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the proposal
clarifies the distinction between the various kinds of risks that workers face
in the labor market. It distinguishes between productivity risk and unemployment
risk. This distinction is often not well understood. Productivity risk is
individual-specific uncertainty that exists regardless of the employer's
characteristics. For example, health shocks affect individual productivity and
hence wages in all kinds of jobs. Unemployment risk captures instead the
uncertainty about having a job. This includes the possibility of firm
bankruptcy, the risk of being laid off and that of not receiving offers while
unemployed. Moreover, if different firms pay different wages, unemployment risk
will be magnified by firm heterogeneity, because unemployed workers may reject
offers from bad firms and stay unemployed longer. The proposal also aims at
quantifying the extent of productivity risk and unemployment risk using
individual panel data. Correct identification of the two risks depends crucially
on the assumptions one makes about the economic environment confronted by
workers. Simple models may lead to wrong inference concerning the quantitative
importance of the two risks. For example, suppose one makes the standard
assumptions that job offers are received with certainty and all firms offer the
same wage. In this case there will be no unemployment risk as such because
unemployment would be entirely voluntary. To make the distinction between
productivity risk and unemployment risk meaningful the author proposes a model
with saving and endogenous labor market participation and intra-firm mobility.
He also allows for government insurance programs such as unemployment and
disability insurance, and the Food Stamp programs, so that behavioral responses
to government insurance are built in his model through changes in participation
and changes in savings. The exercise we propose may have important implications.
When formulating public policy it is imperative to have an idea of what risks
matter. With a quantitative assessment of the risks facing agents it is possible
to use economic theory to guide the construction of optimal social insurance
arrangements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Once the various sources of
risk have been identified, one can simulate individual saving behavior and
measure the welfare costs of the various risks. These simulations give an
indication of the extent of precautionary behavior (both precautionary saving
and precautionary labor supply). They also raise a number of questions that can
be addressed: How much would individuals be willing to pay to avoid the various
risks? How much of the precautionary response is due to unemployment risk and
how much to productivity risk. The investigator plans to evaluate the welfare
benefits of existing government insurance programs, as well as those of proposed
reforms and of alternative programs. &lt;br/&gt;