* 0453525
* REU Site - Internships in Nanosystems Science, Engineering, and Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Liu-Yen Kramer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 03/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

This REU-site grant extends a highly successful program at the University of
California, Santa Barbara (UCSB), which brings community college students from
across California to engage in interdisciplinary research. This program,
entitled "Internships in Nanosystems Science, Engineering and Technology"
(INSET), expands opportunities for community college students, promoting their
future academic and career success in science and engineering through
multitiered mentorship. INSET program objectives are:

o To promote the successful transfer of a diverse cohort of community college
students to the University of California, support their eventual degree
completion, and encourage their pursuit of advanced degrees; o To build a
community of academic research mentors through campus-wide training workshops,
forums and networking; and o To enhance the capacity of UCSB and other research
universities to support community college transfer students by disseminating the
factors which contribute to their transfer and future success.

Intellectual Merit: The INSET program is hosted by the California NanoSystems
Institute (CNSI), a research center established by the State of California,
based jointly at UCSB and University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). CNSI's
focus on nanosystems looks to the richness of opportunities in forming new
materials and complex systems by integrating nanoscale building blocks from both
biological and electronic materials. Over 60 CNSI faculty researchers at UCSB
represent disciplines ranging over the biological sciences, chemistry, chemical
engineering, computer science, electrical engineering, materials, mathematics,
mechanical engineering, and physics. Interns performing research within the CNSI
gain hands-on experience in the development of cutting-edge technologies that
fall outside the boundaries traditional of science and engineering disciplines.

A critical factor in designing beneficial education opportunities for community
college students is recognizing the unique needs and concerns of such students.
INSET program evaluation, conducted jointly with the Graduate School of
Education, surveys community-college research interns and university-student
interns to identify differences in expectations, goals, motivations, personal
gains and achievements. The findings of such research will be valuable for other
programs and universities that aim to engage this highly under-served
population.

Broader Impacts: Community colleges offer a significantly underutilized pool of
talent for science and engineering disciplines. Community colleges serve a
disproportionate number of underrepresented minority and female students, as
well as a hugely disproportionate number of nontraditional students. INSET
recruitment efforts build on established relationships with California community
colleges that have sizable underrepresented and disadvantaged populations. Of
the 45 students who have participated in the first 3 years of the INSET program,
42% were female and 42% were underrepresented minorities so INSET has extensive
impact on the greater UCSB community. INSET enhances the effectiveness of
mentorship through organization of training workshops, discussion forums and
networking. Additionally, program staff take a leadership role in coordinating
activities with several other UCSB undergraduate research programs during the
summer, including a campus-wide undergraduate research colloquium. Nationally,
this program will enhance the capacity of other institutions to support
community-college transfer students by raising the profile of high-achieving
community-college-student researchers, promoting successful university/community
college partnership models, and disseminating INSET evaluation findings through
publications and professional conferences.

