* 0453331
* REU Site: Plant Genome Research
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Georg Jander, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2009
* USD 322,638.00

The Plant Genome Research Program at the Boyce Thompson Institute and Cornell
University will provide ten-week summer internships for twelve undergraduate
students each year. The laboratories involved in hosting this REU Site are at
the forefront of plant molecular biology research, contributing to the latest
advances in genomics, quantitative genetics, proteomics, metabolite profiling,
plant transformation, and other scientific methods. Basic and applied research
projects in the program laboratories include studying plant defense against
pathogens and insects, biosynthesis of primary and secondary metabolites,
phosphate uptake, metal tolerance, light perception, seed dormancy, and
chloroplast function. These projects incorporate not only important crops such
as maize, wheat, rice, tomato, melon, and pepper, but also genetic model plants
such as Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a single-celled alga, and the small crucifer
Arabidopsis thaliana. Summer interns will work on supervised independent
projects within the framework of their mentor's research program. Other
educational opportunities will include weekly lectures, student presentations
and a research symposium at the end of the summer. In addition, two half-day
discussion forums will focus on ethical issues that students will almost
certainly encounter in the course of their scientific careers. The complete ten-
week Plant Genome Research internship will serve to introduce undergraduates to
plant molecular biology research and encourage them to pursue graduate degrees
and future careers in this field. Students who are admitted to the program will
be supplied with a stipend, housing, meals and airfare. Under-represented
minorities and students from colleges with limited research opportunities are
particularly encouraged to apply. Further information can be obtained at
http://outreach-pgrp.cornell.edu/, or by contacting Nicole Markelz (Program
Coordinator) at nph5@cornell.edu, phone 607-254-6732.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;