* 0453868
* Human Impact on the Ancient Animals of the Maya World:  The Regional Maya Zooarchaeology Project
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2008
* Katherine Emery, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 36,465.00

With National Science Foundation funding, Dr. Kitty F. Emery will create a
database of Maya zooarchaeological data and test its utility in an analysis of
changes in ancient animal distributions and population dynamics in the southern
Maya lowland region of Mesoamerica. The database will combine new database
management with GIS technology to provide a powerful resource for archaeological
and biological research in the Maya area. Compiled zoogeographic data will
contribute to an understanding of ancient Maya impact on animal populations and
test the hypothesis that the ancient Maya decimated their local faunas and
environments.

The world today faces a record loss of animal diversity and faunal habitats,
largely as a result of human impact. This is particularly true in the
subtropical countries encompassing the Maya world (Guatemala and Belize, and
parts of Honduras and Mexico) where human activity has been substantial for over
2000 years. Current archaeological thought holds that the ancient Maya had
significant and negative effects on animal biodiversity and biogeography by
reducing animal populations, altering and fragmenting habitats, and interrupting
animal community dynamics. The lack of a suitably robust and flexible database
system has prevented zooarchaeologists from adequately testing this hypothesis.
However, recent advances in technologies for distributional analysis using
relational databases make this an opportune moment for an integrated research
initiative that will first, refine current methods of zooarchaeological data
management to create a Maya zooarchaeology database, and second, use this
database in a preliminary test of the prevailing hypothesis of ancient Maya
impact on faunas and environments.

The project will use available zooarchaeological data from 20 southern lowland
Maya sites to create and test a customized relational database and geo-
referenced GIS system that is both flexible enough to capture data from a
diverse zooarchaeological sample and effective as a research tool in
archaeological, biological, and conservation science. Intrinsic to the database
creation will be extensive consultation with international experts in database
management, zooarchaeology, and Maya archaeology, and the final database product
will be circulated widely for critique and later refinement. Through
collaboration and consultation with database specialists, archaeologists and
conservation biologists working in the Maya world, and Guatemalan research
institutions, the database format and contents will be made available for
further testing, refinement, and use by the scientific community.

This research has important intellectual merit in the creation of an effective
means for Mesoamerican zooarchaeology data management that will be made
available to interdisciplinary research in both the archaeological and
biological sciences, as well as in the use of relational database and GIS
systems in the zooarchaeological evaluation of ancient Maya impact on animals.
The broader impact of this study lies in the development of infrastructure for
future zooarchaeological research, the collaboration between international
scholars and students, and, most importantly, in the fact that these and later
studies will contribute to biodiversity conservation by providing cogent and
clear lessons about the long history of human/animal interactions and their
implications for our own impact on modern environments.