* 0453229
* NSF/CONACyT:  Molecular Modeling of Phase Equilibria in Porous Media:   Application to Enhanced Oil Recovery
* ENG,CBET
* 08/08/2004,07/31/2007
* Clare McCabe, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2007
* USD 99,935.00

McCabe, Clare M&lt;br/&gt;Colorado School of
Mines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Molecular Modeling of Phase Equilibria in Porous
Media: Application to Enhanced Oil Recovery"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project the technology needs of the oil industry will be addressed by providing
tools that can be used to better understand the thermodynamic processes taking
place during enhanced oil recovery (EOR). Specifically a molecular based
framework will be developed with which to study the phase behavior, both in bulk
and porous media, of systems relevant to EOR. In order to achieve this goal,
theoretical developments to accurately study, with the minimum of reliance on
experimental data, systems relevant to EOR will be incorporated into a
sophisticated SAFT (statistical associating fluid theory) approach. In
particular molecular polarity (such as that seen in nitrogen and carbon dioxide
which are important fluids in oil extraction) and monomer heterogeneity (needed
to accurately model aromatic compounds) will be incorporated into the molecular
model. These interactions are also of fundamental importance in accurately
modeling the effects of surfactant molecules on oil plus water phase behavior.
Additionally, within the SAFT approach a molecular based theory for studying the
phase behavior of fluids in porous media will be developed. By computing the
thermodynamic equilibria between the confined fluid and bulk fluid, both
described by SAFT, adsorption phenomena can be studied. This represents a
significant modeling challenge, though if successful would allow us to treat
phase behavior in bulk and confined fluids on an equal
footing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposal are (1)
education of graduate and undergraduate students (including women and
minorities) and the international cooperation with Mexico, and (2) energy
applications in enhanced oil recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;