* 0453685
* NANO:    Combinatorial Self-Assembly of Nanocircuits on Addressable DNA Nanoscaffolds
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 07/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal aims to develop highly programmable and efficient .bottom-up.
methods for &lt;br/&gt;constructing nanoelectronic circuits, using DNA
nanoarchitectures as scaffolds and sequence &lt;br/&gt;specific molecular
lithography as a tool to combinatorially organize metallic and semiconducting
&lt;br/&gt;nanowires into rationally designed ensembles with potential
applications of self-assembling &lt;br/&gt;functional nanoelectronic devices.
Designer DNA nanoscaffolds are emerging as the material of &lt;br/&gt;choice for
creating sophisticated nanopatterns with the potential capability to pattern
nano-scale &lt;br/&gt;objects with addressability, but their successful
integration with functional nanomaterials requires &lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary
studies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of proposed research:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The programmed and efficient self-assembly of rationally
defined nanoelectronic circuit &lt;br/&gt;patterns is presently one of the
outstanding challenges in nanotechnology. The main research &lt;br/&gt;objective
of this collaborative project is to demonstrate that self-assembly of
addressable &lt;br/&gt;molecular lithographic template can be achieved using DNA
based self-assembly. A team has &lt;br/&gt;been assembled whose collective
expertise can comprehensively address the most pressing issues &lt;br/&gt;in
developing DNA nano-architectures as spatially addressable templates for
metallic and &lt;br/&gt;semiconducting nanowire ensembles. Two main goals will
be achieved through this proposed &lt;br/&gt;research: 1) Design and demonstrate
self-assembly of DNA nanostructures to form patterned &lt;br/&gt;lattices
containing sequence specific template for DNA based molecular lithography. 2)
Bridge &lt;br/&gt;the gap between researches in DNA based molecular lithography
and DNA self-assembly to &lt;br/&gt;develop combinatorial methods for highly
programmable nanoelectronic circuit .bottom-up. &lt;br/&gt;assembly. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of proposed research: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project include potentially significant influence on the
production &lt;br/&gt;of future integrated circuits and microprocessors.
Additional impact will occur in educating &lt;br/&gt;students about the various
aspects of constructing nanoelectronic systems. Efforts will be
&lt;br/&gt;continued in recruiting underrepresented students including
minorities and women and train them &lt;br/&gt;in DNA based nanotechnology.
Undergraduate and high school students will also be recruited to &lt;br/&gt;this
project. Distribution of our results will occur through various scientific
publications, &lt;br/&gt;interactions with industrial partners, and through Duke
University.s Center for Nano-science and &lt;br/&gt;Materials. A cohesive set of
courses that address the important aspects of nanoscale computer
&lt;br/&gt;device research will be designed. This includes topics in DNA
Nanotechnology, Nanoelectronic &lt;br/&gt;Devices and Architectures.
&lt;br/&gt;As another important educational component, a .DNA-based
nanotechnology web site. aimed &lt;br/&gt;at a general public audience will be
designed. The PI and co-PI.s access to talented computer &lt;br/&gt;science
students enable us to implement such a web site with a user-friendly interface.
The impact &lt;br/&gt;of DNA nanotechnology can be brought to its full potential
by integrating the proposed research &lt;br/&gt;with a complementary training
and knowledge transfer program. A Web-based channel will help &lt;br/&gt;promote
DNA nanotechnology in the public domain. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal falls into the
following EMT theme: advance the fundamental capabilities of &lt;br/&gt;computer
and information sciences and engineering by incorporating insights from
nanoscale &lt;br/&gt;science and engineering.