* 0453017
* Search, Firms, and Human Capital: Job Loss and the Shaping of Young Workers' Careers
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Till Von Wachter, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2009
* USD 178,152.00

The first few years in the labor market are crucial in the development of a
worker.s career. However, this is the stage when workers have the highest rate
of job loss and lose most in recessions. In fact, current estimates for the
United States show that an early job loss has large and persistent negative
consequences for wages of both young men and women. Similarly, it appears that
young American workers suffer long-term negative consequences from entering the
labor market in a recession. These findings together imply that young workers
are potentially at high risk of long-term adverse consequences from shocks
unrelated to their own characteristics or choices in a crucial phase of their
careers. Persistent effects of early labor market conditions also pose an
important challenge to standard models of labor market dynamics based on human
capital theory. Alternative models based on selective accession and separation
of workers from firms on job search potentially imply important biases for
simple estimates of the cost of early career shocks. However, too little is as
of yet known about job and wage dynamics of young job losers and the role of
firms to provide a thorough assessment of alternative channels. This proposal
outlines a research agenda that attempts (1) to quantify the degree of
persistence of early labor market experiences free from confounding factors due
to sorting and selection; (2) to provide a detailed analysis of the channels
through which persistent wage losses occur, with particular emphasis on job
mobility, job attachment, and firm characteristics; and (3) to use this
information to assess the relative importance of job mobility and human capital
accumulation in young workers. careers. The project aims at improving
understanding of how job losses affect young workers. careers; advance how
economists characterize wage and employment dynamics; compare the labor markets
of two major developed economies; and provide new tools for analyzing a rich
source of data that so far has been underexploited. It thus strives to provide
answers to an important policy question, as well as to set the stage for an
assessment of the relevance of different models of early job and wage mobility.
To do so, the project proposes to study the long term effects of an early job
loss on career outcomes using a new large matched employer-employee data on
wages and career histories from German social security records. This unique data
currently not available in the United States provides detailed longitudinal
information on both firms and workers. It allows for complex and innovative
research strategies that are able to exploit multiple features of both
theoretical and statistical models to obtain identification. In particular, the
core identification strategy is to control for the biases from negative
selection and voluntary mobility uses shocks to firms. labor demand as measured
by changes in retention rates of young apprentices as instrument for mobility
rates at the end of training. To control for selective initial sorting of
workers into firms, it compares job losers with similar workers at the same
training firm. The intellectual merit of this project is to use persistent wage
and employment effects of early job losses to assess the role of different
aspects of the labor market in shaping young workers. careers. The wealth of
information available in the German data allows for estimation of the causal
effects of job displacements on earnings free potential confounding influences.
In response to a common theme in referees. reactions, the project will also put
particular emphasis on using the data to provide a thorough characterization of
the incidence and true effects of job loss on other career outcomes. In
particular, the project will exploit the available information on career
patterns to characterize the dynamic adjustment process within and between jobs
following a displacement; it will also use the longitudinal information on
establishments to analyze the role of firm characteristics in shaping the losses
and opportunities of young job losers. The characterization of the persistent
effects of early shocks is then particularly suited to assess the relative role
of job mobility and job stability in career development. The broader impact of
the proposed research consists of a considerable benefit to society by analyzing
how a particular group of individuals bears a disproportionate cost of labor
market adjustments that are natural in the course of the business cycle. While
these adjustments clearly benefit society, its negative consequences may be long
lasting and leave scars of economic disadvantage that run through entire
cohorts. By assessing the underlying sources of such persistent effects of
initial conditions, the project provides implications of how policy could help
the re-integration into employment of young displaced workers. In addition, the
experience with the matched panel of workers and establishments from Germany
will enhance the creation and use of similar data products in the U.S. It will
also enhance Infrastructure for Research and Education by building a lasting
cooperation with the research department of the German social security institute
and providing access of confidential data to American researchers through a new
research center.