* 0453792
* Collaborative Research: The Interaction of Estuarine Circulation and Wind-Driven Shelf Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* James Pringle, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 06/30/2010
* USD 190,591.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0453864 /
OCE-0453792&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is a large body of work
investigating the influence of a static estuary on a wind-driven coastal ocean,
and a similarly large body of work considering circulation inside an estuary
coupled to a featureless ocean, very little work has been done looking at a more
realistic coupling of an evolving coastal ocean to a large estuary. In this
study, a numerical model will be used to explore the fundamental dynamics of the
interaction between an idealized stratified, wind-driven coastal shelf and an
idealized estuary. The two major questions addressed will be how wind-induced
upwelling/downwelling on the shelf modifies the hydrographic structure of an
adjacent estuary, and how the presence of the estuary affects
upwelling/downwelling response to wind forcing on the shelf.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to make the results readily applicable to a wide
class of estuaries whose mouths are large compared to the internal radius of
deformation in the coastal ocean, a process-oriented approach based on idealized
scenarios will be used instead of more realistic models. The initial choice of
parameters will be appropriate to the Chesapeake and Delaware estuaries, both
because they are familiar and close to the investigators and because they are
well studied. The findings are expected to elucidate the combinations of
hydrographic, bathymetric and geometric parameters which govern the interaction
between the estuaries and the coastal oceans. They may also help interpret
results from a wide variety of more complex, realistic numerical models, as well
as provide a new perspective for future observations and reanalysis of existing
data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Because the exchange of water with
the estuary and the upwelling/downwelling on the shelf are major influences on
the biological and chemical structure of the coastal ocean, the study will
improve ecological understanding of large estuaries and their adjacent shelves.
It will also characterize how anthropogenic influences reach the coastal ocean.
This work will support graduate and undergraduate students at both universities
through their involvement in the research. This proposal will benefit students
in ODU.s Minority Undergraduate Student Training program, and the results will
be integrated into the educational component of ODU.s ongoing monitoring of
hydrography at the mouth of the Chesapeake. &lt;br/&gt;