* 0453005
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Evolution of the Hominoid Striate and Extrastriate Visual Cortex
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2007
* Bernard Wood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 03/31/2007
* USD 11,963.00

The size and organization of the cerebral cortex has played a fundamental role
in studies of human and primate brain evolution. Yet little information exists
about the cerebral cortex in modern humans and closely related ape species.
Differences between the modern human cortex and that of the usual primate model,
the macaque, have largely been ignored by the neurosciences, and there is a
dearth of useful comparative data.&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research project
will study functionally distinct, hierarchically organized, cerebral cortical
areas involved in the processing of visual information. These cortical areas,
which make up the visual cortex, comprise the largest sensory domain of the
primate cerebral cortex. Visual areas will be investigated across modern humans,
apes and Old World monkeys. The student will use modern microanatomical
techniques to identify and describe visual areas according to consistent
quantitative and qualitative microanatomical criteria. Detailed cortical maps
will be generated for each species investigated. Visual area volumes will be
estimated for each specimen. The data obtained during the course of the study
will provide a framework for further research on the higher primate visual
cortex. Specific questions about brain organization and behavior will also be
addressed. For example, the study will test the hypothesis that the human
lineage has experienced a unique increase in the proportion of visual cortex
that is allocated to higher level processing.&lt;br/&gt;Important broader
impacts of the new data generated here are 1) information about the visual
cortices of apes will be made available for the first time, 2) they will enable
human and monkey visual areas to be interpreted within a phylogenetic
perspective, and, 3) the data will improve our understanding of how modern human
visual areas should be defined. The database created by this project, including
images and comparative descriptions of visual areas, will be made available on a
website. Researchers from diverse fields will be able to use this information to
locate these visual areas in studies of higher primate brains. These data will
also make it possible to determine genetic profiles of specific cortical areas,
and then compare these profiles across higher primate species. Finally, this
project will encourage interdisciplinary science by enabling a physical
anthropologist to become trained in neurobiological laboratory
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;