* 0453513
* REU Site: Integrated geological and geophysical research focused on understanding the landscape history of the Fish Lake Plateau, central Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2007
* Michael Harris, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2007
* USD 148,034.00

This REU site will provide research opportunities for undergraduates in an
environment where traditional geologic and geophysical research techniques are
fully integrated with advanced data collection and management. Field data
collection will utilize global positioning system (GPS) technology and be
uploaded into geographic information systems (GIS) for spatial analysis and the
generation of derivative products. Fish Lake Plateau forms a remarkable location
in which to study volcanic, tectonic, and surficial processes and the
interaction of those processes from the mid-Tertiary to the present. The REU
program will include five phases: 1) site introduction, GIS, and geophysical
training at William &amp; Mary; 2) field collection and data integration at Fish
Lake; 3) post-field compilation and metadata production at William &amp; Mary;
4) continued research at their home institution; and 5) project finalization and
presentation at Coastal Carolina University. The science research will integrate
geological and geophysical field data into a GIS in a meaningful way that will
provide answers concerning the interplay and timing of volcanic, tectonic, and
surficial processes on the Fish Lake Plateau and more regionally, in the
transition zone between the Colorado Plateau and Basin &amp; Range. Over the
7-week summer program, participants will live and work together at William &amp;
Mary, both before and after a 4-week field campaign at Fish Lake. Participants
will develop specific research questions and a research plan in coordination
with the project directors. The project directors, a graduate assistant, and two
consulting scientists will work with the student participants in a both a
mentoring and collaborative fashion. After the summer program, students will
work from their home institution on their research topics. In January, student
participants will come together at Coastal Carolina University for oral
presentations, discussion, and ideas about future research directions for the
REU site. Many of the students will present their results at professional
meetings.