* 0453438
* SCI:    REU Site:    Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Network and Communication Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Periasamy Rajan, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Abani K. Patra
* 12/31/2008
* USD 299,056.00

This project establishes a new Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site
focused on network and communication systems at Tennessee Technological
University (TTU). It is designed to provide research opportunities to cohorts of
undergraduate students from TTU as well as other universities nationwide. Six
faculty members with expertise in network and communication systems will serve
as mentors. Ten students will be selected each year based on compatible interest
and skills outlined in available projects with emphasis on recruiting from
predominantly undergraduate institutions and under-represented groups. An eight-
week long summer session will be organized for all participants. During this
session students will first complete a two-week introductory course and lab
experience to familiarize themselves with the key concepts and research tools.
Subsequently, the students will choose a specific research project from a list
of projects identified by the faculty and work closely with a small, focused
research team of faculty and graduate students for additional six weeks.
Furthermore, some participants from TTU will continue their research during the
fall and spring semesters as well. This year-long research experience will
enable them to carry out more substantial research tasks and thereby gain a more
enriching, fulfilling experience. Broader outreach activities with local and
regional/rural high schools and community colleges will also be
organized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will provide significant benefits
to participating undergraduate students by providing them an early exposure to
the networking field, a crucial growth area in the 21st century and helping them
to develop research and technical skills in the network and communication
systems area in addition to professional and project management skills. It is
also expected that this experience will stimulate in them an interest in
graduate studies and research. The program will have a broad impact on the
society by helping to accelerate the training of world-class research talent in
key emerging areas, vital towards maintaining a national preeminence in the
field, fostering increased awareness of (and interest in) networking technology
at the high school and community college levels. This will promote growth in
long-term enrollment in engineering and computing education, yielding many long-
standing benefits to society at large and increased participation of under-
represented groups in engineering and computing research, thereby responding to
the NSF's stated goal of increasing research participation by under-represented
constituencies and contributing to building a more nationally diverse
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;