* 0453143
* The Revelle Hydrographic Doppler Sonar System: Transducer, Electronics, and Signal Processing Upgrades
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2006
* Robert Pinkel, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Shor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 425,000.00

0453143&lt;br/&gt;Pinkel&lt;br/&gt;This award to Scripps Institution of
Oceanography in California provides support for the installation of improved
transducers and development of improved software for the Hydrographic Doppler
Sonar System aboard R/V Revelle, a research vessel operated by Scripps
Institution of Oceanography as part of the University-National Oceanographic
Laboratory System (UNOLS) academic research fleet. Specifically, the project
will use the design implemented in a previous development effort to replace the
two remaining original transducer arrays of the50 kHz sonar. This is expected to
provide significant improvement in S/N, as well as increased reliability and
reduced maintenance. The award will also replace outdated I/O boards in the
current system, replace the sonar receivers of the 140 kHz system with a new
design already implemented for the 50 kHz system, and implement new advanced
Doppler processing algorithms in an effort to reduce signal contamination from
hull reverberation and side lobes. The HDSS will continue to be operated as part
of the standard array of instruments available to users of R/V Revelle, and it
is expected to be of substantial advantage to scientists using the vessel in
their oceanographic research during 2005 and future years.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: As part of the project, a public web site will be established by the PI
to share transducer hardware designs and new broadband Doppler processing
algorithms with other researchers, and to make these copyrighted algorithms
available to commercial manufacturers.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;