* 0453235
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Cell and Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* JoAnn Trejo, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2008
* USD 238,750.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of North Carolina Chapel
Hill (UNC-CH) invites rising college juniors and seniors to apply for admission
to the REU program in cell and molecular biology. Students will join a larger
community under the Summer Undergraduate Research Experience (SURE). The REU
program offers students considering careers in research and science education a
mentored research experience focusing on basic mechanisms of cell function.
Students will use cutting-edge genetic, molecular, cellular and biochemical
approaches in many model organisms to tackle complex biological problems in the
post-genome era. During the 10-week program, students will become active members
of their host lab and will work with their mentors to develop an independent
research project. REU students will gain an appreciation of the scientific
process and will learn how to collaborate and work as part of a larger research
team. Students will also learn a variety of new technologies through their lab
experience and through group activities designed to expose them to a broad range
of research questions, model systems and approaches. Students will learn from
journal clubs and seminars designed to further their understanding of the
scientific process and will interact with graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows at UNC-Chapel Hill. At the end of the summer, REU students will present
their research at a special scientific symposium. For more information students
may contact Dr. Sharon Milgram at milg@med.unc.edu or visit the program website
at http://www.med.unc.edu/pmbb/sure/index.htm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;