* 0453285
* REU Site:  Undergraduate Research in Integrated Ecology: from Molecules to Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Kelly McConnaughay, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2009
* USD 182,666.00

Bradley University in Peoria, IL, is recruiting six undergraduate students to
participate in a 10-week intensive summer research program in ecology. Students
will be exposed to molecular, physiological, organismal, community and ecosystem
approaches. Although students will be responsible for a particular project in
support of the common goal, they will also work collaboratively with other REU
students and faculty mentors. REU participants will be expected to submit a
final report in journal format and to present their results at an in-house
research symposium held at the conclusion of the summer. In addition to
undergrads, K-12 educators and local minority high school students will also be
involved in research and other program activities. Students will be immersed in
a culture that (1) integrates research and educational activities throughout and
beyond the classroom, (2) fosters and supports multi-investigator, multi-
institutional, cross-disciplinary collaborations, (3) introduces students to the
broader scientific community through multiple university collaborations and
research at multi-investigator research sites and (4) shows the highest
commitment to supporting faculty-student research. Selection criteria for REU
participants include (1) a minimum grade point average of 3.0 and the successful
completion of two years of Biology and one year of Chemistry; (2) letters of
recommendation; (3) a statement of research interests; and (4) a statement of
career goals. Applicants not meeting the stated criteria will also be considered
on a case-by-case basis. Minority students are encouraged to apply. More
information is available by contacting Kelly McConnaughay at 309-677-3020 or
kdm@bradley.edu or visiting http://www.bradley.edu/academics/las/bio/reu2005.htm
l.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;