* 0453166
* An NSF REU Site in Micro/Nanostructures Engineering Research
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Guann Li, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 02/29/2008
* USD 274,983.00

Abstract for Li, U. California-Irvine, 0453166&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The REU
site at the University of California, Irvine (UCI), "The Integrated Micro/Nano
&lt;br/&gt;Summer Undergraduate Research Experience (IMSURE)" hosts16 junior and
senior undergraduates per year for a 10-week summer research experience in
micro- and nanosystems. The program provides faculty mentoring on a significant
range of research topics and offers hands-on prototyping and fabrication
experience. Student participants are recruited through national and local
efforts, with special emphasis on minority and community-college students who
will be attending a four-year institution after the summer experience. Along
with a large selection of well-equipped faculty-research laboratories, students
will have direct access to UCI's Integrated Nanosystems Research Facility
(INRF), a modern, industrial-grade facility for designing, constructing and
testing micro-electro-mechanical (MEMS) systems, opto-electronics, fiberoptics
and photonics, microfluidics, and hybrid systems. The REU program benefits from
an existing campus culture committed to undergraduate research that includes
targeted programs, symposia and conferences, publication of an undergraduate-
research journal, and a network of outside collaborators in recruitment, data
sharing, and other coordinated activities. With a goal of helping students gain
the skills and confidence to become independent researchers and make better
career decisions, the experience focuses on intensive and direct contact with a
large number of faculty and their graduate students through a series of pre-
research lectures, hands-on projects, weekly seminars and workshops, an industry
field trip, and social activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the project derives from the exposure of the undergraduates to the
significant breadth and depth of multidisciplinary activity in nano/MEMS
research and engineering, both basic and applied. The broader impacts include
building stronger and more sophisticated collaborative links with other REU
institutions, community colleges, and campuses known to have diverse enrollment,
and inclusion of industrial and security-oriented applications among the
research thrusts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In support the program goals, and to
ensure excellence in the undergraduate experience, the faculty and staff are
engaged in both the student activities and in the program evaluation, from
recruitment to post-experience tracking. The evaluation plan is based on various
measurements and participant feedback as well as guidance from faculty Steering
and Evaluation committees. Faculty sponsors at the student's home institutions
are engaged to identify individuals who will benefit most from the experience
and to provide post-experience support and mentorship for final-paper
submission, conference attendance, and sustained career momentum. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;