* 0453858
* Polar Lipid Trafficking Between the Endoplasmic Reticulum and the Chloroplast
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Christoph Benning, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 01/31/2008
* USD 462,250.00

Cells and intracellular compartments (organelles) are enclosed by biological
membranes. Polar lipids are the building blocks of cell membranes and lipid
transfer between different membranes is essential for the growth and maintenance
of all cells. The isolation of new genetic mutants of Arabidopsis with
deficiencies in the transfer of polar lipids from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
to the photosynthetic membranes in chloroplasts has led to the identification of
three proteins (TGD1-3) with striking similarity to the permease- (TGD1),
substrate-binding- (TGD2), and ATP-binding proteins (TDG3) of predicted
bacterial ABC transporters. It is hypothesized that the TGD1-3 proteins are
components of a phosphatidic acid (PA) translocator in the chloroplast
envelopes. Loss of function leads to the accumulation of PA and the diversion of
ER-derived glycerolipids into triacylglycerols. In addition, a processive
galactosyltransferase at the outer chloroplast envelope is activated in the
mutants, which causes the accumulation of oligogalactolipids. This project
focuses on the functional analysis of the three TGD proteins and their role in
lipid transfer at the chloroplast envelopes. Specific aims are to (1) determine
the subcellular localization of the TGD1-3 proteins, (2) determine the physical
interaction between TGD1, TGD2 and TGD3, (3) determine the lipid substrate for
the proposed complex and (4) determine the ATPase activity for TGD3.&lt;br/&gt;
The project involves the participation of postdoctoral researchers, graduate
students as well as undergraduate students and offers training opportunities for
persons with different skill levels. Because the employed approaches are ranging
from Arabidopsis genetics, to plant biochemistry and plant cell biology, a broad
training experience is provided to all trainees. In addition, postdoctoral
researchers will gain valuable experience in the supervision of students.
&lt;br/&gt;