* 0453105
* Collaborative Proposal:  Challenger Deep and Trench-related Processes, Reconnaissance Studies with WHOI's 11km-Capability Hybrid-ROV
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2006,08/31/2009
* Patricia Fryer, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2009
* USD 25,069.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research is a pilot program
to collect samples to test models of how the Pacific Plate is recycled through
subduction at the deepest ocean trench, the Challenger Deep in the Mariana
Trench, using the world's first full-ocean depth hybrid remotely operated
vehicle (HROV). The work serves as a test of the scientific usefulness of the
deep-diving robotic sampler by having it sample and return to the surface a wide
variety of rock, fluid, and biological samples from the deepest part of the
seafloor. Samples taken by the HROV will permit the composition of fluids driven
off the Pacific Plate as it is subducted to be studied and interpreted in terms
of how these fluids can be used to understand mineral reactions that affect the
mantle and crustal rock overlying the subduction zone. Because fluids carry
nutrients produced by reactions in the supra-subduction-zone mantle that fuel
sub-seafloor communities of microorganisms and colonies of seafloor seep
organisms, this work will also provide a picture of ecosystems associated with
seeps at the world's deepest ocean trench. The work involves seafloor mapping by
the HROV and using the HROV to take samples of rock, fluid, sediments, and
organisms from the seafloor on the overriding tectonic plate in the Marianas
Trench. The project will also produce one of the first video surveys of
ecosystems that occur in these extremely high-pressure and chemically unique
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This research
supports researchers at the University of Hawaii and at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution in Massachusetts, one of which is a woman. The work helps to build
capabilities of new oceanographic equipment that is capable of operating at the
deepest depths in the ocean. Additional impacts are related to making the
samples to be collected available to the wider scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;