* 0453167
* Phylogeography of Indo-Pacific Reef Fishes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Brian Bowen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2009
* USD 510,089.00

This project will address three contemporary issues in marine biology that
relate to the connectivity of fish populations across island archipelagos:
&lt;br/&gt;1) How did reef fish colonize Hawaii? The Hawaiian archipelago is
among the most isolated reef habitats in the world. The primary currents systems
of the Pacific flow above or below Hawaii, so it is uncertain how reef fauna
dispersed to this area. The two prevailing theories are that they colonized from
the West Pacific, or from the South Pacific. Changes in ocean circulation during
glacial periods may have enhanced colonization opportunities. Gene genealogies
from mtDNA and nuclear DNA will be used to reveal the pathways of colonization,
and the age of these events. &lt;br/&gt;2) What are the genetic separations
among Indian and Pacific Oceans? During low sea-levels associated with
glaciation, the Pacific and Indian Oceans were separated by a land bridge
between Asia and Australia. The age and permeability of this barrier will be
tested. In particular, it will be determine whether ecological factors (such as
habitat specificity) maintain genetic partitions during the long intervals
between glacial periods, when the land barrier is submerged. &lt;br/&gt;3) Is
the Indo-Pacific core a center of speciation? Is the high diversity in the
central Indo-Pacific due to speciation within this region, or accumulation of
species that evolve on peripheral islands? These alternatives will be addressed
with gene genealogies, to resolve fundamental evolutionary processes.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance: The conservation status of coral reefs is well
documented, and one of the most effective responses is marine protected areas
(MPAs). In order to design MPAs, Pacific island nations need to know the level
and direction of dispersal among reef ecosystems. The proposed research will
define patterns of reef fish (larval) dispersal across the Pacific and Indian
Oceans, with special emphasis on Hawaii and the U.S. territories. Indo-Pacific
island students will be recruited to collect fin clips for phylogeographic
analysis, usually supervised by a local biology professor. The students will
participate in this research, view the results, and discuss how findings can
influence management of local reef resources. This program will also provide an
opportunity to recruit exceptional Pacific Island students to the University of
Hawaii. Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology has developed a molecular genetic
core facility dedicated to coral reefs and associated fauna. This project will
enhance this unique facility, and provide research opportunities to the diverse
community at University of Hawaii. &lt;br/&gt;