* 0453088
* Collaborative Research: Parental Guidance and Supervised Learning
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Marciano Siniscalchi, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2008
* USD 115,796.00

From early childhood throughout early adulthood, individuals are under
&lt;br/&gt;the supervision of parents, caregivers, teachers, advisors, and other
&lt;br/&gt;experts. Typically, supervisors can influence, at least to some
extent, &lt;br/&gt;the learning activities of young people. A basic trade-off
emerges in &lt;br/&gt;the learning environments, such that a supervisor may wish
to prevent &lt;br/&gt;the learner from making costly mistakes, but in doing so
hinder the &lt;br/&gt;learning process. This research project develops a family
of formal &lt;br/&gt;theoretical models of supervised learning, and analyzes
their &lt;br/&gt;predictions. Within these models, key features of successful
adult &lt;br/&gt;supervision identified in the child development literature may
be &lt;br/&gt;understood as the result of the parent's optimizing behavior.
Similarly, &lt;br/&gt;the analysis can shed light on the widely documented
variability in &lt;br/&gt;parenting practices across different human societies,
as well as across &lt;br/&gt;animal species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
the role of adults as experts supporting children's &lt;br/&gt;learning
activities is a long-standing objective in developmental &lt;br/&gt;psychology,
and the focus of a sizable experimental and empirical &lt;br/&gt;literature. The
theoretical approach pursued in this project complements &lt;br/&gt;the mainly
experimental and empirical approaches adopted in the child
&lt;br/&gt;development literature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;