* 0453722
* Providing Leadership, Coordination and Community Building through the DLESE Project Office
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Michelle Hall, Science Education Solutions Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2007
* USD 548,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The DLESE enterprise holds great promise for providing critical
infrastructure to support the geoscience community's many efforts to advance
teaching and learning about the Earth system. But DLESE's size, complexity, and
success are challenging the governing structure and the effectiveness of the
Core Services and partner organizations to fulfill this promise. This is
limiting DLESE from reaching its full potential. DLESE needs a dedicated leader
that can keep the community engaged, disciplined in thought and actions, and
progressing logically toward the library's mission and goals. Through this
process, DLESE can move from being a very good organization to being a great
one. The PI will establish a DLESE Project Office (DPO) to lead community
discussions surrounding the growth of the DLESE digital collection, coordinate
the development of the services that will support the creation of exemplary
resources and their use in enhancing geoscience education, and lead the
community-building activities of the Core Service groups. The next two years
hold many opportunities for DLESE to reevaluate its current activities and plan
for the future. In particular, DLESE will implement significant enhancements to
the library based on recommendations in the Quality Plan; undergo a proposed
review by NSF; update the 2001 Strategic Plan; and identify strategies for
continuation of the DLESE enterprise beyond 2006. Each of these activities will
require significant effort and a commitment to stay focused on DLESE's goals.
Each will have a lasting impact on the development and future of DLESE. As
Executive Director, the PI will work with the Steering Committee and Management
Council to guide DLESE through these activities. To improve the planning and
operations of DLESE, the PI will use an array of management tools and will
implement a formal program management system that emphasizes goal setting,
prioritization, scheduling that reflects the integrated nature of the project,
apportionment of resources, and program evaluation. The PI will push for
development of new communication and content generation tools to encourage
community-driven innovations to the library and customization of the DLESE
enterprise by individuals and special interest groups, work with the Core
Services to position DLESE as the educational partner for all major geo-
cyberinfrastructure projects, and develop formal partnerships with all major
facilities and centers supported by NSF's Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;