* 0453021
* REU Site in Cell Biology and Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Anneke Metz, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2009
* USD 217,250.00

The REU in Cell Biology and Neuroscience at Montana State University (MSU) is a
10-week summer research program for students with an interest in biological
science research. Students will learn the joys and challenges of scientific
research by working on projects in cell development, cell biology or
neurobiology. The program consists of an initial 2-week hands-on lab session
that will teach participants important biological research techniques. For the
remaining 8 weeks, students will use these newly learned skills by working in
the lab of a faculty member on a research project. Students will have the
opportunity to make a poster of their work and present their research at a
campus summer student symposium at the end of the program. During the 10 weeks,
students will participate in workshops on the methodology of scientific
research, the ethics of doing science, and the importance of science in society
and presentations about science career options. The program is aimed
particularly at students who have an interest in science but who have little or
no research experience. Minority, first-generation college students and students
who attended high schools in rural areas are especially encouraged to apply. MSU
is located in Bozeman, MT, a Rocky Mountain resort town about 80 miles north of
Yellowstone National Park with easy access to spectacular outdoor recreational
activities. Over 200 students participate in various undergraduate research
programs on the MSU campus each summer, making MSU an invigorating environment
for both recreation and intellectual growth. More information is available at
&lt;br/&gt;http://neuron.montana.edu/index.php?fileName=reu.html or by
contacting Dr. Anneke Metz, (406) 994-7519 or at anneke@montana.edu.&lt;br/&gt;