* 0453737
* Seawater Proteomics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Aaron Timperman, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2010
* USD 499,655.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0453737&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although large amounts of carbon are
stored in the oceans as dissolved organic matter (DOM), the complexity of this
heterogeneous pool has meant that little is known about the high molecular
weight organic matter at the molecular level, and this lack has hindered a more
detailed understanding of the mechanisms that control its cycling. Scientists
from the University of West Virginia and from the University of Puerto Rico have
teamed up to study an important component of DOM, the dissolved proteins in the
ocean. Although only a small fraction of the DOM, proteins are, however, a
primary component of the dissolved organic nitrogen pool that arises from
processes such as cell lysis or excretion. They will take advantage of the
dramatic improvements in proteomic analysis to sequence and identify marine
proteins using state-of-the-art mass spectrometric analysis. Intact proteins
will be analyzed with Fourier transform mass spectrometry to access the
complexity of protein bands separated by gel electrophoresis. The reliability
and specificity of peptide tags obtained through de novo sequencing will hence
be improved. Direct database matching and homology searching should yield
important clues to the sources of dissolved proteins. The data will be searched
for evidence suggesting the presence of post-translational protein
modifications. Identified modifications will be characterized to determine if
they are common biological modifications or if they appear to be the result of
abiotic processes. Successful transfer of these techniques to the ocean will
open the way for resolution of longstanding issues concerning the sources and
changes in organic nitrogen, an important reservoir of nitrogen for marine life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, results from this study will
begin to apply the rapidly maturing technology of proteomics to the chemistry of
organic nitrogen in the oceans, leveraging knowledge from the burgeoning genomic
sequences of marine organisms. A graduate student, and a postdoctoral fellow
with training in Chemical Oceanography, will be trained in these new techniques
as part of this study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;