* 0453504
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Tropical Biology in Costa Rica
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2009
* USD 471,109.00

The Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS), a consortium of more than 60
universities and research institutions, will offer an REU Sites program in
tropical biology at the La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica. This project
will provide hands-on, field-oriented research experiences to undergraduate
students from throughout the United States. The goals for this program are to:
1) encourage student interest in careers in field research and tropical ecology;
2) establish a clear understanding of all aspects of the scientific method; 3)
introduce students to the importance of tropical ecosystems and facilitate a
more complex understanding of ecology as a science; and 4) increase student
awareness of the ethical context of research in the tropics. To address these
goals, the OTS REU program will offer research fellowships to a significant
number of undergraduates especially those coming from institutions where
research opportunities are limited. OTS encourages application from students
from underrepresented groups in the sciences. Specifically, the REU Program
provides support for twelve undergraduates per year to have a ten-week research
experience at La Selva, a research site located in a lowland tropical rainforest
in Costa Rica. Selected students will be paired with research mentors who will
oversee the student's research project. Further information is available at http
://www.ots.duke.edu/en/education/under_summer_reu.shtml.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;