* 0453905
* Dynamic Stability and Particle Transformations: Tracing Pathways of Production in Estuarine Turbidity Maxima
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Elizabeth North, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2010
* USD 2,500,000.00

This project entails interdisciplinary research on the complex processes
controlling structure, dynamics, and productivity of Estuarine Turbidity Maxima
(ETMs). Led by Dr. Ed Houde, it builds on extensive results of the Bio-physical
Interactions in the Turbidity Maximum (BITMAX) program in the Chesapeake Bay.
ETMs are physical features located at the heads of coastal plain estuaries near
the freshwater/saltwater interface. They trap sediment, detritus, zooplankton
and fish early-life stages, enhance secondary production, and exercise control
over recruitments of anadromous fish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BITMAX project
substantially advanced fundamental knowledge of ETM structure and dynamics, but
also identified critical gaps in understanding processes and mechanisms that are
addressed in this proposal. The new research objectives are to define and
evaluate processes and mechanisms promoting secondary production in ETMs. In
BITMAX, the ETM was identified as a region of dynamic stability where restoring
forces, both physical and biological, modulate the ETM ecosystem and
periodically enhance trophic transfer. It is proposed that mechanisms promoting
dynamic stability in ETMs are strongly associated with particle transformations
and water column stratification that lead to predictable particle delivery,
entrapment, nutritional enrichment, and trophic transfer from microbes to
zooplankton to fish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will address four
hypotheses: 1) particle aggregation promotes formation and retention of
nutritious particles in the ETM, 2) particle attached bacteria enrich the
nutritional value of food for copepods, transforming the microbial loop into a
microbial shunt, 3) abundant food and stable stratification enhance the feeding
conditions and production of copepods and fish larvae, and 4) life-history
strategies of key ETM species are adapted to take advantage of event-scale
changes (pulses) in ETM circulation patterns. The integrated research program
will be conducted through comprehensive and coordinated field, laboratory, and
numerical modeling experiments in the ETM region of upper Chesapeake Bay.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will expand knowledge of estuarine
processes in physical and biological disciplines. Results will advance knowledge
of estuarine physical oceanography and sediment transport by improving
understanding of stratified tidal turbulence, particle aggregation dynamics in
eutrophic environments, and ETM particle trapping. ETMs are highly productive
regions in coastal-plain estuaries throughout the world. They serve as critical
nursery areas for economically important fishes. Competing human interests
impact physical and/or biological characteristics of the ETM via freshwater
diversion, dam construction, excessive nutrient loading, channel dredging, and
fisheries harvests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has strong education and
outreach components. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in
field, lab and modeling techniques in a multidisciplinary research program. A
teacher Fellow will gain experience working with scientists and translating
research results into lesson plans. In addition to directly fostering scientific
careers of students, research results will be disseminated through frequent
interactions with resource managers in the Chesapeake Bay Program to ensure that
societal benefits are communicated effectively. &lt;br/&gt;