* 0453964
* G Protein Regulation of a Microtubule Motor Protein in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2005,10/31/2010
* David Stone, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 10/31/2010
* USD 709,433.00

Cellular polarization is essential to morphogenesis, immune response, neuronal
development, chemotropism, and motility. Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a well-
studied model eukaryote that exhibits numerous polarization phenomena, including
signal-induced changes in cell shape and nuclear position. During the haploid
phase of their life cycle, yeast cells secrete peptide pheromones that transform
vegetatively growing cells of opposite mating type into gametes. Preparatory to
cellular and nuclear fusion, pheromone triggers polarized growth toward the
mating partner (chemotropism), and migration of the nucleus to the tip of the
mating projection. Recent results implicate the pheromone-responsive G-alpha
protein, Gpa1, in the control of signal-induced polarized growth and nuclear
movement. In cells responding to pheromone, Gpa1 interacts directly with the
mating-specific MAPK protein, Fus3, and with Kar3, a microtubule motor protein
that is essential for nuclear movement during mating. Disruption of the
Gpa1-Fus3 interaction confers defects in chemotropism, microtubule orientation,
and nuclear migration. The long-term goal of this project is to understand how G
alpha proteins regulate the microtubule cytoskeleton in response to external
signals. To this end, genetic, biochemical, mass spectrometric, and imaging
approaches will be used to determine how Gpa1 affects the mating-specific
functions of Kar3, and whether Fus3 is involved in this regulation. Because Gpa1
and Kar3 provide the first example of a G alpha protein/motor-protein
interaction, and because G alpha regulation of nuclear movement is
unprecedented, this analysis promises to be informative. This project will also
provide significant training opportunity. A graduate student and a postdoctoral
fellow will be working on several aspects of the research. In addition, a high
school student will be recruited to participate in the project each
summer.&lt;br/&gt;