* 0453564
* Renewal of Physics REU site at The University of Oklahoma
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Eric Abraham, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2009
* USD 313,813.00

This award supports a 9 week summer research program in Physics and Astronomy at
the University of Oklahoma (OU) to provide undergraduates with an opportunity to
participate in substantial scientific research in one of four areas:
astrophysics, condensed matter, atomic and molecular physics, or high energy
physics. Approximately nine external students will be funded by the REU site
award and at least four OU students will be funded by the University of Oklahoma
each year. External students will be recruited nationally with emphasis on
underrepresented groups and participants who otherwise lack opportunities for
research experience. The program will build upon our previous success in
introducing students of diverse backgrounds to modern research in an engaging
setting. One primary goal is to have the students bridge the gap from student to
scientist by having the student perform substantive, consequential research
mentored daily by a faculty member in an area in which the student is keenly
interested, having all participants take part in a semiweekly seminar series
with strong emphasis on student participation and interaction with faculty and
graduate students, and participation in a series of voluntary courses, field The
program can have a broader impact from the effort to recruit students from
smaller regional schools that do not have active research. From the coupling of
the undergraduate program to a Research Experience for Teachers program,
teachers are encouraged to see how their efforts pay off in undergraduate
excitement and help students see the importance of high school and middle school
science teaching. The student research presentations will be developed into
materials the teachers can present in their own classrooms. This project is co-
funded by the Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate's Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities and Physics Division.