* 0453578
* REU Site: Nanotechnology and Materials Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Daniel Davis, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 02/28/2009
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract for Davis, EEC-0453578:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This REU award for a Site
on Nanotechnology and Materials Systems supports 12 engineering and science
students each year for three years in a 10-week summer research experience at
the Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU), College Station, TX. The REU Site offers
projects with foci on nanoscience and nanotechnology, materials science, and
engineering systems. Projects are selected to span the physical scales from nano
through macroscopic systems. The primary goal of this REU Site in Nanotechnology
and Materials Systems is to present a model program for increasing the number of
U.S. science and engineering students entering graduate studies and pursuing
research and academic careers. The REU Site pursues this goal through four (4)
coordinated components: 1) A challenging research experience in exciting science
and engineering fields of nanotechnology and materials; 2) A close and personal
mentoring relationships with by senior faculty and researchers, administrators,
graduate student role models and peer groups of other undergraduate students; 3)
Exposure to the research communities at regional universities, industries and
government agencies involved in nanotechnology and materials research to further
foster interest in research careers and graduate studies; and 4) Information on
graduate school including seminars on GRE preparation, application procedures,
and funding a graduate education. Additionally, the program sponsors weekly
educational field trips to industrial and governmental agencies such as NASA
Johnson Space Center (Houston, TX), Lockheed-Martin Corporation (Fort Worth, TX)
and Zyvex Corporation (Richardson, TX). These field trips provide some real-
world context to the broad multidisciplinary nanotechnology and materials
research the REU students experience in the laboratory. Also, the REU-Site
students participate in an annual regional research conference on the
multidisciplinary areas of functionalized nanomaterials, multifunctional
materials systems, biomaterials and devices, multiscale modeling, novel design
concepts, and intelligent systems. Participant recruiting places a strong
emphasis on recruiting students from minority-serving institutions. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this proposal lies in the advanced research
content concerning novel materials and materials systems that span the physical
scales from nanometers and microns to mesoscale and macroscopic systems and in
illustrations of the need to consider the nano-level in engineering-system
design. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of this REU Site arise from
the participation of undergraduate students who are women and underrepresented
minorities. The involvement of these students in exciting research in
nanotechnology and materials systems as applied to aerospace technologies
enhanced the likelihood that they will consider post-graduate study and broaden
the base of our technical manpower.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported
by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;