* 0453993
* MO: Photoheterotrophic Microbes of the Mid-Atlantic Bight
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2006,06/30/2011
* David Kirchman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2011
* USD 834,296.00

The carbon cycle and other biogeochemical processes in the oceans were thought
to be controlled nearly entirely by two types of marine microbes: 1) phototrophs
- microbes which, like plants, synthesize organic material using CO2 and other
plant nutrients while producing oxygen; and 2) heterotrophs - microbes which,
like animals, oxidize organic material back to CO2 and other plant nutrients
while using oxygen. Recent studies using molecular approaches have discovered
some novel microbes--photoheterotrophs--that combine phototrophy with
heterotrophy. Photoheterotrophy would fundamentally alter our understanding of
the carbon cycle and other biogeochemical processes in aquatic ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project would establish a Microbial Observatory (MO)
in the Mid-Atlantic Bight to address questions about the diversity, abundance,
and activity of photoheterotrophic microbes. The project will sequence relevant
genes of photoheterotrophic microbes to characterize their diversity and
metabolism. Abundance will be estimated by flow cytometry (cyanobacteria),
infra-red microscopy of bacteriochlorophyll (AAP bacteria), and fluorescence in
situ hybridization with polyribonucleotide probes targeting proteorhodopsin
genes. Consumption of various organic compounds and CO2 will be assayed at the
single cell level using microautoradiography together with fluorescence
microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts This proposed MO project would
offer several unique opportunities to contribute to the education of students
and the general public in aquatic microbial ecology and environmental
microbiology. The project will involve graduate students via a growing
connection between the University of Delaware and The Institute for Genomic
Research (TIGR). Undergraduates from Lincoln University, the nation's oldest
historical black college, will conduct independent research in the summer in
Delaware. Dr. Kirchman's lab is featured during weekly tours of University of
Delaware facilities in Lewes (about 1000 visitors per year) and during Coast
Day, an annual open-house in Lewes that attracts about 10,000 visitors.
&lt;br/&gt;