* 0453125
* Firm Size Dynamics and the Efficiency of Resource Allocation in the Macroeconomy
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,09/30/2007
* Mark Wright, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2007
* USD 233,908.00

This proposal is for a theoretical and empirical investigation of the
distribution of aggregate economic activity across firms and plants. The
investigators have developed a theory of the efficient allocation of resources
in the economy that is able to rationalize a set of robust facts on scale
dependence in firm dynamics and firm size distributions. In particular, their
theory provides an explanation of why small firms grow faster and exit more than
large firms, and why the size distribution of firms has thinner tails than a
Pareto distribution with shape coefficient one (a common benchmark).
Furthermore, their analysis led to the discovery of a new set of stylized facts
on the relationship between the degree of scale dependence and factor
proportions. The investigators show how industry level forces can determine the
patterns of firm dynamics even in the presence of substantial within-industry
firm level heterogeneity. This approach is extended in four ways. First, the
project allows for greater firm heterogeneity. Combining the theory with
available models of costly entry and the evolution of firm specific
heterogeneity, that lead to the presence of selection effects, allows the
investigators to reach conclusions on whether observed entry patterns are
evidence of inefficiencies. With this extension the investigators will also
address the evidence on the relationship between firm dynamics and the age of
the firm. Second, the investigators propose to extend their approach to address
the phenomenon of shakeouts in new and growing industries. So far, their model
has emphasized productivity shocks as the only source of uncertainty in the
economy. Extending their model to include taste shocks will allow the
investigators to address the expansion of an industry and the associated
patterns of entry and exit. Both of these extensions require the use of
numerical methods. Third, the investigators will extend their theory to include
considerations of ownership and control that would allow them to address
differences between establishments and enterprises. Fourth, the investigators
propose to finish their current research by further documenting the relationship
between industry specific factors and scale dependence in firm dynamics and firm
sizes. This will involve the purchase of more data from the US Census to
identify the relative importance of firm versus narrowly defined industry
heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Implications: The fact that the
growth and exit of firms is related to both their size and their age, and that
these relationships are also manifested in the shape of the size distribution of
firms begs several questions. Is this the result of inefficiencies in the
resource allocation process? If so, which inefficiencies are the most important?
And finally, what forms of government intervention are best designed to
alleviate these inefficiencies and improve aggregate economic performance? The
aim of this proposal is to develop an efficient benchmark against which observed
firm size distributions can be contrasted in order to assess the impacts and
potential sources of inefficiencies in the resource allocation mechanism. Once
inefficiencies are diagnosed, appropriate policies - ranging from anti-trust
policy to improved contract enforcement, and to subsidized lending to small
business- can be prescribed.&lt;br/&gt;