* 0453334
* The Development and Application of Strategies for the Preparation of Designed Supramolecular Structures.
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2010
* Frank Fowler, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2010
* USD 468,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports Professors Joseph W.
Lauher and Frank W. Fowler of SUNY at Stony Brook who propose to investigate the
1,4-polymerization of terminal diacetylenes and to develop host-guest systems
that will allow the 1,6-enediyne polymerizations. In this project, the
researchers will implement strategies that allow the preparation of networks of
molecules with precise control of certain supramolecular features such as
intermolecular distances, molecular orientations, and crystallographic symmetry.
The use of host-guest chemistry and a library of functional groups that form
self-complementary hydrogen bonds will achieve this control. This project
outlines a strategy to bring about the polymerization of a stack of diacetylene
macrocycles to produce nanotubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The poly (diacetylenes)
and poly (triacetylenes) to be studied by Professors Lauher and Fowler are
conjugated polymers with potential applications as electronic and optical
materials. The research will be carried out by a group of talented graduate and
undergraduate students with female and minority students well represented. Stony
Brook has made a major commitment to undergraduate research and aspects of the
proposed research will be brought into undergraduate courses. In particular, a
laboratory exercise in chemical synthesis directly related to this research
project will be integrated into the curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;