* 0453444
* REU Site: Computational Materials Science
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Xueyu Song, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2009
* USD 204,000.00

The Iowa State University site is supported by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF REU program for the summers of 2005-2007. The program
director is Xueyu Song who is assisted by co-PI James Evans. This REU site will
introduce undergraduate students to a broad array of methods in computational
chemistry, chemical engineering and physics, with special emphasis on
applications in materials science. The primary faculty mentors have been drawn
from the Departments of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Mathematics and
Physics, with collaborators from experimental areas of materials science and the
Ames Laboratory Scalable Computing Laboratory. The experimentalists will provide
valuable perspectives regarding the way in which theory can interface with
experiments, and they will present overview lectures on the experiments that
connect most directly with theory. Existing experiment-theory collaborations
will enhance and reinforce the emphasis to the students that this experiment-
theory interface is critical for a successful modern research effort. All of the
mentors have robust research groups, and most have extensive experience working
with undergraduate researchers. Because of the ease with which computational
chemistry and physics can be conducted from remote locations, this program will
provide an exceptional opportunity for undergraduate scientists to continue
their collaborations after they have returned to their home institutions.