* 0453071
* Coastal Autonomous Profiling and Boundary Layer System (CAPABLE)
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2010
* Murray Levine, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 01/31/2010
* USD 1,192,094.00

Project Summary

This project represents a partnership between Oregon State University and WET
Labs to develop a Coastal Autonomous Profiling and Boundary Layer System
(CAPABLE). This effort combines the experience of OSU scientists and technicians
working in the coastal ocean with the engineering and oceanographic sensor
expertise of WET Labs to design and build the next generation, multi-parameter
oceanographic sensing system. CAPABLE will be equipped with sensors to measure
the ocean temperature, velocity, salinity, nitrate content, dissolved oxygen
level, suspended particle load, and chlorophyll concentration. CAPABLE will
consist of three components: 1. The ExTended ENdurance Autonomous Moored
Profiler (xTEN AMP) based on a winch-on-board design and carrying a suite of
interdisciplinary sensors capable of profiling a 200 m water column 8 times per
day. The system will telemeter data to shore via radio or Iridium phone and be
deployable for 6 months. The xTEN AMP will carry a battery pack capable of being
recharged from a power system housed in a bottom-mounted docking station; 2. The
Shallow Coastal Upward Looking Profiler Integration Node (SCULPIN) housing the
battery recharge system, a deployment/recovery system and a set of instruments
for making measurements in the bottom boundary region below the xTEN AMP's
lowest measurement. The SCULPIN instrument suite includes an upward-looking
acoustic Doppler current profiler to obtain high-resolution velocity profiles,
and sensors to measure near-bottom pressure, temperature, conductivity,
chlorophyll concentration, and suspended particle load; 3. The Surface Boundary
Buoy (SBB) making detailed observations in the air and the upper-ocean region,
using a suite of meteorological sensors, a high-frequency acoustic Doppler
profiler and sensors to measure upper-layer temperature-conductivity to resolve
the upper-ocean structure. The SBB also provides a platform for collecting and
telemetering all data to shore. The xTEN AMP will cycle up-and-down through the
water column using an electric winch mounted inside the profiling platform
rather than on the ocean bottom. The xTEN AMP will feature: a completely self-
contained, modularly-integrated sensor, instrument controller, winch, power and
telemetry system; a biofouling-resistant and hydrodynamic profiling platform; an
intelligent winch controller for dynamic profiling; and an inductive charging
system coupling with the SCULPIN. The xTEN AMP will communicate acoustically
with the SBB and through an inductive system with the SCULPIN sensors. Data will
be sent to shore via HF radio or satellite phone from the xTEN AMP and/or from
the SBB. Data will then be sent on the Internet to OSU for data processing,
quality control, archiving, and posting on a web portal. As a backup, all data
will be stored internally on the xTEN AMP, SCULPIN and SBB.