* 0453016
* REU Site--Psychology and Law:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Richard Wiener, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/28/2009
* USD 269,280.00

This project is a research experience for undergraduates (REU) site that
provides 10 advanced undergraduate psychology majors from underrepresented
groups a full year of research training into issues of psychology and the law.
The University of Nebraska-Lincoln hosts the students for their junior year.
Students work 10-12 hours per week in a research team, participate in an
intensive graduate school preparation course, and take a full course load at
UNL. Intellectual Merits- REU participants join one of four ongoing research
teams. Topics include: legal decision-making; jurors, witnesses and litigants in
the real world; cultural and social group influence on attitudes and beliefs
about the justice system; and legal competencies. In conjunction with faculty
mentors, students develop their own project designs, data collection, and
analyses. The ultimate goal is to have students produce publishable papers
and/or present their research at professional conferences. Broader Impacts- The
project targets students from underrepresented groups in the Midwest. It
prepares them for advanced graduate training in psychology through an intensive
research experience in a team-based environment and a special graduate school
preparation course. The focus is on exposing students early on to a number of
professional development activities all aimed at preparing them for research
careers in academic and applied settings. The project also includes a
comprehensive evaluation plan.