* 0453896
* SGER: Planning Activities to Foster International Collaboration
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Diana Rhoten, Social Science Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 09/30/2006
* USD 199,979.00

The Social Science Research Council (SSRC) will work to consider how to
strengthen the intellectual and organizational infrastructure needed to improve
understandings of the social impacts of global processes through international
collaborative research. The research focus of this work will be on social
inequality and social inclusion/exclusion -- topics of great importance within
and between nations. To undertake this, a series of meetings will be organized
with social scientists and representatives of national funding agencies.
Background work on international collaboration, global processes, and training
needs for international collaboration will frame the discussions. The Economic
and Social Research Council (U.K.) will partner in these efforts and contribute
funds for extending the work beyond 12 months.

The series of four meetings and the report that will come out will serve as a
useful guide outlining promising directions for fostering international
collaborations on these and related topics and will suggest mechanisms for doing
so. The collaborations that have been arranged include links among North
America, Europe, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, the Middle East and
North Africa, Eurasia, South and South East Asia; and East Asia. The perspective
of scholars will be sought to determine what research competencies are needed,
across many disciplines, to address these issues and what are the relevant
concepts, models, theories, and methods. Scholars will also be asked to think
about the nature of the training and scholarly relationships that will
facilitate addressing these questions in the context of international
collaboration. The national funding agencies will be asked to indicate what
science they already support and what funding mechanisms they use to do so; they
will also think about future partnerships and collaborations.

The broader impacts of this work include the inclusion of voices and
perspectives representative of the full geographic, social, and disciplinary
diversity of the international community of the social sciences. This will
support growing scientific international cooperation. The linking of NSF
research agendas in the social, behavioral, and economic sciences with those of
other national funding agencies will be a particularly beneficial outcome of
this work. In addition, a scholarly and administrative awareness will be
engendered of the importance of the issues of inequality and social
exclusion/inclusion, as global issues will be a very valuable broader impact.
These are issues that clearly transcend national boundaries. This work responds
to current international interest in these issues and stems partly from growing
international tensions related to terrorism, as well as international isolation
due to new travel restrictions and nationalism.

