* 0453126
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in Organic Chemistry in Bangkok, Thailand
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Poonsakdi Ploypradith, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2009
* USD 324,453.00

NSF's chemistry division and Office of International Science and Engineering
jointly co-fund the University of California-Santa Cruz Research Experiences for
Undergraduates in Organic Chemistry site in Bangkok, Thailand for the summers of
2005-2008. The program director is Rebecca Braslau, UCSC, who is assisted by
Poonsakdi Ploypradith of Chulabhorn Research Institute, Bangkok, Thailand. This
international ten week program is designed to give eight outstanding students
from the United States an intensive, hands-on research experience in organic
chemistry in Bangkok, Thailand in laboratories at Chulalongkorn University, at
Mahidol University, and at the Chulabhorn Research Institute. Each American
undergraduate will be paired with a Thai graduate student. The American REU
students will be housed together at Chulalongkorn University. The International
Affairs Office at Chulalongkorn University will offer the students an initial
Thai culture, history and language course, which will be supplemented throughout
the summer by cultural enrichment outings to important religious and historical
locations. The program includes multiple research meetings throughout the
summer, followed by a final Research Colloquium for both American and Thai
student participants. In addition, the REU students will submit written research
reports to complete their formal research experience. Student participants will
be recruited from across the U.S. by posters and by web, partially in tandem
with the existing REU program at U. C. Santa Cruz. Candidates will be evaluated
on academic excellence in chemistry and an interest in experiencing a foreign
culture, while striving to achieve a broad representation of minorities, women
and students with disabilities.