* 0453466
* REU Site: Collaborative Research in the Chemical Sciences at the University of Arizona
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2008
* Dominic McGrath, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Wilfredo Colon
* 05/31/2008
* USD 212,133.00

This Chemistry Division award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at the University of Arizona for the summers of 2005-2007. The
program director is Katrina Miranda who is assisted by co-PI Dominic McGrath.
The University of Arizona REU site will train 27 primarily female and minority
undergraduates in chemical research while encouraging these students to enter
scientific careers, enhancing the scientific workforce. The primary objective is
to expose undergraduates from primarily non-Ph.D. granting institutions to
collaborative research environments in order to initiate or develop their desire
to pursue a career in the sciences. The program will recruit women and
underrepresented minority students from non-Ph.D. granting institutions
primarily, although not limited to, the western states. The core of the program
will be independent research under a faculty mentor and associated
collaborators. A series of seminars will help prepare the REU students to carry
out research, to initiate discussion and thought about ethical issues in science
and the research environment, and to consider career opportunities in chemistry.
A poster symposium for the REU students as well as other on-campus summer
research programs will be held at the conclusion of the program. After the
completion of the program, the REU students will be encouraged to present their
research at regional conferences such as the Rocky Mountain Regional Meeting of
the American Chemical Society (RMRM).