* 0453855
* Dissertation Research:  ICT Development in the NGO Sector: The Case of Greenpeace
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Kim Fortun, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant will provide
funds to document and analyze the development of information systems at
Greenpeace, a prominent, transnational environmental organization. Greenpeace
grew to prominence largely from its successes in using mass media for
environmental advocacy, and the organization has traditionally emphasized
technical innovation in the service of environmental advocacy. It is unique
among the larger environmental organizations in incorporating confrontational
tactics, technical sophistication, and a relatively hierarchical governance
structure. This combination of traits makes it an ideal setting for
investigating the synergies and discordances between institutions and practices
proper to advocacy and those found in commercial settings. Over the past decade,
ICT development has emerged as a strategic area for Greenpeace, as is witnessed
by increased management attention and a three-fold increase in investment. At
present, there are clear indications that technical innovation is being
rethought by senior managers, who see promise in models borrowed from commercial
settings as means of adaptation to external change. This project will analyze
the implications of the organization's efforts to develop shared, geographically
distributed information systems. It will use participant observation,
ethnographic interviews, and archival research as the basis for detailed
histories of three information system projects. The primary conceptual problem
of the study will be relating the development and use of the information systems
to their successively larger organizational and societal contexts. Extended
participant observation of central office IT support work has been conducted at
the study's main research site, Greenpeace International. Subsequent phases of
research will focus on the distributed&lt;br/&gt;environment in which the
information systems are used-the organization's many national offices. By
examining socio-technical systems in an advocacy context, this study will
contribute to research on organizational informatics, social movements, and
globalization. Conclusions of this research will be presented as a dissertation
that explores the strategic and operational dimensions of information systems
development by large environmental organizations. The dissertation will be
reworked into a book manuscript. Portions of this work will be presented at
Greenpeace International with the primary goals of informing strategic planning
for ICT investment and management of information systems projects, and the
secondary goal of demonstrating how the insights of contextual inquiry can
inform socio-technical design within the organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;