* 0453380
* REU Site:  Ecology, Evolution and Behavior Field Research at Mountain Lake Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Eric Nagy, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2011
* USD 446,935.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Mountain Lake
Biological Station (MLBS, University of Virginia) offers ten students a summer
opportunity to conduct independent, self-motivated, interdisciplinary, and
original research in experimental, field-based ecology, evolution, and behavior.
Under the close supervision and guidance of a research mentor and the program
coordinator, students design, execute, analyze, interpret, and present a self-
contained research project within the ten weeks of the program. Many student
projects are published in leading peer-reviewed journals. Students participate
in weekly seminars on the design and conduct of research, scientific ethics,
writing and presentation techniques, and other matters of scientific and
academic life. Students prepare written and oral proposals and final reports.
Participants also take advantage of the rich, varied, and stimulating
intellectual and social life at Mountain Lake Biological Station. MLBS hosts two
formal research seminars per week, which include both in-house and invited
speakers. All Station residents eat meals together in the common dining hall,
and most daily activity revolves around the central lab building where all
research programs are housed. Since field sites are often within walking
distance, interactions among all Station users occur constantly, resulting in a
supportive and collaborative environment. Each summer, some 60-80 scientists,
faculty, post-docs, and students are in residence at the Station. Students from
under-represented groups and those with limited opportunity for research are
especially encouraged to apply. Four Historically Black College and University
(HBCU) member institutions are active partners in the program. Program
information are available at http://mlbs.org/REU.html, or by contacting the REU
Coordinator at mlbs-reu@virginia.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;