* 0453205
* River Basins Research Initiative NSF REU-Site
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Dennis Haney, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2009
* USD 323,244.00

There are three primary scientific and educational objectives associated with
the River Basins Research Initiative (RBRI) REU site: 1) to introduce and
immerse each REU participant into a valid research endeavor that will culminate
in developing new scientific knowledge, 2) to foster the progression of each
participant from a dependent assistant to an independent scientific colleague,
and 3) for each participant to disseminate the results of their original
research in the form of presentations at regional and national scientific
meetings and, when possible, as published journal articles. Participants will
spend ten weeks at Furman University during the summer in an intensive
interdisciplinary research effort. Briefly, the first week will be spent in
classroom instruction and laboratory/field training. The second week will be
spent on project design and the introduction to the field areas. The next six
weeks will focus on data collection and analysis, literature review and
compilation of results. The final two weeks will be devoted to the
interpretation of results and initial preparation of materials for presentations
at professional disciplinary meetings. The considerable field equipment,
instrumentation, and facilities of the Biology, Chemistry, and Earth and
Environmental Sciences departments will be made fully available for student use
during the REU period. Six faculty members will commit to working full time on
RBRI projects during the 10-week period, and three additional faculty members
have committed to working part time.