* 0453809
* CRI: Emstar: A Community Resource for Heterogeneous Embedded Sensor Network Development
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Richard Guy, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 06/30/2009
* USD 856,987.00

Wireless embedded systems are invigorating CISE research areas from operating
systems, distributed embedded computing, architecture, and networking to signal
processing, algorithms, and data management, and opening up new broad-impact
applications ranging from wide area environmental management to biomedical
monitoring. These systems are increasingly focused on a particularly powerful
and exciting class of deployment: the heterogeneous or tiered sensor network. A
heterogeneous sensor network contains nodes with different capabilities, such as
tiny, low-power "motes" and higher-powered, "microservers". Motes are
inexpensive and require no infrastructure for long-term deployments, but also
extremely constrained in memory, CPU power, and communication. Microservers, in
contrast, are more efficient than motes at many computation- and memory-
intensive tasks, and more readily interfaced to high-bandwidth peripherals, such
as high-rate ADCs and network interfaces; but their higher energy consumption
requires power infrastructure, such as solar panels, in long-term deployments. A
heterogeneous system containing both motes and microservers can combine the
advantages of both devices, using motes to achieve the desired spatial sensing
density and microservers to achieve the desired processing power.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless embedded sensor systems present the CISE
community with an array of intertwined research challenges: real time sensing of
complex and diverse phenomena, embedded computing constrained in bandwidth,
energy, memory, and storage, controlled mobility, and the autonomous
coordination of vast numbers of network nodes. But implementing and testing
sensor network applications is daunting even aside from these challenges: many
of the constraints that yield low-power, long-lifetime systems also undermine
traditional methods for instrumenting and understanding program behavior.
Coordinated community infrastructure can thus act as a tremendous research
accelerator, and without shared infrastructure, research in the field will be
significantly hampered. This project addresses a pressing need: wireless sensor
network research demands a concentrated effort to develop a community resource
for heterogeneous sensor systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
develop a community resource based on Emstar, a highly resilient application
methodology for microservers and general heterogeneous deployments. Emstar
smoothly combines simulation, emulation, and deployment, leading to
qualitatively easier debugging and application analysis. An EmTOS component
seamlessly integrates motes and microservers; the EmView visualizer provides
unprecedented visibility into wireless sensor network communication
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will build on the investigators Emstar
prototype which has proven its value in deployments of heterogeneous
networks.&lt;br/&gt;With expanded functionality, integration, hardening,
enhanced usability, and longer-term support, its broad array of tools will
become accessible to the computer and information science and engineering
community. The project will expand Emstar's flexibility, completeness,
robustness, documentation, and programmability; extend its functionality by
learning from targeted deployments such as seismic arrays, mobile environmental
sensing, and medical informatics; and develop a robust, active Emstar community
through workshops, tutorials, and mailing lists. The proposed community resource
will act as a tremendous accelerator for research into heterogeneous wireless
sensor networks, enabling quick and thorough exploration of socially important
applications including environmental monitoring, medical and public health
systems, and industrial and civic infrastructure development and management. The
project will also support and develop undergraduate and graduate level project
courses using Emstar, and explicitly involve an undergraduate research program
targeting underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;