* 0453207
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Geometric Morphometric Analysis of the Infraorbital Region of Great Apes and Modern and Extinct Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2006
* William Kimbel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 01/31/2006
* USD 3,500.00

This project is a three-dimensional metric analysis of the infraorbital region
of extinct hominins, modern humans, and great apes. The primary goal is to use
3-D landmark data in a phylogenetic analysis of extinct hominins. Issues of
metric variation and the use of quantitative characters in phylogenetic analyses
will be necessarily addressed as they relate to hominin
phylogeny&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One aspect of the intellectual merit of this
project is that it provides for a detailed examination of hominin facial
morphology widely acknowledged to play an important role in interpretations of
the evolutionary history of the hominins, but with technologies that allow
metric description of the anatomy and quantitative methods that permit detailed
examination of specific characters. Furthermore, this project specifically
reexamines important hypotheses of homology for facial anatomy in
Australopithecus africanus, A. robustus, and A. boisei articulated by Yoel Rak,
particularly in light of the discovery of KNM-WT 17000. One advantage of this
project is that it applies technologies and statistical methods that allow
sophisticated metric description of anatomy that has historically been described
quantitatively. Furthermore, it takes advantage of the potential for addressing
phylogenetic issues with three-dimensional landmark data by breaking the
landmark data into subsets. These subsets describe the variation, and similarity
and dissimilarity, of specific characters across multiple hominin taxa. Although
the use of geometric morphometrics is becoming widespread, evolutionary
biologists have not taken full advantage of the potential for addressing issues
in evolutionary systematics with these technologies. By demonstrating the
utility of a dense anatomical landmark set that can be subdivided to represent
the variation of individual characters, this study will serve as a model for the
use of geometric morphometric data in phylogenetic studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project will be in the
dissemination of information derived from the study. Methods and preliminary
results will be presented to museum personnel and interested non-scientific
local parties during on-site data collection. To ensure that the information is
distributed to a wide scientific and non-scientific community, final results
will be distributed to scholarly journals from both the United States and the
countries of origin of the fossils, and non-scholarly journals. Periodicals from
the countries of the fossils' origin, such as the Journal of Ethiopian Studies,
will be presented the material for distribution to a broader, non-scientific,
audience. Fossil hominins are a source of great local pride in the countries of
origin, and the dissemination of information on the importance of these fossils
in understanding the evolutionary history of all humans is an integral aspect of
increasing knowledge of and educational interest in human evolutionary history.&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;