* 0453773
* Drosophila Mcm10 in DNA Replication and Heterochromatin Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Bik-Kwoon Tye, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2009
* USD 673,000.00

The chromosome cycle begins with the precise replication of the genome, followed
by condensation of the duplicated genomes and segregation of sister chromatids.
These processes define the distinct phases of a cell division cycle. Defects in,
or mis-coordination of these processes can have dire consequences to a
proliferating cell resulting in chromosome damage, genome instability and
chromosome mis-segregation. The possible roles of the Drosophila MCM10 protein
in DNA replication and heterochromatin formation and its effects on variegated
gene expression, maintenance of genome integrity and chromosome segregation will
be explored in this project. MCM10 was initially characterized in the budding
and fission yeast as an abundant nuclear protein that plays an important role in
the initiation of DNA replication. MCM10 is localized to replication origins,
interacts physically and functionally with subunits of the presumptive
replicative MCM helicase and facilitates the phosphorylation of the MCM helicase
by the Cdc7-Dbf4 kinase, a step believed to activate the MCM helicase. Studies
in Xenopus laevis confirmed the role of MCM10 in the initiation step and suggest
that MCM10 plays a critical role in bridging the activation of the MCM helicase
with the recruitment of factors required for DNA synthesis. Recent Drosophila
studies by the Tye laboratory showed that MCM10 interacts not only with
components of the pre-replication complex that is assembled at replication
origins during G1 phase, it also interacts with components of the elongation
machinery. Furthermore, it interacts with components of the heterochromatin
complex including ORC and HP1. RNA interference studies in tissue culture cells
indicate that depletion of MCM10 leads to abnormal chromosome morphology such as
aberrant chromosome condensation, precocious sister chromatid disjunction and
possibly chromosome fragmentation. These chromosomal abnormalities may be the
indirect result of defects in DNA replication that affect chromatin
condensation. Alternatively, MCM10 may play a direct role in both DNA
replication and chromatin condensation. &lt;br/&gt;MCM10's role in DNA
replication and the maintenance of chromosome integrity in Drosophila will be
explored at the cellular level by addressing whether MCM10 depletion affects DNA
replication and whether MCM10 depletion affects heterochromatin formation. The
developmental abnormalities that result from depletion of MCM10 will also be
investigated at the organismal level. The approaches taken will include
construction of genetic null mutants, hypomorphic mutants and conditional
transgenic RNAi mutants, mosaic analysis, PEV analysis, chromosome cytology, CFP
and YFP colocalization as well as FRET analysis, and two-hybrid
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding biology requires understanding chromosomal
biology- how the integrity of genetic information is preserved through the
precise replication and segregation of chromosomes and how that information is
selectively disseminated throughout development. This project should increase
the depth and breadth of our understanding of the mechanisms through which
chromosomes carry out their many functions. In addition, this research will help
train undergraduates and a graduate student and help a new investigator develop
his teaching skills.&lt;br/&gt;