* 0453316
* Fluvial Dynamics of Large River Confluences
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2005,09/30/2009
* Bruce Rhoads, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2009
* USD 190,262.00

ABSTRACT Confluences, the locations where two rivers join, are fundamental
components of natural river networks, yet most studies of flow, sediment
movement and channel change at confluences have focused on laboratory
confluences and on small natural confluences. Little is know about the relevance
of conclusions derived from small-scale studies for large-river confluences and
a critical need exists for process-based field investigations of large-river
confluences to explore how confluence dynamics change with spatial scale and
implications of such changes for network-scale movement of water and sediment.
This project will explore the influence of various controlling factors,
including confluence geometry, momentum ratio of the upstream tributaries, on
flow structure and changes in channel form within large river confluences. Field
data on channel form, three-dimensional flow structure and bed topography will
be collected at three confluences along the Wabash River system in Indiana that
exhibit different geometries. Data-collection activities will be conducted in
collaboration with the District Headquarters of the U.S. Geological Survey in
Urbana, which maintains a full suite of state-of-the-art instrumentation for
large-river research. Data will be collected for one to two events per year at
each confluence over a period of three years. The suite of sampled events will
be chosen to represent a range of hydrological conditions at each site. Data
analysis will involve the development of three-dimensional computer-based
renderings of spatial patterns of bed morphology, 3-D velocity fields and water
temperature/mixing at each site to explore the influences of confluence
planform, momentum-flux ratio and bed morphology on the dynamics of the
confluences. This analysis will include documentation of changes in confluence
bed morphology resulting from changes in momentum-flux ratio of incoming flows,
and the response of flow structure and mixing to these changes. Through an
ongoing collaboration with research teams at the University of Leeds and the
University of Sheffield in the UK, the field data will be used as inputs to an
advanced numerical model of three-dimensional flow to test the capability of the
model to simulate flow through natural large-river confluences. The numerical
modeling will complement the field investigation by allowing findings for site-
specific locations to be understood more completely within a theoretical context
and by providing the basis for explaining how general processes manifest
themselves differently in site-specific contexts.

Besides providing basic insights into the dynamics of large river confluences
and the role of confluences in regulating fluxes of water and sediment through
river networks, results of the research contribute to improved understanding and
management of practical issues related to sedimentation/erosion at confluences,
such as river navigation, enhanced linkages between river geomorphology and
ecology by defining in detail physical habitat conditions at large-river
confluences, and applied problems involving the dispersal of contaminants and
other dissolved or suspended constituents within river systems. The research
will be tied directly to university and K-12 education and outreach through the
newly established Center for Water as a Complex Environmental System at the
University of Illinois. A partnership with the U.S. Geological Survey is a
critical component of the project and, through this partnership, real
opportunity exists for results of the research to become integrated into broader
programs and activities of national interest.