* 0453432
* REU:    Novel Materials and Processing in Chemical and Biomedical Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Christos Takoudis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 12/31/2008
* USD 310,993.00

Abstract for Takoudis, EEC-0453432:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site in Novel
Materials and Processing in Chemical and Biomedical Engineering supports a total
of twelve undergraduate students annually for three years in the Departments of
Chemical, Mechanical and Bio-Engineering at the University of Illinois at
Chicago (UIC). Students are recruited from regional community colleges,
universities with high minority enrollments (e.g.., Chicago State and U. of
Puerto Rico), other universities across the nation, and UIC for 10-week summer
research projects. The target is to accommodate at least 80% of the students
from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foci of this REU site are
new materials, novel thin films, design methodologies, biomaterials and
bioengineering processes, and characterization techniques that reveal the
process-structure-functionality interrelationships of novel materials with their
processing in the chemical and biomedical engineering disciplines. Specific
projects include product and process engineering for biomedical applications,
atomic-scale investigations of nanostructures, experimental investigation of
fluid behavior in nanochannels, biological surface modification for implantable
medical devices, micropatterned substrates for controlling growth and neurite
extension of retinal neurons, and novel catalytic materials. The objectives of
this REU program are to introduce students to independent research in novel
materials and their processing, to develop and enhance the students' creativity
and originality, to develop outstanding candidates for graduate programs, to
demonstrate the excitement of doing original research, and to promote the
development of interdisciplinary skills needed in the engineering workplace of
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is anticipated to have a broad
impact on novel materials and processing in biomedical and chemical engineering
as well as on the development of human resources. The REU site places emphasis
on (i) oral communication and technical writing skills through 4 bi-weekly brief
research progress reports as well as a final oral presentation and written
report, (ii) skills in experimental design and safety engineering through
tutorials and seminars, (iii) engineering ethics through a workshop, seminar,
and a three-hour tutorial series, and (iv) introduction to several areas of
novel materials and processing. The social program of the REU site includes
unstructured social gatherings after the weekly group meetings, tours of
regional research/industrial facilities (i.e., BP,Motorola, Argonne National
Lab, Abbott Labs, American Air Liquide, Fermi Lab, and UOP), picnics and
cookouts, group outings to Cubs and White Sox baseball games, and a Lake
Michigan ship tour.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program. &lt;br/&gt;