* 0453681
* Internal Tides and Inertial Oscillations:  Analysis of Observations in the Gulf Stream South of New England
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* D. Randolph Watts, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2009
* USD 174,251.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0453681
Watts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand
the impact of the Gulf Stream on the horizontal and vertical distributions of
internal tides and inertial oscillations in the region south of New England. An
existing dataset from the Synoptic Ocean Prediction (SYNOP) experiment
(1988-1990) will be reanalyzed. The Central Array of the SYNOP experiment
comprised 24 inverted echo sounders and 13 tall current meter moorings
collecting currents at 4 levels, plus 3 with Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers.
The SYNOP experiment was highly successful, improving the physical understanding
of the mesoscale meandering of the Gulf Stream. However, the high-frequency band
signals (inertial to semi-diurnal frequencies) of these data have not yet been
analyzed and reported upon. The reanalysis of the SYNOP dataset provides a cost-
effective opportunity to achieve the goal.&lt;br/&gt;The mean and shorter term
distribution of internal tides and inertial oscillations will be related to the
observed circulation and compare to predicted propagation paths in the Gulf
Stream. Exciting preliminary evidence that internal tides, generated by strong
cross-slope tidal currents associated with the Bay of Fundy tides, are blocked
from crossing the Gulf Stream, and that near-inertial oscillations may be
concentrated by the vorticity of the Gulf Stream, will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. The energy available for
ocean mixing by internal tides and near-inertial oscillations are variable in
space and time. The understanding gained from this study will validate model and
theoretical concepts regarding the process by which they interact with currents
and can be trapped or
focused.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;