* 0453365
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the Rice Quantum Institute
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Bruce Johnson, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2009
* USD 238,083.00

The REU program conducted by the Rice Quantum Institute (RQI) brings together a
number of students from outside universities as well as from Rice University for
a ten-week interdisciplinary summer research program. The focus is to provide
undergraduate students, frequently from schools with more limited resources,
with a jump start into many aspects of research that cannot easily be learned in
classes. The students are exposed to different disciplines by contact with a
variety of research groups, organized lab tours, weekly seminars by Rice grad
students, and frequent scientific and social interactions with other REU
students. Each student will become involved in cutting-edge scientific work by
joining an individual research group and working daily with the students,
postdocs and faculty supervisor. The members of RQI have strongly overlapping,
interdisciplinary research interests that interweave work in chemistry, physics,
electrical engineering, chemical engineering, mechanical engineering and
materials science, bioengineering, computational and applied mathematics, and
civil and environmental engineering. Each project chosen will ideally be
challenging for the student, yet still manageable within the 10-week period.
Group cohesiveness will be promoted through joint housing, weekly scientific
seminars by Rice graduate students, and weekly scientific and social activities.
While the students will naturally discuss among themselves the nature of their
work and how it is progressing, they will also present brief computer
presentations to each other and the PI at midsession. This will solidify their
knowledge of each other's progress and projects as well as providing a first
experience in scientific presentation. During the last week, students will turn
in written reports of their scientific activities, go through exit interviews,
and, on the last day of the program, present posters of their work in the annual
RQI Summer Research Colloquium alongside undergraduates from Rice and other
schools in a session where competitive prizes are awarded. Students will be
encouraged to present their results at other conferences. Continual efforts will
be made to track the career progress of the participants in the years after
their participation. The site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF REU program and by the NSF Physics and Chemistry
Divisions.