* 0453436
* REU Site: Functional Nanostructures
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Vimal Desai, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 12/31/2009
* USD 354,168.00

Abstract, 0453436:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an REU Site at the
Advanced Materials Processing and Analysis Center (AMPAC) at the University of
Central Florida (UCF) which engages ten undergraduate students per year for ten
weeks of research and other educational experiences in nanotechnology. The
primary emphasis of these programs is placed on encouraging talented
undergraduate students, in particular women, minorities and persons with
disabilities, to pursue graduate studies in the fields of nanoscience and
engineering. Experienced faculty serve as research supervisors in this program.
The program includes: (1) Introductory coursework on the basic principles of
nanotechnology; (2) Research seminars for undergraduates led by the faculty; (3)
Bi-weekly industrial visits to the numerous heavy industries in the Orlando
area; (4) Seminars, workshops, and discussion sessions on issues of ethics in
engineering research; and (5) Continuous monitoring of the students' progress by
the principal investigators via weekly discussion groups. The summer program
concludes with a poster session in which the REU students present their research
results to the AMPAC, Nanocenter, and UCF communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research reports are bound into an REU yearbook, which the
students and PI compile. The program follows up by helping students to obtain
admission and scholarships for graduate school. The REU site staff track the
career progress of former participants. A new feature of the REU site is the
formation of an External Oversight Committee, which evaluates annually the
quality of the students' experiences and the Site's overall success in meeting
its and NSF's goals. Another novel dimension of the program is the participation
of several students from England and Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Worldwide research has clearly demonstrated that many benefits can be
derived from the dynamic discipline of nanoscience/nanotechnology. Knowledgeable
UCF faculty, combined with the availability of extraordinary resources, have
created an interdisciplinary team of scientists, engineers, educators to advance
their own talents in nanoscience and nanotechnology through their individual and
combined research activities. The participating students are incorporated into
this stimulating intellectual environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The curriculum of this program provides new learning opportunities in
nanoscience and nanotechnology and aids the participants in formulating their
career paths (scientific, academic, or industrial). Special emphasis is placed
on practical and hands-on experience. Minorities and women and especially
community-college students, who traditionally have little opportunity to become
involved in research work, realize immediate benefits through broadened
perspectives on career opportunities. Thus, an important result is the retention
of these students in advanced study of science and engineering disciplines. This
interdisciplinary effort contributes to the professional growth of the STEM
faculty involved and provides the PI's with an opportunity to investigate new
teaching paradigms and teaching collaborations. The outcomes of the program will
be disseminated further to inform K-12 teachers through a related NSF Research
Experience for Teachers (RET) program. &lt;br/&gt;