* 0453069
* Taking a New Contour: A Novel Approach to Inference in Nonstationary Panels
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2005,06/30/2007
* Yoosoon Chang, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 77,958.00

It is well known that the distributional theories for many of the commonly used
unit root tests are nonstandard. This project develops an original approach to
these and related distributions. The sampling distribution of a statistic is
usually obtained for a given sample size. Using the conventional sampling
distribution of the statistic for the purpose of statistical inference thus
implies evaluation of the likelihood of a realized value of the statistic along
the contour of the distribution, given by the fixed sample size. This project
takes a different contour in obtaining the sampling distribution of a statistic,
i.e., the contour that is given by the fixed sum of squares. For the
observations from stationary time series, the sum of squares becomes a constant
multiple of the sample size for large samples, so the contour of the equi-
squared-sum has conventional statistical properties for statistical analysis of
stationary data. But the statistical properties are different for nonstationary
data. The proposed research develops this new framework for statistical
inference in nonstationary panels. Specifically, it is well known that the
cross-sectional dependencies in nonstationary panels are extremely difficult to
handle. The nonstationary models in general have distributions that are
nonstandard and dependent upon nuisance parameters. The tests in panels combine
the statistics computed for each individual unit, so the problem of nonstandard
distributions and nuisance parameter dependencies of the individual test
statistics becomes aggravated if aggregated across individual units. Statistical
inference is difficult if not impossible using standard statistical methods of
inference. But if the individual test statistics are computed using the samples
which have the same sum of squares across all cross-sectional units, then the
models yield standard normal asymptotics free of nuisance parameters and
statistical inference on these panels is now much easier.

Broader Impacts: This project will build up a new framework for the statistical
analysis of the nonstationary panels, which will open up new opportunities for
the econometric theorists to develop new methodologies to effectively deal with
nonstationary panels. A set of new reliable tools to do inference in
nonstationary panels will also be provided. Given that the use of nonstationary
panels has become, and will be even more so in the future, widespread in such
fields as international finance, macroeconomics, industrial organization and
labor economics, the outputs from this research could have a far-reaching impact
on both theoretical and empirical research in economics. To facilitate
implementation of the new methods, the investigator will prepare a program
package and distribute it to applied researchers.