* 0453515
* Reconstructing Slab and Mantle Fluxes During th Eocene-Oligocene Evolution of the Izu-Bonin Volcanic Arc
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Cornelia Class, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 05/31/2009
* USD 219,383.00

ABSTRACT - Goldstein (0453515)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
research investigates geologic factors, such as tectonics, subduction, and
changes in the compositional evolution of the upper mantle, that affect
volcanism through time, an objective being to determine how these factors relate
to changes in volcanic chemical signals. To accomplish this task, samples of
fragmental volcanic rocks (tephra) from Eocene to &lt;br/&gt;Oligocene deep sea
sediment cores from the Izu Bonin-Mariana arc in the western Pacific were
targeted for a host of geochemical and isotopic analyses. Justification of this
work comes from the fact that volcanic arc lavas and tephra contain geochemical
components that reflect melts, volatiles, and melt processes that occur as the
ocean floor subducts and the subducting slab reassimilates into the mantle. Such
processes are responsible for many of the chemical characteristics of present
day seawater and the atmosphere and are related to the genesis of major
earthquake events. &lt;br/&gt; One of the most completely characterized records
of arc volcanism comes from the Izu Bonin-Mariana arc which has been active for
~ 50 million years. At that location, however, there is a gap in the oldest part
of the magmatic record (Eocene-Oligocene) because lavas erupted in the early
stages of arc construction are buried and generally inaccessible to study.
Nevertheless, tephra from eruptions that took place during this time gap, are
easily accessible from deep sea sediment cores because they are airfall deposits
that are deposited over large geographical areas. A complete record of such
tephra has been collected during coring expeditions of the NSF-funded Ocean
Drilling Program (ODP). &lt;br/&gt; This research program uses tephra samples
from ODP cores that occur in the Eocene-Oligocene time gap to identify secular
changes in Izu Bonin-Mariana arc during this time interval using major element
and trace element analyses. In addition, Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf isotopic ratios will be
determined for the same samples to infer changing slab and mantle magma sources.
The use of tephra to unravel volcanic arc evolution is a new approach in this
area and geochemical analyses will focus on elements and ratios that are
sensitive to both the composition of slab fluids and melt components. In
addition to the tephra, similar geochemical analyses will be performed on select
Oligocene lavas to tie the tephra results to the lavas erupted in the region.
The tephra samples used in this study have been carefully selected for freshness
to prevent analysis of altered materials for which the original chemical
signature has changed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research is
an essential element of the NSF-funded MARGINS subduction factory initiative. It
supports two female researchers, one of which is hearing disabled and has
performed pioneering work in establishing the chemical evolution of the Izu-
Bonin arc through tephra studies, and the other who is returning to the full-
time workforce. The work also supports analytical infrastructure at Columbia
University and engages an undergraduate student in research. &lt;br/&gt;