* 0453329
* REU Site-Summer Undergraduate Research Focus: Anthropogenic Impacts on the Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2011
* Suzzette Chopin, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2011
* USD 472,955.00

The College of Science and Technology at Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi
will offer a 10-week Summer Undergraduate Research Focus (SURF) on Anthropogenic
Impacts on the Environment. This program is funded by a partnership between the
Department of Defense and the National Science Foundation. Ten undergraduate
participants will have two research experiences: an independent research project
and a cohort investigation at the Laguna Madre Field Station. Professional
skills development is another component of SURF. The major goal of SURF is to
increase the number of students entering post-baccalaureate science programs.
SURF targets female and minority students majoring in science, math or computer
science. Particular emphasis is given to students from institutions lacking
research opportunities. Faculty members representing the disciplines of biology,
chemistry, environmental science, math and physics mentor interdisciplinary
research activities focusing on the relationship of the effect of human
activities on the environment. Following a one-week orientation, the standard
week includes four days of laboratory/field research and one day of group Ethics
and Professionalism activities. SURF concludes with a symposium in which the
students deliver oral presentations of their research. Information about SURF
and online application are available at
www.sci.tamucc.edu/surf/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;