* 0453561
* Policy Positions and Policy Choice in U.S. Legislatures
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Gerald Wright, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2008
* USD 284,191.00

A central issue for evaluating the quality of democratic governance is the
extent to which the policy choices of public officials reflect the wishes of
citizens. Elections are viewed as the most common institution through which
citizens affect these policy choices, and four conditions must be met if
elections are to facilitate public influence over policy making:
&lt;br/&gt;Opposing candidates for office must offer voters differing issue
positions&lt;br/&gt;Voters must perceive the issue positions of
candidates&lt;br/&gt;Voters must cast their ballots on the basis of these
perceived issue positions&lt;br/&gt;Winning candidates must vote in accordance
with their pre-election issue positions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A fair
summarization of the research on this topic would conclude that there is a great
deal of support for the first condition within the United States, and that there
is at least qualified support for the second and third conditions. Comparatively
little attention has been paid to the fourth condition. We know very little
about the extent to which the policy decisions of elected officials are related
to or governed by their pre-election policy statements as candidates.
&lt;br/&gt; This investigation answers three questions about the relationship
between the pre-election policy positions of legislative candidates and their
post-election policy choices, focusing on the U.S. Congress and legislatures in
twelve selected states. &lt;br/&gt;1. How often are the pre-election policy
positions of candidates consistent with their post-election policy
choices?&lt;br/&gt;2. How useful are policy positions for predicting the policy
choices of legislators?&lt;br/&gt;3. How consistent is the policy position -
policy choice connection, and can we explain any systematic variation in this
relationship?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The policy positions of candidates are taken
from two sources: the National Political Awareness Test (a pre-election survey
of candidate issue positions) and policy statements made on candidate campaign
websites. The policy choices made by legislators are taken from roll call votes
on bills that are directly related to candidate policy positions taken on the
NPAT or candidate websites. For each vote on each bill, then, the researchers
can assess whether the vote was consistent or inconsistent with a legislator's
pre-election policy position. Using these measures, the first question can be
answered by calculating the proportion of the time roll call votes are
consistent with policy positions. The second question can be answered by placing
the measures of policy positions within well-respected multi-equation,
multivariate models of roll call voting behavior. If the measures of policy
positions are significant in these models, policy positions provide useful
information to voters. Finally, the proposal offers a theoretical framework for
explaining the conditions under which legislators will be more likely to make
policy choices consistent with their policy positions. The utility of this
framework will be evaluated using multi-equation, multivariate models that
employ the framework to predict a binary variable identifying roll call votes
that are consistent and inconsistent with policy positions.&lt;br/&gt; Broader
Value: Evaluating the strength of the connection between the policy positions
and policy choices of legislators has obvious implications for democratic theory
and the quality of democratic governance in the United States. In addition, the
connection between policy positions and policy choice is relevant to general
issues of trust in government in the United States. A lack of scholarly
attention has not deterred citizens from drawing their own conclusions on this
topic: many citizens believe that the policy choices of legislators are not
guided by their statements as candidates. Moreover, there is substantial
evidence that public skepticism regarding candidates' policy statements affects
overall levels of trust and cynicism among citizens. If efforts at civic
education are to counteract this cynicism, we need to know more about the
relationship between the policy positions of candidates and the policy choices
they make as legislators. &lt;br/&gt;