* 0453665
* Collaborative Research:  Seed Dispersal by Wind and Plant Recruitment in Tropical Forests - an Interdisciplinary Investigation Across Multiple Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2010
* Stuart Wright, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 03/31/2010
* USD 307,322.00

Collaborative Research: Seed dispersal by wind and plant recruitment in tropical
forests - an interdisciplinary investigation across multiple scales
&lt;br/&gt;Ran Nathan&lt;br/&gt;Smithsonian Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops and tests models of seed dispersal by wind and applies those
models to investigate the importance of seed dispersal in tropical forests. Seed
dispersal is recognized as a very important ecological process, and yet
ecologists still know very little about seed dispersal patterns and their
particular influences in plant communities. This research builds on recent
advances in atmospheric modeling and genetic techniques, using an
interdisciplinary team with a history of successful collaboration to develop,
test and apply the next generation of atmospheric models of seed dispersal by
wind. The mechanistic seed dispersal models developed here will be the first to
incorporate the effects of spatial heterogeneity and complex topography, and
will cover an unprecedented range of spatial and temporal scales. The study
site, Barro Colorado Island in Panama, offers a unique combination of a highly
diverse group of wind-dispersed plant species and extensive relevant long-term
and large-scale datasets. In combination, this makes possible an unprecedented
investigation of the importance of seed dispersal, including examination of its
importance in determining individual species abundances and of its contribution
to the maintenance of species diversity. The models developed as part of this
research will be broadly applicable to wind-dispersed species worldwide, and
will constitute an important new tool for conservation and management. These
models will be useful, for example, for predicting invasion rates of exotic
species, responses to range shifts due to climate change, and the effects of
habitat fragmentation. All results, including these models, will be made
publicly available. &lt;br/&gt;