* 0453884
* Collaborative Research: High Resolution Imaging of Deep Mantle Structure Using USArray Data
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Thorne Lay, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 07/31/2010
* USD 195,476.00

Title of Project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Collaborative Research: High Resolution
Imaging of Deep Mantle Structure Using &lt;br/&gt;USArray
Data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigators:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Thorne
Lay, Professor of Earth Sciences, UCSC&lt;br/&gt; Ed Garnero, Associate
Professor of Geological Sciences, ASU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project utilizes USArray Transportable Array (TA) and Backbone Array data in
high-resolution seismic wave imaging of deep mantle structure. The research plan
is designed to scale naturally with the progressive deployment of TA stations in
the western U.S, building upon initial results obtained using California
regional network data. We are analyzing teleseismic earthquake waves that
traverse the deep mantle in three subregions: beneath the southern U.S.-Gulf of
Mexico-Central America-Caribbean, under the Central Pacific, and beneath Alaska
and northern North America. Seismic methodologies that exploit the relatively
dense 70-km station spacing provided by the TA data are being applied. Double-
array waveform stacking, Kirchhoff scattering migration in 3D tomographic
models, shear-wave splitting analysis allowing for azimuthal anisotropy, and
finite frequency tomographic arrival time inversion procedures are the primary
methods being applied to broadband P and S waveforms. When the initial TA
deployment is completed, it will enable 5-fold increase in deep mantle spatial
sampling relative to recently developed localized high resolution models for
beneath the Cocos Plate and regional framework structures that we have
developed. Particular effort is being focused on the mid- and deep mantle
beneath Central America and the Gulf of Mexico, where there is evidence in
tomographic models for tabular high velocity structures extending through the
lower mantle and spreading broadly in the D" Region, possibly associated with
the Farallon slab and with the long history of subduction beneath North America.
The velocity gradients, structural continuity, structural fabric, and spatial
extent of the deep mantle structure is being examined using arrival time
analysis and migration methods, with 2D and 3D synthetic modeling being used to
quantify structures and to verify the reliability of the imaging procedures.
Corresponding structure beneath the subduction zone under Alaska is being
analyzed, and these two convergent zone regions are being compared to the
isolated structure under the Central Pacific. We are assessing contributions to
deep mantle structure from slab material, a post-perovskite phase transition,
deep mantle dynamic flow, and partial melting. These analyses will be closely
coordinated with Earthscope investigations of shallow mantle structure,
incorporating corrections based on models found by others for receiver
structure, lithospheric anisotropy, and upper mantle travel time variations. Our
goal is to exploit USArray data to make breakthrough advances in understanding
of deep mantle structure and its relationship to mid- and upper-mantle flow
associated with the westward movement of the North American continent.
&lt;br/&gt;