* 0453004
* Lie Algebras, Vertex Operator Algebras and Their Applications; May 17-21, 2005; Raleigh, NC
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2005,09/30/2007
* Kailash Misra, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 09/30/2007
* USD 19,996.00

The theory of Lie algebras, both finite and infinite-dimensional, have been a
major area of mathematical research with numerous applications in many other
areas of mathematics and physics, for example, combinatorics, group theory,
number theory, partial differential equations, topology, conformal field theory
and string theory, statistical mechanics and integrable systems. In particular,
the representation theory of an important class of infinite dimensional Lie
algebras known as affine Lie algebras has led to the discovery of new algebraic
structures, such as vertex (operator) algebras and quantum groups. Both of these
algebraic structures have become important areas of current mathematical
research with deep connections with many other areas in mathematics and physics.
This conference will provide an excellent setting for researchers in mathematics
and physics working in the area of Lie algebras, vertex operator algebras and
their applications to explore possible new directions of research in the twenty-
first century. The focus of the conference will be on the following topics: (i)
Finite and infinite dimensional Lie algebras and quantum groups. (ii) Vertex
operator algebras and their representations. (iii) Applications to number
theory, combinatorics, conformal field theory and statistical mechanics.

Lie algebras are a class of algebras describing continuous symmetries in nature.
They were first introduced by mathematician S. Lie in the ninteenth century and
have been studied by many prominent mathematicians and physicists since then.
During the twentieth century, the theory of Lie algebras developed rapidly into
a main research area in mathematics with numerous important applications in
physics. Vertex operator algebras and quantum groups are relatively new class of
algebras and can be viewed as far-reaching analogues of Lie algebras. Vertex
operator algebras have been used to solve problems related to discrete
symmetries and to number theory. They are also an important ingredient in a
physical theory describing phenomena such as the physical state in which water,
ice and steam coexist and in a physical theory called string theory which some
physicists are using to unify all the forces in the universe. This conference is
on Lie algebras, vertex operator algebras and their applications and it will
encourage mathematicians and physicists to interact and, to join forces to
discover new frontiers. It will be especially beneficial to graduate students
and junior faculty members who have just started their careers. We will
encourage participation from graduate students, junior researchers, women,
minorities, and persons with disabilities by giving them priority for financial
support.