* 0453287
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in Circadian Disruption of Military and Law-Enforcement Personnel Through Shift-Work
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2007
* James Miller, Weber State University
* Continuing grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 04/30/2007
* USD 157,766.00

This project is a research experience for undergraduates (REU) site that
provides 10 psychology students a hands-on, ten-week summer independent research
project, working collaboratively with a faculty member from one of the
departments within the College of Social and Behavioral Sciences at Weber State
University. Students conduct research on the effects of circadian disruption
through shift-work on military and law enforcement personnel. Intellectual
Merits- Through a collaboration with the Air Force Research Laboratories Human
Effectiveness Directorate, Warfighter Fatigue Countermeasures Branch, REU
students research the effects of fatigue on performance, quantifying and
optimizing existing Air Force and law-enforcement shift-work scheduling
practices. Research is conducted on a variety of levels, including
physiological, cognitive, behavioral, and social aspects of shift-work. Broader
Impacts- Four populations of students are targeted for participation in this REU
site-women and underrepresented minorities, nontraditional students, students
from institutions where research opportunities are limited, and students
contemplating graduate school. The goal is to provide students with the
opportunity to design and conduct research and to participate in a number of
professional development activities intended to assess their desire toward
pursuing graduate school. In addition, the research conducted by student
investigators will directly contribute to the growing pool of knowledge
necessary to improve working conditions for our military and law-enforcement
personnel.