* 0453040
* What Explains Modern Economic Growth?  New Evidence from a Comparison of China and Europe in the 18th Century
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2013
* Wolfgang Keller, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2013
* USD 266,183.00

The sustained increase of per-capita income, modern economic growth, is a
relatively recent phenomenon. The impact, nevertheless, has been profound. By
most accounts, it started&lt;br/&gt;in Britain in the mid-18th century and
spread to a limited number of regions of the world, including&lt;br/&gt;Western
Europe and North America. Explaining the causes of growth and identifying the
factors that made it possible are among the most important unsolved questions
facing economists today. This project pursues these issues by providing a
detailed quantitative analysis of the economic conditions that prevailed in
major economies in the 18th century at the turning point of modern economic
growth. The focus is on China and Europe, two regions of the world that were
both relatively advanced as of the mid- 18th century, and yet would start
industrializing about 150 years apart. The project assesses economic development
in these two regions in three major areas: commodity markets, labor markets, and
the accumulation of worker skills (human capital). The PI's also provide a new
benchmark for living standard comparisons for the mid-18th century. The database
for this analysis is based on both primary and secondary sources, and it allows
us to produce a quantitative picture for China in unprecedented detail.
&lt;br/&gt;The first paper in this project examines the performance of commodity
markets. Prevailing views place much emphasis on how efficient markets lead to
optimal resource use and specialization. This paper presents evidence on the
level of grain market integration in China and Europe over the 17th to 19th
centuries. Preliminary findings suggest that differences in the relative levels
of market efficiency in China and Western Europe were important. The performance
of European markets of the 18th century was comparable to China's, but markets
within Britain, the first industrial nation, were more integrated than anywhere
else in the world. Continental Europe did not catch up with Britain until the
mid-19th century.&lt;br/&gt;The PI's propose to relate their findings to
theories about the Industrial Revolution and the timing of the spread of growth.
&lt;br/&gt;The second paper confronts the great debate on relative living
standards. Historic living standards provide the initial conditions of modern
growth. The longstanding consensus going back to Smith and Malthus is that
Western Europe was richer than China long before 1750. Recent revisionism has
disputed that claim, but the question remains unsettled. With the large set of
wages and prices assembled in this project, the PI's will be in the position to
reassess the issue. For this comparison, they will employ new data on real wages
in about 700 counties all over China, together with the available data for
Europe. This paper also sheds light on the merits of theories that explain the
post-1750 divergence in terms of technical change biased towards capital in
Europe and towards labor in China, and differences in labor market
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;In the third paper, the PI's examine the role that skill
abundance and human capital accumulation may have had for growth. With the
innovations of the 18th century requiring a better trained labor force, did
skilledlabor abundance give Europe a crucial advantage over China? Did Europe
build on that to create a comparative advantage in skill-intensive products with
higher growth potential? This paper addresses these questions by creating a new
database on the skill premium in China and in Europe. In addition, the PI's also
use the skill premium to calculate an implied interest rate for the prefectures
of China. Together with interest rates computed from seasonal fluctuations in
grain prices, the PI's then compare capital market integration in China and
Europe both spatially and across (agricultural versus education)
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The PI's research on the sources of
economic growth in history takes a&lt;br/&gt;comparative and multidisciplinary
approach that helps to increase understanding of economic&lt;br/&gt;interactions
in other regions of the world and in the economy while showing how a better
understanding of past events can inform analysis of contemporary economic
issues.&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: In creating a public-use dataset from Chinese
and European historical sources, the PI's will promote greater inter-cultural
education and direct cooperation between researchers and organizations in North
American, Europe, and China. In addition, both collaborators on this project
teach undergraduate and graduate courses in Economic Development, and under
their supervision students will be welcome to participate at all stages in this
project. The PI's have presented work related to this project to audiences at
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, Statistics Canada, the National
Bureau of Economic Research, and at academic seminars and conferences in North
America and Europe.