* 0453631
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Mechanisms of Coexistance in Communities of Ant-plant Mutualists
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Brian Inouye, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 01/31/2010
* USD 245,104.00

A major goal of ecology is to understand the factors promoting coexistence among
competing species. Chief among the hypothesized mechanisms is habitat
heterogeneity, but alternatives include temporal fluctuations in resource
availability, spatially restricted dispersal, and tradeoffs among fecundity,
dispersal, and competitive ability. Only a handful of these mechanisms have ever
been shown to operate in the field, and experimental tests simultaneously
evaluating multiple mechanisms are rare. The proposed study will evaluate
alternative coexistence mechanisms in an emerging model system in community
ecology - ants that compete to establish colonies in specialized plant
structures known as domatia. Three species of ants colonize the domatia of the
Amazonian trees Tococa bullifera and Maieta guianensis. Using this system, non-
mutually exclusive mechanisms that may promote ant coexistance will be tested
with a combination of field observations, manipulative experiments, and
mathematical models. Because this system is composed of two specialists that
coexist with a generalist on two resources, our results could provide unique
insights into the evolution of specialization in ecological communities. The
project will provide ample opportunities for students at multiple stages of
their academic careers to develop research, modeling, and mentorship skills.
Furthermore, the collaborating PI's are at institutions with large minority
enrollments, which will allow them to continue mentoring students from
underrepresented groups. Finally, this project will strengthen a dynamic and
productive international collaboration, and allow US students to gain their
first experience working in Amazonian ecosystems.