* 0453495
* REU Site: Summer Fellowships in Biogeochemistry and Climate Change at the University of California, Irvine
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Jefferson Moore, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2010
* USD 280,487.00

This REU site program will enable eight undergraduate students to conduct
scientific research in conjunction with a faculty member in the Department of
Earth System Science at the University of California, Irvine. The program theme
is biogeochemical cycling and climate change, with most research projects
involving studies of air-sea or air-land interactions in the context of a
changing climate. The diverse research interests within the department in
conjunction with the facilities available will offer a unique research
experience for undergraduate fellows, including world class modeling facilities,
an accelerator mass spectrometer facility, and state of the art chemistry
laboratories used for studying aspects of ice core gas samples, atmospheric,
terrestrial, and oceanic chemistry. Student research projects may involve
fieldwork, laboratory studies, computer simulations, analysis of satellite
remote sensing data, or combinations of several of these techniques and
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to individual research projects,
group activities will expose students to the wide variety of ongoing research
within Earth System Science, through a series of Research Snapshot lectures,
informal discussions with department faculty and graduate students, and Reading
Group analysis of key papers in the field. Broad-ranging lectures will present
an overview of the Earth's physical climate and biogeochemical cycles, and give
students an understanding of the emerging field of Earth system science. It is
anticipated that students in the program will learn about the diverse research
tools and techniques being applied to study the Earth system, gain valuable
research experience in one of the subfields of Earth system science, and become
intellectually stimulated to pursue a career in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this program will be the
entrainment of the next generation of scientists into careers involving
scientific research, including students from underrepresented groups, and
students from other regional schools where research opportunities are more
limited.