* 0453061
* Private Monitoring, Sets of Lotteries
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Wojciech Olszewski, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2009
* USD 147,279.00

This award funds two projects in microeconomic theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project 1: (Infinitely) repeated games have widespread
application in economics as simple and tractable models of ongoing strategic
relationships between agents. Despite an extensive literature on repeated games,
the case where agents privately monitor the behavior of their opponents has been
known for its intractability. This case is important as real-life relationships,
where monitoring is not private, are even hard to imagine. It is now a famous
open question whether the folk theorem extends to the case of private
monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project intends to address this open
question. A recent working paper of Ely, Hoerner, and Olszewski studies a class
of strategies that generalizes examples constructed in the literature for the
Prisoners Dilemma. The Prisoners Dilemma strategies were more tractable than
others. The paper provides a simple and sharp characterization of equilibrium
payoffs that can be achieved by using those strategies. While those strategies
can support a large set of payoffs, they are not rich enough to generate a folk
theorem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research strategy in a follow-up study by
Hoerner and Olszewski relies on progressive enlarging of the class of
strategies, sacrificing as little tractability as possible but generating more
equilibrium payoffs. It is believed that this strategy should lead at least to
the folk theorem for all two-player games with almost-perfect monitoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Project 2: This project has been inspired by the
potential of sets of lotteries as a modeling tool. Sets of lotteries have
recently been used to model the preference for flexibility as well as self-
control problems, such as temptation-driven preferences. A recent working paper
of Olszewski uses them to provide an alternative model for studying ambiguity.
Traditionally, ambiguity has been studied within the Savage setting, which
instead of sets of lotteries considers mappings from a state space into the
outcomes. Both ambiguity and temptation-driven preferences apply to a wide range
of economically important situations, and there seem to be a demand for better
tools to analyzing these phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; It is believed that a
model that considers correspondences from a state space into sets of lotteries
would be not only an joint tool for studying several phenomena, but it would
also respond to several possible criticisms of the existing models of the
preference for flexibility and self-control problems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
Private monitoring in ongoing relationships, ambiguous information, and self-
control problems are widely present in the surrounding us world. It is -
referring to most standard examples - commonly believed that the studies on
ambiguity contribute to the understanding of financial markets, in particular
equity premium puzzle, and that the studies on private monitoring in repeated
games have implications on collusive behavior in oligopoly markets and antitrust
regulations. These projects will develop techniques for thinking about private
monitoring within equilibrium setting, as well as it will improve tools for
studying ambiguous information, and self-control problems. Private monitoring
attracts attention from sociologists and anthropologists, while ambiguity and
self-control problems are subjects of active research by psychologists.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;