* 0453471
* Collaborative Research: Developing a Methodology for Imaging Stress Transients at Seismogenic Depth: Data Analysis and Interpretation
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Fenglin Niu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 03/31/2009
* USD 157,298.00

0453471&lt;br/&gt;Niu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The time-varying stress state of
fault systems is perhaps the single most important property controlling the
sequencing and nucleation of seismic events. The deployment of surface geodetic
instrumentation, as part of Earthscope, will provide us with important
constraints on this stress field, through comprehensive observations of the
time-varying surface strain field. As a way of augmenting these constraints, the
PIs are presently developing an active-source methodology based on the stress
dependence of seismic velocity to measure subsurface stress transients. Numerous
laboratory studies over several decades have shown that the elastic properties
(seismic velocity, attenuation, anisotropy) of crustal rocks clearly exhibit
stress dependence. Such dependence is attributed to the opening/closing of
microcracks due to changes in the stress normal to the crack surface. Thus
stress changes can, in principle, be detected by exploiting the stress
sensitivity of the elastic properties of the seismogenic crust. For decades
there have been efforts to exploit this stress dependence, although this goal
has thus far been elusive. There are two primary reasons for this: 1) lack of
sufficient time-delay precision necessary to detect small changes in stress, and
2) the difficulty in establishing a reliable calibration between stress and the
seismic properties of the medium. These two problems are coupled because the
best sources of calibration are the solid-earth tides and barometric pressure,
both of which produce weak stress perturbations of order 102-103 Pa. Detecting
these sources requires measurement of fractional velocity changes on the order
of 10-5-10-6, based on laboratory experiments. The PIs have been conducting a
series of cross-hole active-source experiments at different scales: 3 m spacing
at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) facility, 30 m spacing at
the LBNL Richmond Field Station (RFS), and, 300 m spacing at 2 km depth,
shooting from SAFOD Pilot Hole at Parkfield to sensors at the SAFOD main hole.
Thus far they have completed work at the first site, have made several
measurements at the RFS, and are completing the final test at RFS. Preliminary
analyses of the two test datasets suggest that it is possible to reach the
required delay time precision of order 10-6, and that barometric pressure and
tidally-induced changes in travel time can be observed. With the final datasets
from RFS and Parkfield, the PIs are planning to conduct the following analysis
together with numerical modeling: (1) delay time estimates of the P wave and its
coda; (2) delay time estimates of the S wave and its coda; (3) amplitude
measurements for both P and S wave; (4) S-wave splitting measurements; (5)
scattered-field imaging using P- and S-wave coda. Numerical modeling includes:
1) determining the characteristics of the corresponding poroelastic medium and
its response to known stresses, and 2) calculating the corresponding seismic
properties of such a medium. The most promising properties are then to be used
to develop a quantitative stress calibration, established through the choice of
an appropriate poroelastic medium that accounts for both the observed stress
sensitivity and seismic properties (including scattering).