* 0453046
* Upper Ocean Processes under the Stratocumulus Cloud Deck in the Southeast Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2005,10/31/2009
* Toshiaki Shinoda, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 10/31/2009
* USD 261,780.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0453046&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heat budget of the upper ocean in the southeast
Pacific will be studied using ocean general circulation model (OGCM) experiments
The primary goal is to improve the understanding of upper ocean processes that
control sea surface temperature variability in the stratocumulus cloud deck
region, which may play an important role in formation and maintenance of marine
boundary layer clouds. The data collected during recent field observations will
be utilized to create surface forcing fields to integrate the OGCM and to
validate the model performance. Gridded surface flux data sets will be created
to force the OGCM based on a variety of recent satellite measurements. The flux
estimates will then be compared with those derived from in-situ observations
including the surface meteorological data from the IMET buoy at 20.S, 85.W and
the intensive field measurements in the stratocumulus deck region conducted
during the fall of 2001. Also, the performance of the OGCM will be evaluated
based on the comparison with in-situ data of the upper ocean and satellite
observations. Mean and variability of upper ocean heat budget will be calculated
from the model output, and physical processes responsible for balancing surface
heat fluxes will be examined. A particular emphasis is given to the role of
Rossby waves, atmospheric subseasonal variability, and penetrative solar
radiation in seasonal to interannual variations of upper ocean heat balance. The
analysis of the model output in the entire stratocumulus deck region will also
elucidate how accurately large-scale upper ocean variability in this region is
represented by mooring observations at a particular
point.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Proper representation of
air-sea coupled processes in the stratocumulus deck region in global climate
models is one of the major challenges for their further improvement. The
proposed research will improve understanding and modeling of these processes,
leading to better climate simulations and associated societal benefits. The
project will also fund a postdoctoral scientist for participating in
interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;