* 0453870
* Socio-Demographic Factors Influencing Seasonality in Male Sifaka, Propithecus verreauxi, at Beza Mahafaly, Madagascar
* NONE,NONE
* 06/04/2004,02/28/2006
* Diane Brockman, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing grant
* Richard Kay
* 02/28/2006
* USD 36,550.00

This research is a continuation of a study of the hormonal, demographic, and
social mechanisms influencing seasonality in free-ranging sifaka (Propithecus
verreauxi) in the Beza Mahafaly Special Reserve (BMSR), Madagascar. Prevailing
theory suggests that reproduction is tightly entrained to seasonal variations in
photoperiod, rainfall, and food abundance in many seasonally breeding mammals.
Reproduction in wild sifaka is highly seasonal with 96% of births restricted to
just a two month period. However, preliminary results using noninvasive methods
of hormone analysis indicate that male reproduction is not so tightly entrained,
suggesting that social factors, including aggression during group transfer in
the birth season, may be as important as climatic factors in the regulation of
male reproductive function in this species. The Specific Aim of this research is
to test the relationship between birth season testosterone (T) levels and male
dispersal, age, and migration success. The broader implications of this research
reside in the insights it may provide into the role of androgens (T) in
mediating male dispersal, life history, and reproductive strategies. Hormonal,
behavioral and demographic data will be collected from 200 marked sifaka in 37
social groups at the research site in Madagascar during the July-August 1999,
2000, 2001, and 2002 birth seasons to examine androgen-behavior interactions
associated with T-mediated migration and aggression. This research breaks new
ground in the study of mammalian reproduction by employing field
endocrinological approaches to studies of male dispersal patterns and
seasonality in free-ranging endangered sifaka. More importantly, this study will
broaden our understanding of male reproduction and provide new perspectives on
its complexity, variation, and evolution.