* 0453814
* Ballot Design and Unrecorded Votes
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2007
* David Kimball, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 11/30/2007
* USD 133,882.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Problem. Recent elections indicate that a significant number of
voting errors occur because of malfunctioning equipment or confusing voting
procedures. For example, roughly two million voters in the United States failed
to cast a valid vote for president in the 2000 election. The recount of votes in
Florida in 2000 was complicated by unrecorded votes (the difference between the
number of people who went to the polls and the number of valid votes cast for
president). In the wake of the 2000 election, state and local governments are
implementing several reforms to improve the voting process, and much of the
reform effort has focused on technology. Hundreds of counties have bought new
voting equipment in the last three years. However, even though the main source
of voting errors in Florida in 2000 was a ballot design flaw, election officials
and the academic community have not given enough attention to ballot design as a
source of voting errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Research. This
investigation tests whether ballot features are associated with unrecorded votes
for several contests in the 2004 election. The investigators use a theoretical
framework based on research in survey methodology, psychology, and other
disciplines. Their framework for evaluating ballot design was developed in a
pilot study of 250 counties from five states that had gubernatorial elections in
2002. For the 2004 election, they obtain ballots from roughly 1,750 counties
that use hand-counted paper or optical scan ballots. They assess each county's
ballot features and collect voting returns, demographic data, and information on
voting technology for each county. The researchers conduct a statistical
analysis to assess the impact of ballot features on unrecorded votes in several
contests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific impact. This investigation assesses
the impact of ballot design on voting errors. The pilot study in 2002 found that
poor ballot design had a stronger effect on unrecorded votes for governor than
any other factor (including voting equipment). The current investigation of the
2004 election examines additional ballot features in a larger and more diverse
sample of counties. The researchers test the impact of ballot features in the
presidential contest as well as other down-ballot contests. Finally, the
investigators maintain an inventory of ballots collected from the 2004, 2002,
and 2000 elections that will be available to researchers and election
officials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This study will demonstrate the
degree to which ballot design influences a voter's ability to cast a ballot
accurately. State and local election officials who buy new voting equipment
without paying attention to ballot design may not achieve the desired result of
reducing voting errors. Similarly, election officials who resist buying new
electronic voting machines because of cost and security concerns can still
reduce voting errors by incorporating the ballot design recommendations from our
study. The investigators use the results of this study to create educational
materials on best practices in ballot design for state and county election
officials.&lt;br/&gt;