* 0453707
* Enhancing the Performance and Applications of Sol-Gel Derived Materials via Template Based Strategies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Maryanne Collinson, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Professor Maryanne Collinson of Kansas State University is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry program to investigate templating silicate thin
films. The PI has detected specific molecules by first using them as a template
in a sol gel on an electrode. The molecule is removed, leaving a negative image
of the species. On exposure to a solution of the molecule, the electrochemical
responses is enhanced over the response to other similarly shaped species. In
the present work, this team is using bacteria as the template species to make a
bacteria-specific surface. The bacteria will yield rods and corkscrew shaped
pores. In addition to use as biosensors, the cavities also may serve as
microreactors and templates to form metal and oxide nanoparticles. In another
part of the project, the molecule-templated films are being developed as
electrochemical luminescent sensors, for example for glucose. Titanium dioxide
is being investigated as a sol gel matrix. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated
applications of these materials include new nanostructured materials and
chemical sensors. The ability to create microcompartments in materials will be
useful as microreactors and micro-reservoirs of chemicals that can be used as
needed, for example, in drug delivery. As methods become more sophisticated
through fundamental projects such as this, it is possible that we will have
hierarchically ordered porous materials for applications such as pharmacy and
biosensing. The work connects chemistry, microbiology, materials science and
engineering. The majority of the PI's students come from groups that are under-
represented in the sciences, so, if this trend continues, the research will help
society by increasing diversity in the scientific workforce.