* 0453318
* Chemistry REU Site at Clemson:    A Summer Undergraduate Research Program (SURP)
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Luis Echegoyen, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 04/30/2008
* USD 199,265.00

This Chemistry Division award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at Clemson University for the summers of 2005-2007. The program
director is Luis Echegoyen who is assisted by co-PI Lourdes Echegoyen. Nine
students, recruited from other institutions, will participate in a ten-week
program. Students are recruited nationwide with emphasis on the ten-state region
surrounding Clemson where a large number of institutions are HBCUs. In addition,
special recruiting efforts target Puerto Rican institutions with a new
initiative to recruit from 2-year technical colleges in the vicinity of Clemson.
Students will participate in group activities aimed at enriching their research
experience and at fostering student-student and faculty-student interactions.
These activities include a preliminary research presentation, instrumentation
workshops, informational lunch seminars and a visit to the R & D facilities at a
local industry. The research experience culminates in a final symposium at which
students present the results of their work in a poster format. Ultimately, the
program is intended to encourage and successfully prepare participants to
continue studies at the graduate level and to lead them to a successful
scientific and teaching career.