* 0453747
* Collaborative Research: Canadian Northwest Seismic Experiment
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2007
* James Gaherty, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 163,496.00

Gaherty-EAR0003404 Revenaugh-0003746 Garnero-0003745

The Canadian Northwest Experiment (CANOE hereafter) will employ a Y-shaped,
48-station broadband seismic array to address two of the great unsolved problems
in the evolution of the solid Earth: the assembly and stabilization of the
continents, and the importance of the Earth's core-mantle boundary (CMB) as the
birthplace of mantle plumes and the graveyard of subducted slabs. Constructed
via a sequence of collisional events associated with subduction, continents grow
outwards from nuclei that stabilize quickly, experiencing little deformation
over the subsequent billions of years. This stability is presumably due to
dynamic processes associated with craton construction, but is poorly understood.
The best locale in the world for mapping continent construction is the
northwestern corner of the Canadian shield, which is characterized by a
progression from the 2.5-4 billion-year-old Slave province (home to the oldest
known rocks on Earth) to the recently uplifted Northern Cordillera of the great
Rocky Mountain system. The investigators will deploy broadband seismometers
across this transition, with a western arm following the Alaskan highway from
Whitehorse, BC to Edmonton, AB, and an eastern arm reaching from Fort Nelson, BC
to Yellowknife, NWT. Using records of local, regional, and distant earthquakes,
the investigators will construct detailed images of the mantle and crust
associated with this cordillera-to-craton transition.

By recording earthquakes from the far reaches of the Pacific basin, the CANOE
deployment will also provide unsurpassed sampling of the seismic structure of
the lowermost mantle. The 90's witnessed a parade of new and unusual discoveries
about the Earth's lower mantle and CMB, including evidence for compositional
heterogeneity, partial melting, and anisotropic mantle fabric that have strong
implications for mantle dynamic processes. CANOE, situated within 120o of the
vast majority of the world's deep seismicity, provides a remarkable opportunity
to examine the lower mantle in greater detail. This includes unsurpassed
coverage of the CMB beneath Hawaii, providing an excellent opportunity to test
models of the genesis of this hotspot archetype.

Following the experiment, all data will be made available to the community
through the IRIS Data Management Center (www.iris.washington.edu). Seismic
instrumentation will be provided by the IRIS PASSCAL program. A portion of the
experiment is funded by the Canadian Lithoprobe program via a grant to the
University of British Columbia.

--

