* 0453284
* Claremont Colleges Mathematics REU Site
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Mario Martelli, Pitzer College
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 01/31/2008
* USD 195,977.00

The five undergraduate Claremont Colleges, Claremont McKenna, Harvey Mudd,
Pitzer, Pomona, and Scripps, will jointly sponsor this Research Experiences for
Undergraduates site. Each summer, five Claremont faculty will engage 10
undergraduates in an 8-week program of mathematics research and other
mathematical and social activities designed to expose them to professional
careers in mathematics. Students will work in groups of 3 or 4 with one or two
faculty advisors on an original research project. Two or three topics will be
selected each summer from different areas of mathematics such as low-dimensional
topology, knot theory, combinatorics, group representations, number theory,
statistics, dynamical systems, mathematical modeling, and optimization problems
in computer architecture. Weekly mathematical activities will include seminars,
workshops in research related skills (such as library research, TEXnical
writing, oral presentation, and computational methods), and discussions of
career opportunities in mathematics. Frequent social activities will allow
participants to interact with additional Claremont faculty and non-REU Claremont
students also involved in summer research projects. Students will give a final
presentation of their project, produce a written paper possibly suitable for
publication, and, after the summer is over, be encouraged to present their work
at a meeting of one of the mathematics professional societies. Funds
specifically for this purpose will be available. Participants will be selected
nationwide. Prerequisites will vary each year with choice of topics for that
year. Women, minorities, and other groups traditionally underrepresented in
professional mathematics are especially encouraged to apply.