* 0453391
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Marine Comparative Functional Genomics
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* James Claiborne, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2010
* USD 469,338.00

Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory (Salisbury Cove, Maine) REU site
provides ten nine-week fellowships for undergraduate students majoring in
biology, geology or its allied fields of study. Students prioritize three
mentors/projects from a list of about 35 senior scientists exploring timely
questions involving marine molecular physiology and functional genomics. Using
sharks, skates, flounder, sculpin and other sea fauna including invertebrates,
students work at the laboratory bench to explore questions at the molecular
level concerning development, reproduction, osmoregulation, ion transport and
environmental toxicology. Many student projects utilize interesting techniques
including confocal microscopy, quantitative PCR, sequencing, and bioinformatics.
To supplement bench work, undergraduates attend three weekly laboratory-wide
science seminars on topics related to marine molecular physiology and are
invited to a variety of MDIBL Conferences featuring internationally renown
researchers. The program concludes with a Student Symposium where students
present their work to their colleagues, mentors, and invited guests. Finally,
students write a research paper for possible publication in the Bulletin of the
Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory. REU Fellowships provide room, board,
supplies, travel and a stipend. Students are housed on campus in two new
residence halls. Students also participate in outdoor activities such as hiking,
biking, and climbing in Acadia National Park, sea kayaking, whitewater rafting
on the Kennebec River, a hike up Mt. Katahdin (the highest point in Maine),
whale watching, and others. Student recruitment point of contact is Michael
McKernan (Director of Education), tel. 207 288-3605. More information is
available at http://www.mdibl.org/edu/reu/reu2.shtml.