* 0453260
* REU Site:  Undergraduate Research in a Dynamic Museum Setting
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Scott Van Keuren, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2008
* USD 136,181.00

The Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County (NHMLAC) will offer a
comprehensive program of scientific research and training for eight
undergraduate students. The 10-week program will build on the core strengths of
the museum: a dynamic program in systematic biology combined with strong human
studies programs, extensive reference collections, and broad experience in the
education of scientific discovery. The NHMLAC is the largest natural history
institution in the western United States. Research collections encompass 33
million specimens and objects that represent the nearly 4.5 billion years of the
earth's past. Ph.D. level curators conduct research on these collections and
ongoing fieldwork. The Museum has state-of-the-art molecular and scanning
election microscopy labs, shared by all research departments. REU students will
work alongside a curator from any of the major fields in the Research and
Collections Division. Research themes will include the understanding of
evolutionary relationships of living organisms, exploration of natural and
cultural diversity, the study of environmental change, and the refinement of
scientific method and theory. Recruitment will emphasize placement of candidates
from groups who are under-represented in the sciences and those with limited
opportunities for research, and students from colleges and universities in the
greater Los Angeles metropolitan area. In addition to seminars, workshops, and
fieldtrips, student will experience the rich cultural and natural landscapes of
Los Angeles and southern California through extracurricular activities. More
information is available by contacting Scott Van Keuren (213-763- 3475;
svankeur@nhm.org) or Angel Valdes (213-763-3380; avaldes@nhm.org), or by
visiting http://www.nhm.org/research/reu.