* 0453138
* Collaborative Research: Chemical, Isotopic and Volatile Constraints on the Evolution of the Lau Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Barry Hanan, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 04/30/2010
* USD 301,426.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research supports four investigators at two
southern California universities to carry out a comprehensive geochemical and
isotopic investigation of magmatic processes occurring in the Lau back-arc basin
in the western Pacific. The setting is an ideal one to study and understand
links between subducting oceanic crust and its sediment cover, back-arc mantle
dynamics, and heterogeneity as well as the mantle source of magmas erupting
along the arc and on the seafloor. This work seeks to characterize the
geochemistry of the mantle beneath the basin and discern its control on basin
evolution. In particular, the research will focus on understanding how the
composition of the ocean crust in the Lau Basin in the western Pacific Ocean is
affected by materials coming from the Pacific plate that is being subducted to
the east. &lt;br/&gt; The Lau Basin has been a site of intense reconnaissance
work and the targeted geochemical sample suite consists of 400 lavas and glasses
collected by Scripps Institution of Oceanography during five NSF-sponsored
cruises to the region. The sample inventory represents extensive coverage of the
Lau Basin, including lavas from all recognized spreading centers. This research
will analyze representative igneous and volcanic rocks for major and trace
element chemistry (including REE, HFSE, and light elements Li, Be, B, Cl);
volatile elements (CO2, H2O); isotopes of Sr, Nd, Pb, Hf, He, Ne, and Ar; and
short-lived isotopes of the U decay series (226Ra, 230Th, and 234U). With this
unprecedented data set, the research will be able to address the following four
issues: (1) whether it is possible to map the spatial distribution and extent of
Indian- and Pacific-type mantles in the Lau Basin; (2) what the spatial extent
of the Samoan mantle plume component in the Lau Basin is; (3) how the proximity
of the Lau Basin spreading centers to the Tofua Arc affects mantle melting, and
(4) what proportion of volatile enrichment in Lau Basin lavas is due to ridge-
arc source interaction versus other processes such as crustal assimilation. This
work will provide the framework for additional work in the region. The work is
important for the science objectives of the NSF-funded MARGINS and RIDGE 2000
Programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Broader impacts of this
research include contributions to education and training of at least three
graduate students (Ph. D. and/or M.S). Furthermore, undergraduates will be
involved in selected aspects of the work. Students will receive broad
geochemical training in a number of sub-disciplines of analytical geochemistry.
In addition the presence of PhD-level students from the University of
California, San Diego (UCSD) at San Diego State University (SDSU), which has no
PhD program, will stimulate and challenge the undergraduate and Master's
students to higher levels of achievement. Finally, the proposal will help to
support the considerable analytical infrastructure at UCSD and SDSU, as well as
foster closer working relationships between faculty and students at both
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;