* 0453216
* Materials, Mechanics, and Manufacturing (3M) REU Site
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Stacy Phelps, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 12/31/2008
* USD 290,000.00

ABSTRACT 0453216

This award supports development of an REU Site at the South Dakota School of
Mines and Technology (SDSM&T) focusing upon Materials, Mechanics, and
Manufacturing (3M) is proposed. The main objective of the 3M REU Site is to
enhance student interest in post-graduate study. Another objective of the 3M REU
Site is to improve student abilities with respect to those tools that will make
them more competitive in a research environment, namely, team building,
technical communication, ethics, and overall research acumen. Additional
objectives are to promote minority-student exposure to cutting-edge research.
One of the targeted populations is drawn from Oglala Lakota College (OLC), a
Native-American institution. Three-to-four OLC students participate in this 3M
REU Site summer program on an annual basis. The second targeted student
population includes SDSM&T undergraduates. Three SDSM&T students participate in
the 3M REU 10-week summer program on an annual basis. The third category of
targeted student groups is found at regional four-year institutions that do not
possess a program to support undergraduate research. Three students from the
regional four-year schools participate in the 3M REU summer program on an annual
basis.

Projects focus on cutting-edge research in materials, mechanics, and
manufacturing and are led by senior SDSM&T Faculty Mentors. Research projects
involve freeform laser deposition, composite materials,
nanomaterials/lithography, and materials selection in product design. This
research draws upon existing SDSM&T faculty expertise and research
infrastructure, including the SDSM&T Advanced Materials Processing Center and
the Center for Advanced Manufacturing and Production. A detailed 3M REU-Site
Assessment Plan has been developed and includes assessment components for both
the summer and academic portions of the program.

The 3M REU Site offers the potential for significant broad impact on the
Nation's human resources given the emphasis on the recruitment of Native-
American students into the program. In general, many of the 3M REU students tend
to be first-generation college students. Thus, the 3M Site serves both minority
and other traditionally underrepresented students and encourages them to pursue
post-graduate study and a career in research.

