* 0453363
* REU Site:    Sensors and Metrology for the Manufacturing Enterprise
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2008
* Shivakumar Raman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 01/31/2008
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract for Raman, EEC-0453363:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This REU award for a Site
on Sensors and Metrology for the Manufacturing Enterprise supports 8 engineering
and science students each year for three years in a 10-week summer research
experience at the University of Oklahoma in Norman.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The objective of this program is to
formally introduce and involve undergraduate students to research in metrology
and sensors. The participants conduct research on topics such as coordinate
tolerance metrology, machining tribology, roughness metrology and gain
experience in emerging areas such as Scanning Probe Microscopy, Laser-Doppler
Velocimetry, sensor networks, and optical interferometry. Further, each
participant learns to conduct literature surveys, formulate hypotheses, design
experiments to collect data, analyze and interpret the data and communicate
their work through written and oral presentation. These experiences are
facilitated by the PI and a team of research mentors. Students undertake both
individual projects as well as team research. Standard teaming exercises are
conducted, and students learn to synthesize and analyze engineering problems
while bringing diverse individual expertise to teams. Although research is
introduced by the mentors, the student's own experiences enhance their
understanding of problems. Ethics training is incorporated in research
situations in addition to structured workshops. Faculty presentations of
research, workshops, lab and industry tours, progress reports, and social
activities provide a broad experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Metrology is essential to the maintenance of product quality, process
improvement, and evolution of newer manufacturing processes and equipment. By
exposing more students to this important area, the program seeks to improve the
nation's competitiveness in manufacturing. Sensing/metrology for nanosciences,
biomanufacturing, and MEMS are studied under this umbrella, promoting cutting-
edge to over-the-horizon research. This REU site attempts to motivate students
to participate in research leading to graduate and doctoral work. Coordination
with RET and GK-12 opportunities are pursued as appropriate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment: Students are recruited nationally through
advertisement and publicity. Specially targeted will be students who come from
non-research institutions where such opportunities may not be available. The
recruitment of under-represented minorities in engineering such as women,
Native-, Hispanic- and African-Americans is a major focus for this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation: A formative evaluation plan is designed to
obtain feedback and to monitor the progress of the students after they conclude
their formal term. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;