* 0453362
* Fabrication and Magnetism of Coordinate Covalent Networks Assembled at Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Daniel Talham, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 03/31/2009
* USD 375,000.00

This research project explores methods to synthesize magnetic nanoscale objects
directly on surfaces. Synthesizing and organizing magnetic materials directly
where they are needed is the most efficient way to produce nanoscale magnetic
films. These investigations are used to educate the next generation of materials
chemists and to prepare them to be competitive in materials chemistry related
high-technology professions. Ph.D. students are trained in cutting edge
synthetic methods and use of state of the art fabrication, analysis and
measurement equipment, including facilities at the National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory and the Advanced Photon Source. Undergraduate students are exposed to
the same exciting technology as they prepare for scientific careers. The
research will be used as the basis of a series of web-based tutorials on
chemical routes to thin films.

%%%

Many of the promised applications of molecule-based nanostructures will require
positioning structures at interfaces. An attractive alternative to the multistep
process of synthesis-isolation-deposition is to fabricate nanoscale objects
directly at the site of use. Magnetic information storage is a billion dollar
industry that will ultimately benefit from procedures to fabricate thin films of
nanoscale objects. This project aims to train the next generation of materials
chemists and to prepare them to be competitive in related high-technology
professions. Ph.D. students are trained in cutting edge synthetic methods and
use of state of the art fabrication, analysis and measurement equipment,
including facilities at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory and the
Advanced Photon Source. The research will be used as the basis of a series of
web-based tutorials on chemical routes to thin films.