* 0453107
* REU:  Undergraduate Research Experience in Application of Geophysical Methods to the Archaeology of Late Prehistoric Central Indiana
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Andrew White, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/29/2008
* USD 186,953.00

This project is a research experiences for undergraduates (REU) site in
Archaeology/ Geophysical Applications at Indiana University-Purdue University at
Fort Wayne. The site offers 10 undergraduate students eight weeks of hands-on
training at a late-prehistoric site in Central Indiana. Intellectual Merits-
Students, in conjunction with faculty mentors, develop their own project
designs, data collection, analysis and interpretation using geophysical
prospection and ground-truthing. Research projects focus on the processes of
ethnogenesis among Late Prehistoric frontier societies. Intensive remote sensing
in conjunction with small, targeted excavations allows for the conducting of
archaeological research with minimal impact on non-renewable cultural resources.
Broader Impacts- The proposed project offers a unique opportunity for
undergraduates to work with state-of-the-art equipment. Data gathered by the
students will be integral to the greater research program at the Strawtown
Koteewi archaeological park, and will be used in displays for and presentations
to the general public in collaboration with the Hamilton County Parks and
Recreation Department. A strong ethics component provides training for students
in stewardship, cooperative resource management, and issues of presenting the
past both to an academic and general public audience.