* 0453253
* REU: An Idaho Physics Department Based Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2008
* Wei Yeh, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2008
* USD 148,576.00

The University of Idaho Physics Department REU site will host seven
undergraduate physics students for a ten-week summer research experience. These
students will work closely with Idaho faculty members in the areas of condensed
matter physics, nuclear physics, materials science, and atomic &amp; molecular
physics. The objectives of this site are: (1) to introduce undergraduate
physics&lt;br/&gt;majors to the excitement of physics research, (2) to train
these students in the laboratory skills needed in modern physics research, (3)
to foster student personal growth by having the students work in teams and by
teaching them the ethical dimension of scientific research, and (4) to promote
diversity in the field of physics by encouraging applicants and participants
from under-represented groups. The Idaho physics faculty will design research
projects that are challenging yet viable. Both theoretical and experimental
projects will be made available. The students will be encouraged to work in
small groups to foster teamwork skills. Weekly meetings will be held to allow
the students to interact and to keep each other posted on their progress. The
REU students will interact with Idaho faculty, research staff personnel, post-
doctoral researchers, graduate students and undergraduates. Supplementary
activities will include weekly lunch together with faculty and weekend
activities that revolve around the tremendous outdoor experiences available in
Idaho. A targeted recruiting plan will be undertaken. Particular attention will
be given to recruiting from institutions with significant populations of
students from traditionally under-represented groups. The program will conclude
with REU student research presentations.