* 0453541
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduate Students in Plant Cell Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2011
* Julia Bailey-Serres, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2011
* USD 432,901.00

The Center for Plant Cell Biology (CEPCEB) in association with the Institute for
Integrative Genome Biology (IIGB) at the University of California, Riverside
(UCR) is committed to provide rewarding research experiences to undergraduate
students. As a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site, CEPCEB brings
research experiences to students of two- and four-year colleges who have limited
opportunity to learn about the excitement and career options that research in
plant cell biology offers. Ten undergraduates will be accepted into the 10-week
residential program. The program will begin with a one-week workshop, in which
students will be introduced to techniques and approaches used for analysis of
plant and plant fungal pathogen cell function, including basic molecular
biology, genomic and bioinformatic analyses, and confocal microscopy methods
used to study live cells. Students will then spend nine weeks working with a
faculty mentor and a graduate or postgraduate mentor on a research project of
their choice. Students will also participate in workshops to enhance learning
skills and professional development, and to discuss ethics in science. Students
will receive a stipend, free room and board, and funds for travel to and from
the site. Information about the program can be found at
http://cepceb.ucr.edu/about/about.htm#UnderGradTrain, or by contacting Dr.
Patricia Springer at (951) 827-5785 (pspringer@ucr.edu) or Dr. Julia Bailey-
Serres at (951) 827-3738 (serres@ucr.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;