* 0453712
* Science in the Law School Curriculum: The Diffusion of Practice Innovations after Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,12/31/2007
* James Richardson, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Susan Brodie Haire
* 12/31/2007
* USD 244,996.00

Following the Daubert trilogy, broad changes have occurred within the practice
environment of the United States legal culture. Not only have the kinds of cases
that are being litigated changed, but also the skills needed by legal
professionals to proffer, challenge, and evaluate cases in which expert
testimony plays a part. However, wide disparity exists among law schools in the
number and variety of courses offered that are designed to provide future
attorneys with knowledge and experience related to science or scientific
evidence. This research will apply a diffusion model to investigate the extent
to which law schools and law school professors have incorporated innovations in
litigating cases involving scientific evidence into the law school curriculum. A
multi-method study incorporating data related to each of the factors obtained
from a telephone sample survey of law school professors, content analysis of
course materials, and archival data published on relevant web sites will be
conducted to provide a picture of the current educational landscape and to
identify the factors that are related to the availability and content of science
education for law students. The findings of this research will provide resources
for law professors and legal professionals by identifying relevant readings and
sources of information, and describing course formats and contents. This
information will be used to produce a model curriculum for a scientific evidence
course, which will be made available to law professors. Information about the
factors to be investigated can also be used by law school administrators to
identify strengths and weaknesses in their curriculum, and may be used to
support arguments for additional funding and resources in order to improve the
curricula of their schools. Finally, this project has the potential to
significantly and positively impact society by providing resources that may be
used to better prepare law students for their future careers as attorneys,
judges, and legislators.