* 0453204
* REU Site: Archaeological Field Research and Public Outreach in the Homolovi Ruins State Park, Winslow, Arizona
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Lisa Young, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/28/2010
* USD 198,260.00

This project is a research experience for undergraduates (REU) site that
provides 10 archaeology students a hands-on, six-week summer research training
experience and public outreach activities at the Homolovi Ruins State Park in
Arizona. Students conduct their own research projects investigating changes in
the economic and social organization of ancient communities in the American
Southwest. As part of their research experience, students also work on public
outreach projects, which provide a context to discuss the ethical
responsibilities of archaeologists and museum professionals. The goal of the
program is for students to understand how to integrate information from
archaeological fieldwork with broader questions about human behavior and to be
able to communicate this often complex and highly technical knowledge to a
nonprofessional audience. Intellectual Merits- The research contributes to the
understanding of the origins and development of ancient village life-the type of
community organization that was the foundation of more complex societies.
Research focuses on household decision-making strategies during a period of
fundamental change in the American Southwest. Because similar shifts in domestic
architecture and village organization have been documented in other areas of the
world, the research has interesting implications beyond the immediate geographic
area. Broader Impacts- The REU site enhances the information available to
general audiences about archaeology and Native Peoples in Northeastern Arizona.
Through the contributions of student research projects to the interpretive
programs at the Homolovi Ruins State Park, the project will increase the public
understanding of the scientific methods and processes used by archaeologists to
interpret the remains they unearth. This type of approach is important in the
United States where pseudoscientific interpretations of archaeological remains
often capture the public's imagination and archaeological sites are being
destroyed by vandalism on a daily basis.