* 0453843
* Collaborative Research: MIP:  Bacterial Interactions and Processes that Regulate Biodiversity on Marine Organic Particles
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2009
* David Rowley, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2009
* USD 249,920.00

Bacterial abundance and diversity in ocean waters varies at the millimeter
scale, and organic-rich particles represent "hot spots" for microbial activity.
Remarkably, the bacteria found attached to particles are genetically distinct
from those in the surrounding water. Bacteria that colonize particles employ
species-specific enzymes that breakdown the organic content at different rates.
Since sinking particles in the ocean represent a major mechanism influencing
global carbon flux, bacterial metabolic activity on marine particles is an
important factor in biogeochemical cycling. However, little is known regarding
the variables that regulate microbial diversity on and around marine particles.
This study will investigate mechanisms controlling micro-scale diversity and
interactions among marine microorganisms colonizing particles. A specific focus
will be microbial competition, and the possibility that pelagic bacterial
population structures are influenced by the production of antibiotics.
Experiments will be conducted to quantify the effects of bacterial antagonistic
interactions at the molecular, single-bacteria cell, consortia, and community
levels. The colonization of model particles by microbial natural assemblages
will be measured in response to fluorescence-tagged antagonistic strains. Growth
and respiration of sensitive strains in close proximity to antagonistic bacteria
will be measured to quantify interactions at the single-cell level. Molecules
produced by antagonistic bacteria will be identified and tested for their
effects on particle colonization by single strains and natural consortia of
bacteria. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the first, in depth investigation to
probe cell-cell antagonistic interactions as a micro-scale factor involved in
structuring marine microbial communities. Knowledge of microbial diversity on
suspended particles will be advanced, and the interactions and specific
adaptations involved in surface colonization will be better understood. This
endeavor will further fuse connections between marine bacterial chemical
ecology, microbial diversity, and biogeochemical cycling. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be cross-trained in chemical ecology and molecular
microbial ecology, and future teachers will learn molecular and microbiological
techniques and concepts during one-year internships.