* 0453694
* Collaborative Research: Service Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* John Ettlie, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 02/29/2008
* USD 114,129.00

Abstract 0453694 Ettlie &lt;br/&gt;Innovation in the U.S. service sector is
important, but not well understood. The proposed research, the first phase of a
broad inquiry on services innovation, concentrates on the important innovation
context where services are developed and initiated as extensions of core
manufacturing operations. For this target domain, our proposed research seeks to
answer the following three questions: 1. How do emergent strategies, structures
and general management team composition impact service innovation approaches in
a way that produces persistent outcomes and sustainable routines? 2. How does
the implementation of new service innovation strategy in such firms compare with
innovation for their traditional core products and their negotiation of external
dependencies? 3. What new practices seem to be most effective in promoting
service innovation processes that are co-determined by
partners?&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of this Research: We have developed a
conceptual model and associated hypotheses by applying and adapting resource
dependency theory at the organization level to the phenomenon of service
innovation in manufacturing firms. This frame provides a lens for understanding
the dynamics of change associated with service innovation and impacts on
persistence. Long-term, this research aims to build a foundation for
understanding how new kinds of services emerge generally in all service
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;Research Approach and Methods to be Employed: Fundamental
understanding of service innovation in general, and service extrapolation of
manufacturing technology in particular, requires at this point contextual
investigation, rather than identifying statistical correlates of success. This
project will produce a series of cross-industry case studies designed and
conducted to refine the resource dependency theory that we have adapted from the
literature. We will test our theory with field research that encompasses both
historical and prospective viewpoints, employing modified critical incident
techniques. Data collection for these cases will include extensive interviews
with key participants plus systematic review of relevant documents produced
associated with the strategy formation, intra and inter-organizational
initiatives, and staffing for service innovations. Our analysis of findings from
individual cases and comparisons across cases will refine, bound and surface new
theory for subsequent research on service innovation.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
Resulting from this Research: The research findings from this project will apply
to all kinds of manufacturing firms that seek to innovate by initiating related
service businesses. General insights will also apply more broadly to the field
of service innovation. Dissemination activities included in this project will
promote the application of these findings and insights by the management of
service organizations. Peer reviewed publications will promote additional
rigorous research on service innovation, which, over time, could favorably
impact the robustness of this critical sector of the economy. We also intend to
produce significant new materials (exercises, cases) for use by students of
innovation management and industrial engineering. &lt;br/&gt;