* 0453519
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in the Sun-Earth Space Environment at Prairie View A&amp;M University (PVAMU)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Tian-Sen Huang, Prairie View A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 12/31/2010
* USD 749,033.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
ATM-0453519&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: REU Site: Research Experiences
for Undergraduates in the Sun-Earth Space Environment at
PVAMU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Tian Sen Huang, Prairie View
A&amp;M University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
establishes a new REU site at Prairie View Solar Observatory (PVSO), a research
unit under the College of Arts and Science at Prairie View A&amp;M University
(PVAMU). The PVSO REU site will focus on the study of the space environment
represented by the Sun and its effects on Earth's magnetosphere and upper
atmosphere. Within the Sun-Earth space environment theme, students will
participate in current research projects at PVSO. Research projects encompass
two main research areas: (1) the study of solar activity based on observations
performed at PVSO and (2) computer modeling to ascertain the response of Earth's
magnetosphere and ionosphere to solar activity. This site is supported by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The faculty and research staff of PVSO will
individually mentor students during their research experience.
Tutorials/seminars will familiarize students to the Sun-Earth space environment,
the basic concepts of space physics, and the impact of solar activity on
satellite and ground-based systems. Under the guidance of their mentors,
participants will prepare a written report on their research and give a
presentation at a group seminar. Selected students will be afforded the
opportunity to attend and present their research results at a scientific
conference. The PI proposes to establish both summer and academic-year programs
open to undergraduates who have satisfactorily completed at least their freshman
year. Eight students each will be recruited for the programs. The summer program
will consist of 8 full-time weeks, while the academic-year program will consist
of 34 part-time weeks. Emphasis will be on the participation of minorities and
women, groups that are underrepresented in solar and space science. Recruitment
efforts will be directed mainly towards students from PVAMU and students from
HBCU's nationwide. During the academic year, only students enrolled at PVAMU
will be accepted. To retain their interest in solar and space science and
further develop their skills as independent researchers, promising students will
be selected to continue in the subsequent summer/academic-year programs. PVSO's
REU program will introduce undergraduate participants to a realistic and
fulfilling research experience in solar physics, space plasma physics, and the
near-Earth space environment by working directly with active professionals.
Participation in PVSO's REU program will help undergraduates develop a greater
interest for disciplines related to the space environment, as well as consider
future careers in solar and space sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;