* 0453194
* Dissertation Research:  The Post-Cold War Mission of U.S. Missile Defense Testing: American and Marshall Islander Perspectives
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2005,10/31/2006
* Shirley Lindenbaum, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

The mission of United States ballistic missile defense (BMD) testing in the
1980's was a &lt;br/&gt;technological and strategic response to Cold War
geopolitics and Soviet nuclear threat that enjoyed considerable popularity
during the Reagan Presidency. Yet by 1990 the Cold War's end and the waning of
the perceived threat had significantly transformed the research context; the
mission of Star Wars, as this big science project became popularly known, was
suddenly uncertain. This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Research
Improvement Grant examines the process by which a new mission for United States
missile defense testing emerged at this historical juncture and how it was
understood via distinctive cultural lenses within its testing network. The
project will to this end examine American national discourse on this
transformation and the new technological and strategic aims it entailed, as well
as the perspectives of network participants who encountered the changing form
and fortunes of Star Wars at the Cold War's end. The heterogenous network
required for BMD testing links the U.S. and the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, the principal overseas test site for this technology. The islands are
also a former U.S. Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands that served as a
nuclear and atomic weapons proving ground in the 1950's. This network, whose
participants hold very different stakes in American weapons testing and the
heterogeneous engineering it requires in social, cultural, political, and
economic domains, is a promising setting for a comparative, anthropological
study of interactions between technology and society. Discourse analysis,
interviewing, participant observation, and archival research in the United
States and the Republic of the Marshall Islands will elucidate perspectives of
American governmental, engineering, and corporate actors as well as Marshall
Islander landowners and governmental actors who have facilitated use of the
islands as a BMD test site. This research builds upon the Ph.D. student's
exploratory research in the United States and the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, and coursework including fieldwork methods, the anthropology of
science, the United States, and the Pacific. Her research will extend studies of
the construction of risk, big science and its intersection with national
security and historical change, and technological networks. Through its focus
upon linkages between big science and its test site, the research will also
extend the study of interactions between the Western and non-Western worlds
mediated by science and technology. Broader impacts include doctoral training in
anthropology at the City University of New York. Findings will be communicated
in academic conference papers and journal articles, and to participating
institutions and communities. The project will contribute a cultural historical
understanding of one of the most enduring big science projects in existence, a
matter of potential relevance to science policy in light of the significant
expansion of missile defense activities in the past decade. U.S. missile defense
technology has thus far existed solely in the test phase, with a single and
circumscribed exception, yet this will soon change with deployment scheduled for
2004, a development likely to intensify the not well understood interactions
between this foremost example of big science, society, and culture. &lt;br/&gt;