* 0453743
* Collaborative Research:  Investigations into the Temporal & Source-Dependent Chemical Compositions & Reactivity of Natural Dissolved Organic Matter
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2006
* Patrick Hatcher, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 05/31/2006
* USD 315,123.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0453777 / OCE-0453743

In this project, investigators at the Old Dominion University and the Ohio State
University will integrate the determination of molecular-level chemical
characteristics of natural dissolved organic matter (DOM) with investigations
that quantitatively explore the reactivity of DOM with model compounds. Their
preliminary work shows that compositional differences in DOM attributed to both
season and source can influence the bulk chemical properties of natural waters
so as to induce changes in, for example, the solubility of specific compounds.
The team will investigate changes in composition and reactivity of DOM as a
function of season (over 2.3 years), organic matter source (6 sites from
upstream blackwater rivers to the coastal ocean) and water chemistry (pH,
salinity, etc.). A rigorous sampling regime, combined with laboratory work
designed to detail both the bulk chemical composition and reactivity of the DOM
will allow for more comprehensive quantitative models of DOM chemistry and
interactions with anthropogenic compounds. As part of this work, the researchers
plan to use NMR, IR, HLPC and several mass spectral approaches to fully
characterize the DOM and use NMR and IRMS to quantitatively follow its chemical
interactions with isotopically labeled model compounds.

Broader Impacts: This study will provide significant advancements in the areas
of aquatic/marine and analytical chemistry, contaminant transport and the impact
of anthropogenic compounds in aqueous systems and organic matter sequestration
and preservation. Both Old Dominion University and Ohio State University are
strongly committed to the training of graduates, undergraduates and K-12
students. This work will provide direct support for three graduate students
whose dissertation topics will be centered in DOM characterization, variability
and molecular interactions. Undergraduate students will be trained in advanced
analytical and instrumental techniques as well as in the interpretation of their
results. The project will also be augmented through association with the NSF-
sponsored REU-MUST program in ocean science at ODU and environmental molecular
science at OSU.

