* 0453930
* Core Support for the Committee on National Statistics
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2012
* Constance Citro, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2012
* USD 7,874,344.00

The Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) is a standing committee of the
National Academies. It was established in 1972 at the recommendation of the
President's Commission on Federal Statistics to fill a critical gap as an
integrative force for the federal government's highly decentralized statistical
system. The Committee works to improve the data and analytic methods that
contribute to public policy research and decision-making. During this grant
period, the Committee will hold public seminars and develop studies in areas of
increasing challenge for federal statistical agencies, including: the tension
between protecting confidentiality and privacy and providing research access to
data; stemming the decline in response to government surveys; measuring the
changing economy; and pursuing innovation and coordination in preference to the
status quo. The Committee also will respond to requests for particular studies
from sponsor agencies. Some current and expected projects include: measurement
of food insecurity and hunger; residence rules and coverage evaluation for the
2010 census; estimation issues for the new American Community Survey; the
adequacy of federal business statistics on small business dynamics and
innovation; the design of national health accounts; and an update of the
Committee's white paper, Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical
Agency. Joint projects with other units in the National Academies include the
feasibility of a national ballistics imaging database and applications of data
mining and information fusion for public health, terrorism prevention, and other
governmental functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Committee on National Statistics
projects are designed to have broad application beyond the specific issues
covered. Many studies help improve government policy and operations. Almost all
contribute to the social, behavioral, and economic sciences in such ways as:
improving federally sponsored data collections on which much social science
research depends; furthering the development and use of statistical methods for
policy and methodological research; providing forums for intellectual exchange
and consideration of system-wide issues, such as human research participant
protection for social science research; and advancing the social, behavioral,
and economic sciences within the National Academies and through the Committee's
relationships with Congress, OMB, and federal research and program agencies.
Many projects also contribute to better public understanding by improving key
national indicators (e.g., the poverty measure, the Consumer Price Index) and
the quality, relevance, and accessibility of key data sets.&lt;br/&gt;