* 0453975
* PBO Nucleus:  Support for an Integrated Existing Geodetic Network in the Western U.S.
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* William Prescott, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 02/28/2010
* USD 4,546,408.00

0453975&lt;br/&gt;Prescott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tectonic and earthquake research
in the US has experienced a quiet revolution over the last decade precipitated
by the recognition that slow-motion faulting events can both trigger and be
triggered by regular earthquakes. Transient motion has now been found in
essentially all tectonic environments, and the detection and analysis of such
events is the first-order science target of the EarthScope Project. Because of
this and a host of other fundamental tectonics questions that can be answered
only with long-duration geodetic time series, the incipient 1400-station
EarthScope Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO) network has been designed to
leverage 432 existing continuous GPS stations whose measurements extend back
over a decade. The irreplaceable recording history of these stations is
accelerating EarthScope scientific return by providing the highest possible
resolution. This resolution will be used to detect and understand transients, to
determine the three-dimensional velocity field (particularly vertical motion),
and to improve measurement precision by understanding the complex noise sources
inherent in GPS.&lt;br/&gt;The PBO Nucleus project supports the operation,
maintenance and hardware upgrades of a subset of the six western U.S. geodetic
networks until they are subsumed by PBO. Uninterrupted data flow from these
stations will effectively double the time-series length of PBO over the expected
life of EarthScope, and has created, for the first time, a single GPS-based
geodetic network in the US. The other existing sites remain in operation under
support from non-NSF sources (e.g. the USGS), and EarthScope continues to
benefit from their continued operation. &lt;br/&gt;On the grounds of relevance
to EarthScope science goals, geographic distribution and data quality, 209 of
the 432 existing stations were selected as the nucleus upon which to build PBO.
Conversion of these stations to a PBO-compatible mode of operation was begun
under previous funding, and as a result data now flow directly to PBO archives
and processing centers while maintenance, operations, and meta-data requirements
are continue to be upgraded to PBO standards. At the end of this project all 209
stations will be fully incorporated into PBO, meeting all standards for new PBO
construction including data communications and land use permits. Funds for
operation of these stations have been included in planned budgets for PBO after
the construction phase ends and PBO begins an operational phase in
2008.&lt;br/&gt;The research community has only begun to understand the
pervasive effects of transient creep, and its societal consequences remained
largely unexplored. For example, one open question is whether slow faulting
pervasively moderates earthquake nucleation. The existence of slow earthquakes
will impact seismic hazards estimation, since these transients are now known to
'absorb' a significant component of total slip in some regions and trigger
earthquakes in others. The data from these stations serve a much larger audience
than just the few people who work to keep them operating. This project is now
collecting the data that will be used by the next generation of solid-earth
researchers for at least two decades. Educational modules are being developed by
a team of researchers, educators, and curriculum development professionals, and
are being disseminated through regional and national workshops. An interactive
website provides the newest developments in tectonics research to K-16
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;