* 0453090
* Evaluating the Relationship Between Melt Inclusions and Host for high Anorthite Plagioclase: Prevalence and Significance of Trace element Diversity in MORB Plagioclase
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Adam Kent, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 04/30/2009
* USD 178,037.00

ABSTRACT (Nielsen - 0453090) One of the primary ways the Earth gives up its
inner heat is by eruption of mid-ocean ridge basalts. This research studies the
origin of the large high Ca-rich plagioclase crystals characteristic of many
suites of these ocean floor lavas to examine the exchange of material and heat
between the mantle and crust. These minerals are unusual because they have never
been found to be in equilibrium with the glass in which they occur. In this
study, plagioclase crystals and glass inclusions within them, which are thought
to represent the magmas from which the plagioclase crystallized, will be
analyzed for trace elements to obtain information on mantle and crystallization
processes as well as with magma interaction with the lower crust. Because of
difficulties analyzing chemical gradients and trace elements that vary over
small distances, the initial stage of the research focuses on development of
micro-analytical techniques for measuring small differences, chemically and
spatially in basaltic rocks using laser ICP mass spectrometry and the electron
microprobe. The second stage involves making geochemical traverses of high Ca-
plagioclase crystals and their glass inclusions, as well as their host glasses.
Trace elements to be measured and their gradients in the glasses and minerals
include Ti, Zr, REE, Sr, Ba. Results of these analyses will be used to assess
the degree to which melt inclusions in the crystals and the host glasses have
achieved equilibrium through use of partition coefficients obtained from
laboratory experiments. The final objective will be to put high Ca plagioclase
into a framework of crustal and magmatic evolution that permits better
understanding of formation of the ocean crust.

