* 0453901
* Bacterial Population Structure: Evaluating Gene Flow in the Symbionts of Deep-Sea Mussels \(Genus Bathymodiolus\)
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2010
* John Wakeley, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2010
* USD 337,753.00

Recent evidence suggests that microbial populations in spatially and chemically
fragmented habitats are not distributed ubiquitously, but rather exhibit
geographic structure. Heterogeneous environments restrict gene flow among
populations, which promotes genetic differentiation, local adaptation, and
speciation. Hydrothermal vents are distributed in a patchy array due to
topographic features, deep ocean currents, and variations in vent fluid
chemistry. Though associations between chemosynthetic bacteria and their
invertebrate hosts provide the basis for macrofaunal production at deep-sea
hydrothermal vents, almost nothing is known about the distribution of genetic
variation in the symbionts and how population structure of bacteria affects
ecological interactions and the evolution of symbioses at vents. This research
project will test models of gene flow for populations of thioautotrophic and
methanotrophic endosymbionts of mussels inhabiting fast-, slow-, and
discontinuous spreading centers by examining genetic structure along the East
Pacific Rise (EPR), Mid-Atlantic Ridge (MAR) and within the Lau Back-arc Basin
(Lau), respectively. Bathymodiolus mussels are found at nearly all hydrothermal
vent sites and most likely acquire their symbionts from the environment in each
generation, making them model systems for evaluating geographic structure of
bacterial endosymbionts. Symbionts from 3 ridges, 5 vent fields per ridge, and
mussels from 2-4 sites per vent field will be studied. For both types of
symbiont, 4 DNA markers (16s rRNA, ITS, ftsZ, and either pmoA or soxY for the
methanotroph and thioautotroph, respectively) will be sequenced from 20-30
mussel individuals per site. Population genetic, coalescent, and phylogeographic
approaches will be employed in the data analyses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms that affect the population structure of
bacterial endosymbionts have important implications for microbial biogeography,
diversity, and the origin, evolution, and ecology of life at deep-sea
hydrothermal vents. This research will yield the first high-resolution
examination of gene flow among environmentally transmitted endosymbiont
populations. Comparisons between hydrothermal vent fields will provide valuable
information on the historical biogeography and barriers to dispersal for
bacterial species. These findings will allow broader inferences regarding how
deep ocean currents influence dispersal and the evolution of chemoautotrophic
communities. Further, because hydrothermal vents serve as analogs to early Earth
as well as extraterrestrial environments, results from this research will have
implications for the origin of eukaryotic cell organelles and the ecology and
evolution of microbes in extreme biomes. Annotated gene sequences will be
deposited in GenBank and made publicly accessible through a website
(www.endosymbiont.org) that the investigators use to present information on
endosymbiosis to the scientific and public community. The investigators also
give seminars designed for the general public on scientific topics, including
microbial symbiosis and diversity, chemosynthesis and life on this planet and
others. Undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows will have
ample opportunity to participate in analyses of these gene sequences, both
through their research and through inclusion in university courses. &lt;br/&gt;