* 0453856
* Structure and Dynamics of Polymeric Complex Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Simon Mochrie, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2009
* USD 402,500.00

*******NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT******* &lt;br/&gt;Amphiphiles are molecules with
end groups that exhibit very different affinities, and can organize immiscible
fluids into so-called complex fluid phases with characteristic structures in the
10-100~nm range. They have applications in such diverse areas as enhanced oil
recovery, living cells, and food science. This research project will
characterize the behavior of polymer-based complex fluids with the goal of
rigorously testing and refining theoretical understanding of these phases. This,
in turn, will lead to improvements in our understanding of how to make best use
of existing amphiphiles and how to design better ones for practical
applications. Beyond the time-averaged behavior, thermal fluctuations in these
materials will be characterized using the emerging technique of x-ray photon
correlation spectroscopy (XPCS). These studies will elucidate how the
fluctuations depend on the structures and properties of the phases in question,
and how these properties in turn may be inferred from the observed fluctuations.
Overall, the proposed experiments will create new knowledge concerning the
statistical physics of amphiphilic complex fluids. Methodologies developed
during the research will enable scientists from across the country to better
pursue their own XPCS experiments. In addition, because the promise of XPCS
measurements probing shorter length scales and shorter time scales is an
important component of the rationale for new, fourth-generation, x-ray sources,
including LCLS at Stanford, the ERL at Cornell, and NSLS-II at Brookhaven, this
research will better inform programmatic and technical decisions concerning such
facilities. Finally, it will contribute to the education and training of the
next generation of scattering scientists, so that they will prepared to do the
best possible facility-based science at existing and future x-ray and neutron
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*******TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT*******&lt;br/&gt;Because of the applicability of self-consistent mean-
field theory to polymer systems, studies of block polymer-based complex fluids
offer the prospect of an essentially first-principles understanding of complex
fluid structure, phase behavior, and dynamics. Building on prior work that has
revealed the existence of membrane-based sponge (L3) and vesicle (L4) phases in
binary block copolymer-homopolymer blends, this research will clarify several
key, unresolved questions concerning the phase behavior and structure of these
materials, including the importance of anharmonic contributions to the membrane
bending free energy, the effect of possible length-scale-dependent
renormalization of the membrane elastic constants, the role of the membrane's
Gaussian curvature, and the conditions required for a continuous L3-to-L4
transition. Beyond the time-averaged behavior, the equilibrium dynamics will
also be characterized using the emerging technique of x-ray photon correlation
spectroscopy (XPCS), in order to elucidate how the dynamics of equilibrium
fluctuations depend on the structures and properties of the phases in question,
and how these properties in turn may be inferred from the observed dynamics.
This research will also improve the capabilities for carrying out x-ray photon
correlation spectroscopy experiments, enabling scientists from across the
country to pursue their own XPCS research, and will inform decisions to be made
about the next generation of national x-ray facilities. It will also contribute
to the education and training of the nation's next generation of scattering
scientists, so that they are capable of carrying out the best possible facility-
based science at existing and future x-ray and neutron sources.&lt;br/&gt;