* 0453454
* REU Site: Summer Research Program in Developmental Psychology
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Sharon Mutter, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida N. Chowdhury
* 03/31/2009
* USD 240,485.00

This project is a research experiences for undergraduates (REU) site in
developmental psychology at Western Kentucky University. The site offers 12
undergraduate students eight weeks of research and several concurrent
professional development workshops. Intellectual Merits- Each student develops a
research project in collaboration with one of six faculty mentors who has an
active research program in the area of lifespan developmental psychology. The
faculty mentors have research programs that span developmental periods from
infancy to old age, and include developmental issues in perception, attention,
memory, judgment and decision-making, emotional and moral development, social
cognition, exercise and eating disorders, and parenting. In addition to working
on their research projects, REU students attend workshops and special topics
seminars designed to help them gain the technical knowledge and skills they need
to successfully complete their projects. The workshop topics include writing
research reports, experimental design and statistical analysis, giving oral and
poster presentations, ethical issues in the conduct of psychological research,
planning for graduate study in psychology, and balancing the demands of family
and career. Broader Impacts- The broader impacts of this project include the
provision of an experiential research learning opportunity for undergraduate
students, who might otherwise not have such an opportunity, increased
participation of ethnic and racial minorities in scientific research, and
enhanced prospects for the participants to pursue an academic and/or research
career in psychology or a related discipline. The targeted participants are
students at non-PhD. granting institutions.