* 0453572
* Brainstorming and Barnstorming:   An REU site at KSU
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2008
* David Auckly, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 09/30/2008
* USD 235,691.00

``Brainstorming and barnstorming,'' is an NSF funded research experience for
undergraduates site at Kansas State University that will run for three
consecutive years starting in the Summer of 2005. Each year the program will
accept 10 undergraduates and employ fourteen faculty for an eight-week program.
The primary objectives of this REU will be: 1)recruit new talent into
mathematics 2) help these students make the transition from problems that take
minutes to solve to problems that take years to solve; 3) expose these students
to a variety of mathematical ideas that they might not ordinarily encounter in
their studies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The academic portion of the program will
utilize three separate components to achieve these objectives. Each component is
an adaptation of a program that has already been a success in the Kansas State
University mathematics department. The first activity will be modeled on the KSU
problem seminar and problem-solving group. In the problem seminar, faculty
members show students problem-solving techniques. In the problem-solving group
students collaborate on challanging problems that may require the new
techniques. The second activity will introduce the participants to a problem
from applied mathematics. Each year this problem will be a simplification of a
problem coming from the aviation industry. The problem will be similar in scope
to the problems in theMathematical Contest in Modeling. After an initial
introduction to the applied problem, the students will be split into three
groups and each group will be asked to develop a solution to the problem. After
one week of progress, the groups will be brought back together and the various
approaches will be compared and synthesized. The faculty will suggest
improvements and the participants will agree on a plan of research for the
remaining weeks. The third activity will be a notions and open research problems
seminar in pure mathematics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There will be regular
``after math'' social activities. The highlight of these activities will be
flight training for interested students.