* 0453664
* Role of UDP-rhamnose and UDP-galacturonic acid biosynthetic genes in pectic synthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2012
* Maor Bar-Peled, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2012
* USD 799,999.00

The proposed research tests the hypothesis that the amount and location of
synthesis of nucleotide-sugar substrates plays a role in the regulation of
pectin synthesis. Pectin is a family of plant complex cell wall polysaccharides
involved in cell-cell adhesion, plant defense, plant development and cell-cell
communication. The long-term goal is to elucidate the biological roles of
pectins and the genes involved in their synthesis and assembly. Here the
regulation and synthesis of two immediate precursors of pectin synthesis, UDP-
galacturonic acid (UDP-GalA) and UDP-rhamnose (UDP-Rha), will be studied.
&lt;br/&gt;All pectins contain galacturonic acid in their backbones and the RG-I
backbone contains both GalA and Rha. RG-II also has Rha and GalA in its side
chains. Recombinant Arabidopsis enzymes that convert UDP-glucose to UDP-Rha and
recombinant epimerases that convert UDP-GlcA to UDP-GalA have been functionally
cloned and biochemically characterized by the PIs. Two gene families containing
three UDP-Rha synthases (URhaS) and six UDP-GlcA epimerase (UGlcAEp) isoforms
have been identified in Arabidopsis. The UGlcAEp isoforms are divided into three
distinct classes (A, B, and C) predicted to determine their subcellular
residency. The UDP-RhaSyn members contain a linker domain that differs among the
isoforms.&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of how these UDP-sugars are supplied to the
various pectin biosynthetic enzymes in different Golgi cisternae is crucial to
understand how pectins are synthesized. For example, it is not known if
different isoforms of UGlcAEp are localized to different endomembranes. Unlike
vertebrates, plants produce numerous nucleotide-sugar isozymes. There is
evidence that plants produce multiple NDP-sugar synthase isoforms to provide the
diverse activated sugars required for complex polysaccharide synthesis. To
elucidate the biological roles of UDP-GlcA epimerase and UDP-Rha synthase
isoforms the following research goals are proposed: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Determine the
enzymatic properties of the UGlcAEp and URhaS isoforms. Complete biochemical
characterization of each isoform will identify isoform-specific enzyme
properties. (2) Analyze the wall structure of T-DNA mutants to determine if any
of the UGlcAEp or URhaS isoforms are involved in the synthesis of a particular
pectic polymer. (3) Characterize the subcellular location of the native
UGlcAEp's (or of GFP fusions) and determine if the native URhaS's (or GFP
fusions) are associated with membranes. Antibodies raised toward distinct
isoforms will be used to establish by electron-microscopy whether different
isoforms are localized to unique endomembranes. Antibodies specific to UDP-
RhaSyn isoforms (or to GFP-fusions) will address whether the enzymes are soluble
or membrane associated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed
research. Both PIs have a strong commitment to educating undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdocs and currently have 6 minority researchers in
their labs. The PIs will use the University of Georgia Summer Undergraduate
Research Program (SURP) and the SURP-Bridge program to recruit future minority
students. The students funded by this research will receive training in cell
wall biochemistry, cell biology and molecular biology; a rare combination of
expertises that are required to effectively understand wall biology.
Intellectual merit- The proposed research tests the hypothesis that the
synthesis of pectin is regulated by the expression of specific nucleotide-sugar
synthase isoforms and will establish whether the nucleotide-sugar synthase
isoforms are localized to different Golgi cisternae. The mutant analyses are
expected to provide insight into the biological roles of pectin and provide
novel substrates for pectin biosynthetic glycosyltransferases.&lt;br/&gt;