* 0453392
* REU SITES PANEL: Undergraduate Research Experience in Computer Science
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Marietta Cameron, Birmingham Southern College
* Standard Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 01/31/2009
* USD 232,903.00

REU site: BACHE-REU Scholarship Program in Computer
Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program, BACHE-REU Scholarship in Computer
Science, is designed to&lt;br/&gt;provide undergraduate research opportunities
to full-time students attending any of the&lt;br/&gt;five member institutions in
the Birmingham Area Consortium of Higher Education.&lt;br/&gt;The five
institutions are Birmingham-Southern College, Miles College,
Samford&lt;br/&gt;University, the University of Montevallo, and the University
of Alabama in Birmingham.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The BACHE REU-CS program is a year-long experience in
which&lt;br/&gt;participants are selected from BACHE institutions to take part
in projects designed by&lt;br/&gt;faculty researchers from within the BACHE
consortium. Each participating institution&lt;br/&gt;will have an assigned
faculty coordinator who will publicize the project on his/her&lt;br/&gt;campus.
Fourteen students will be selected by acommittee of faculty mentors based
on&lt;br/&gt;compatible interest and skills outlined in available projects.
Accepted Scholars will&lt;br/&gt;spend up to 10 hours per week for theacademic
year and full time during the summer&lt;br/&gt;learning a wide variety of
disciplines and approaches. The students will participate in &lt;br/&gt;weekly
journal club meetings and monthly research-in-progress meetings. In addition,
&lt;br/&gt;the students will present their work in an inter-institutional
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
this program is to give BACHE REU - CS&lt;br/&gt;scholars the experience and
confidence to pursue graduate study in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;Several
factors shape the design of this program. 1) While all BACHE institutions
offer&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate computer science and/or management information
system majors, only&lt;br/&gt;the University of Alabama in Birmingham offers
graduate study in Computer Science.&lt;br/&gt;This program will increase the
research opportunities for students attending&lt;br/&gt;Birmingham-Southern
College, Miles, Samford, and the University of Montevallo. 2)&lt;br/&gt;BACHE
institutions represent a wide range of student profiles: Samford
and&lt;br/&gt;Birmingham-Southern College students are generally upper middle
class or affluent,&lt;br/&gt;UAB has a large first-generation college student
and international representation, Miles&lt;br/&gt;is an historically black
institution, and Montevallo is a state-supported liberal
arts&lt;br/&gt;institution. Interaction between faculty and students from such
disparate institutions will&lt;br/&gt;be of great benefit to all concerned, and
will respond to the NSF's stated goal of&lt;br/&gt;increasing research
participation by underrepresented constituencies.