* 0453460
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry at Santa Clara University
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Michael Carrasco, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilfredo Colon
* 05/31/2008
* USD 156,792.00

This Chemistry Division award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at Santa Clara University for the summers of 2005-2007. The program
director is Michael Carrasco who is assisted by co-PI Ram Subramaniam. Each
summer, eight undergraduates will be engaged in original, individual, ten-week
research projects in analytical, biological, inorganic, organic, and physical
chemistry. Each student will receive instruction directly from a faculty mentor,
use state-of-the-art instrumentation in recently modernized and newly-built
chemistry facilities, and learn the physical and intellectual techniques
necessary to become an independent researcher. Development of professional
communication skills will be fostered by weekly research meetings at which
students present and discuss their results and by having the students deliver a
formal presentation at a final symposium. Students will examine ethical issues
in scientific work through a weekly seminar series conducted by the faculty
mentors in concert with ethicists from Santa Clara University's Markkula Center
for Applied Ethics. This series increases awareness of ethical concerns in
science (ethical sensitivity) and imparts the knowledge and skills needed for
students to perform an ethical decision-making analysis (ethical judgment and
commitment). Student recruitment partnerships established with faculty at local,
high-minority-enrollment community colleges will serve as conduits for the
participation of students from underrepresented groups. Santa Clara University
will establish continuing mentoring relationships with these students with the
goal of ensuring their immediate entry into four-year colleges and universities
and their eventual entry into the chemistry workforce.