* 0453485
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Molecular Genetics
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2012
* Amanda Simcox, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2012
* USD 451,705.00

This REU program at Ohio State University (OSU) will immerse students in an
intense yet rewarding 10-week research experience that allows them to discover
firsthand the excitement of science. Research projects will involve molecular-
genetic and biochemical approaches to problems in biology. After an initial one-
week laboratory workshop, which will provide students with a set of basic
technical skills, REU participants will spend the next nine weeks working in one
of the participating laboratories. Students will investigate a specific research
problem and will be encouraged to develop independence in planning and
interpreting experiments. At the end of the summer, they will write a summary of
their experimental results and present them in a poster format. Students will
also attend journal clubs, workshops, and field trips to explore and discuss (i)
research, (ii) career options in science, (iii) cutting-edge technology at OSU
and in surrounding biotechnology centers, and (iv) ethical issues that they are
likely to face as scientists and as citizens. To promote interactions in relaxed
settings, there are planned biweekly social events. Students will be recruited
from institutions that focus primarily on undergraduate education. Students from
groups under-represented in science are strongly encouraged to apply. Indicators
of promise, other than GPA, will be taken into serious consideration in
selecting participants. More information is available at http://www.biosci.ohio-
state.edu/~mgmajors/html/mg_reu.html or by contact Deborah Dotter, (614)
292-8084, at dotter.4@osu.edu.