* 0453666
* Collaborative Research: LTREB  - Long-Term Ecosystem Responses to More Extreme Precipitation Patterns and Warming
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2011
* Scott Collins, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 97,929.00

Temperature and rainfall greatly influence the structure and function of
grasslands, making them particularly vulnerable to projected climate changes. In
the Central Plains mean temperatures are expected to increase and rainfall
patterns are predicted to become more variable and extreme, with an increased
frequency of large rainfall events and extended inter-rainfall droughts. The
ecological consequences of these changes are difficult to predict. This LTREB
project addresses the consequences of potential climate change by supporting the
long-term manipulation of rainfall and temperature in a unique experimental
facility (the Rainfall Manipulation Plots, RaMPs). For seven years, we have been
assessing the impacts of altered rainfall patterns (larger rain events with
longer inter-rainfall droughts, but no change in total precipitation amount) in
replicated, intact grassland plots. Our central hypothesis is that changes in
the timing of rainfall events will significantly alter temporal patterns and
depth distributions of soil moisture, with long-term consequences for plant,
community and ecosystem processes. In 2003 we added a warming treatment to
assess the consequences of a combination of more extreme rainfall patterns
(increased climatic variability) and increased temperatures (increased climatic
mean). The interactive effects of more extreme rainfall patterns and warmer
temperatures are expected to be complex, but will be critical for predicting the
sustainability of grassland resources and ecosystem services under future
climate scenarios. This LTREB project will support the training of undergraduate
and graduate students, provide new data to the scientific community, and inform
the general public on the importance of global change research.