* 0453892
* Chiefdom to Manor:  Using Ground Penetrating Radar on Viking Age and Medieval Archaeological Sites in Skagafjordur, Iceland
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2006
* Brian Damiata, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 39,969.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. John Steinberg and his
colleagues will conduct one season of archaeological fieldwork in Skagafjordur,
Northern Iceland, to test the effectiveness of Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR-
Slice) images for guiding the excavation of well-preserved but deeply buried
turf long-houses of the Viking Age.

Iceland was uninhabited until AD 874, when chieftains and wealthy farmers, along
with their household retinues, began to arrive in their open boats. Accounts of
the settlement and of the resulting chiefly society are given in semi-historical
sagas. However, these sagas are ambiguous, contradictory, or silent on several
critical socio-economic issues that would help scholars understand why this
Viking Age chiefly society was stable for so long and why, in the end, it
finally turned into a medieval manorial state society. Archaeological
investigations of the settlements can help by yielding information on economic
status of farmsteads. Unfortunately, the archaeology of Iceland is paradoxical:
in the fertile coastal lowlands early archaeological sites are difficult to
identify. Conversely, once found, preservation at these sites is often
outstanding. The funded research will specifically address this paradox with
GPR.

This research follows up on a successful NSF-funded subsurface survey, which
identified a series of previously unknown Viking Age sites. The survey results
indicate a dynamic settlement pattern sequence: large farmsteads were initially
established, they then later spun off smaller farmsteads, and finally many of
those larger farmsteads moved locations. One of the sites discovered during the
subsurface survey, at a farm called Glaumbaer, is probably the farmstead of the
family that returned from Greenland and the New World and told the story of Erik
The Red and his son Leif. This discovery has received substantial media
attention.

The proposed work is a prelude to future excavations. Excavation of turf
structures is notoriously difficult and time-consuming. GPR has the highest
resolution of any remote sensing technique and GPR-Slice images would aid
significantly in excavation. GPR-Slice imaging would be employed on several
Commonwealth sites in Skagafjordur (including Glaumbaer) and on two pagan burial
grounds. Excavations would follow, allowing us to test the GPR-Slice images and
determine their value for future research.

More generally, the ability to create accurate subsurface maps of Icelandic
buried turf architecture would have a substantial and beneficial effect on
archaeological practices in Iceland and in other regions with wet clayey soils.
Substantial areas of Iceland are under threat from development and accurate
subsurface maps of archaeological deposits would be useful to those agencies in
charge of historical preservation. This is especially important since our past
work has demonstrated that many of the earliest sites cannot be identified by
surface features.