* 0453187
* Collaborative Research: Productivity Differences, Firm Evolution, and Worker Reallocation
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Dale Mortensen, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2009
* USD 126,001.00

The purpose of the project is to construct and estimate an equilibrium model of
wages,&lt;br/&gt;employment and growth. The approach is based on a dynamic model
of firm innovation and&lt;br/&gt;evolution developed by Klette and Kortum
(2002). In their model, aggregate growth is viewed as&lt;br/&gt;the result of
research and development investments made by firms. The process is one
of&lt;br/&gt;Schumpeterian .creative destruction. in which new products replace
old ones as in the theories of&lt;br/&gt;Grossman and Helpman (1991) and Howitt
and Aghion (1992). There are several reasons for&lt;br/&gt;interest in the
approach. First, it is consistent with empirical evidence on research
and&lt;br/&gt;development investment made and patents filed by firms as wells as
the evolution of firm labor&lt;br/&gt;force size. Second, it provides a model of
labor demand that can be used to match the essential&lt;br/&gt;characteristics
of worker flows into an out of employing firms as well as the size distribution
of&lt;br/&gt;firms. Finally, the model establishes a clear link between labor
market policies, the evolution of&lt;br/&gt;productivity and economic growth and
employment.&lt;br/&gt;The first task among those proposed is to complete a
formulation of the model that can be&lt;br/&gt;estimated using matched employer-
employee data. The estimation strategy exploits the
stochastic&lt;br/&gt;structure of the model and the empirical fact that firms
differ with respect to the productivity of&lt;br/&gt;the inputs that they
employ. These differences allow one to estimate the cost of firm expansion
as&lt;br/&gt;well as the production function relationship between the quantity
and composition of workers in&lt;br/&gt;the labor force of a firm and its value
of output. Although initially the PI's intend to use the&lt;br/&gt;Danish Pay
and Performance data to estimate the structure of the model, they also hope to
estimate&lt;br/&gt;it using Longitudinal Research (LRD) and Longitudinal
Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD)&lt;br/&gt;U.S. databases. Cross country
comparisons are essential for the policy applications proposed.&lt;br/&gt;Given
the structural parameter estimates, the objective is to explore the model.s
quantitative&lt;br/&gt;implications for cyclical responses to aggregate shocks
and for the welfare effects of labor market&lt;br/&gt;policy. Does the model
explain the observed magnitudes of cyclical variation in
investment,&lt;br/&gt;employment, wages, and worker and job flows and the
dynamic relationships among them? What&lt;br/&gt;are the implied magnitudes of
the effects of payroll taxes, unemployment benefits, hiring&lt;br/&gt;subsidies
and employment protection on wages, employment and growth? The answer to
these&lt;br/&gt;questions is of critical importance to society at large. For
example, the research should provide&lt;br/&gt;new insight into why employment
and productivity growth in many European countries has&lt;br/&gt;lagged that of
the U.S. in recent decades.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigators will offer the opportunity for undergraduates to engage in
the&lt;br/&gt;activities of the project. The principal way in which they will do
so is as research assistants. In&lt;br/&gt;addition, they would like to develop
a macro-labor economics course, suitable for upper class&lt;br/&gt;majors as
well as graduate students in economics and policy analysis, based on the
project.s&lt;br/&gt;modeling approach and results.