* 0453209
* Proposal to the National Science Foundation for the Support of a Site REU Program at the European Laboratory for Particle Physics (CERN).
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Homer Neal, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2009
* USD 559,593.00

The Department of Physics of the University of Michigan will administer a
Research Experience for Undergraduates program at the European Organization for
Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva, Switzerland. The program will support 15
students recruited from large and small institutions across the US. The students
will spend 8-9 weeks at CERN participating in research projects, attending a
physics lecture series and interacting with European scientists and science
students. The program orientation contains components designed to help them
learn how to live in Geneva, instruction in computing, seminars on physics and
ethics along with tours of the CERN experiments. It ends with a Saturday day
trip to BERN to visit the small Einstein museum. The students will gather
frequently to give talks about their research activities, learning about the
protocols and techniques of physics presentations. Each day they also work with
assigned mentors on current physics problems. An onsite Coordinator is present
at CERN to assist the students with any matters related to program or personal
needs. Each student must give a final talk on their accomplishments and
participate in the program evaluation. CERN is one of the top international
Laboratories in the world. The students at CERN participate in the day-to-day
experimental development associated with their research group, deepening their
understanding of the relevant physics. They attend a lecture series organized by
CERN and presented by top scientists in the area. The work that the students do
is an important part of the ongoing physics at CERN, whether they work on an
anti-matter experiment like ATRAP or ATHENA or work on detector design and
construction for groups like ATLAS and CMS. Being in the international research
atmosphere of CERN and working on cutting edge problems is an intellectual
apprenticeship that produces a student who understands the nature of
international scientific collaboration and is able to function effectively in a
collaborative environment. This award is co-funded by the Division of Physics
and the Office of International Science and Engineering.