* 0453498
* SCI:   REU Site:    Undergraduate Research Experience in Computational Science and Cybersecurity
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Shou-Hsuan Huang, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 02/28/2009
* USD 270,434.00

Two areas of increasing national importance, namely Information Assurance and
Computational Science, are the foci of the Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site at the Department of Computer Science of the
University of Houston. Each year, ten students will be recruited from
institutions that offer limited research opportunities. Emphasis will be placed
on attracting underrepresented groups in Science and Engineering. The program
emphasizes steering non-traditional students into research, reinforcing their
interest in computer science, and preparing them for graduate school. The
specific program objectives are to: 1) provide students the opportunity to
develop competency in scientific research through meaningful undergraduate
involvement in strong research projects; 2) enable students, in collaboration
with mentors, to produce research results during their summer program and
follow-up interactions, which will be written up in a format acceptable for
conference or journal publication; and 3) help participants sustain and increase
their interest in research careers after their on-campus summer, through
continuing contacts and research participation as well as presentation of
research results. These activities will be integrated with social activities
appropriate for a diverse group of undergraduates and with seminars on career
development, ethics in computer science, methods of literature search, and
practical advice on questions related to graduate school, which foster the
professional development of the students, thereby making a lasting impact beyond
the 10 weeks they spend at the University of Houston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project derive from actively recruiting ten students
from colleges and universities with high minority enrollment and those that
offer limited research opportunities. Many talented students in such
institutions are unaware of the possibilities for a research career or lack
accessible opportunities to explore them first hand. Emphasis is on attracting
underrepresented minorities and females, a cohort increasingly underrepresented
in computer science. The program should attract new, non-traditional students
into research, reinforce their interest in computer science, retain these
students in their academic programs, and prepare them for graduate school. The
University of Houston is a comprehensive research university and one of the most
ethnically diversified in the nation. This REU site is supported by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;