* 0453731
* Cantilevers and Scanner for Biological AFM
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2006,12/31/2009
* Frederick Sachs, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 12/31/2009
* USD 525,000.00

This award supports refinement of a new, low mass cantilever for use in atomic
force microscopy (AFM), and the related development of a novel scan head. AFM is
uniquely capable of producing very high resolution data in real time using
samples held in a biological environment. AFM measures the surface structure of
samples by the effect of the surface on a small flexible probe, called the
cantilever, whose motion is affected by the atomic force exerted by the sample.
The effect on the cantilever is measured by deflection of a laser beam using the
optical system in the scan head. Biological AFM is typically carried out in
water, and the damping of its motion by the water determines the response of the
cantilever. Commercially available soft cantilevers are long and experience
substantial drag in water; shorter cantilevers experience less drag. Preliminary
work has led to a prototype torsion cantilever that is about 20% the length of
commercially available cantilevers, and has a resonant frequency in water about
an order of magnitude higher than commercially available cantilevers. With the
support of this award, the design of the prototype and the fabrication process
for making it will both be improved substantially. To facilitate use of the new
tip in combination with other measurement tools, such as the patch clamp, the PI
will also develop a smaller scan head. This will permit simultaneous use of a
standard optical microscope, required for the patch clamp procedure, in
combination with the AFM. The size reduction will be accomplished by use of a
GRIN lens; the optical properties of such lenses derive from the structure of
the glass used in its construction, rather than from the shape of the lens as
with standard lenses. The GRIN lens will act as the cantilever support while
also focusing the laser beam and collecting the deflected light. The proposed
cantilever design is expected to be useful in biology, physical sciences and
engineering. The scan head should also be of general utility, and by being
compact, is expected to improve background noise performance in any setting.