* 0453804
* Magnetic Correlations Through Metal-Insulator Transition in Strongly Correlated Electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Pengcheng Dai, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2009
* USD 330,000.00

***NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT***&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how complex behavior
emerges from simple and basic laws is one of the areas of current interest in
Condensed Matter Physics. This individual investigator project addresses the
fundamental physical processes that give rise to novel phenomena, such as high-
transition temperature superconductivity and colossal magnetoresistance (where a
material displays a very large change in its electrical resistance when exposed
to a magnetic field), resulting from the collective behavior of electrons.
Materials in the family known as transition metal oxides (TMOs) exhibit these
collective phenomena. Understanding these phenomena will not only enhance our
knowledge of basic science, but also gives us the ability to design materials
with novel and predictable properties. The objective of the program is to
explore and understand the microscopic origins of various phases in the TMOs
using neutrons as a probe. Neutron scattering experiments will be performed
mostly at the upgraded high-flux isotope reactor (HFIR) at the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory (ORNL) and on the new spallation neutron source at ORNL. The
project will also utilize other world-class facilities in the U.S. and Europe
when similar capabilities are unavailable at ORNL. The impact of this research
program will include the training of the next generation of neutron scatters and
elucidating the nature of the exotic properties of the TMOs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***TECHNICAL ABSTRACT***&lt;br/&gt;This
individual investigator project will establish an experimental program
integrating neutron scattering experiments with lab based materials efforts. The
aim of the project is to further our understanding of the phase transition from
a Mott insulator to a metallic/superconducting state in transition metal oxides
(TMOs). The objective of this research program is to explore and understand the
microscopic origins of various phases in the TMOs using neutron scattering as a
primary tool. The project will focus on electron-doped high-Tc superconductors
and colossal magneto-resistance (CMR) manganese-oxides. The program has two
components: advanced synthesis with initial materials characterization and
neutron scattering. Neutron scattering, the core part of this research program,
will be used to study the exotic spin and lattice dynamical properties of the
highly correlated electron materials. Most experiments will be performed at the
newly upgraded high-flux isotope reactor (HFIR) at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory (ORNL). However, other world-class facilities in the U.S. and Europe
will be utilized when similar capabilities are unavailable at HFIR. Students
will be trained in state-of-the art materials synthesis and neutron scattering
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;