* 0453242
* Effects of Migration and Industrialization on Health and Families in Panzhihua, China
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Stevan Harrell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2008
* USD 155,470.00

Since the 1980s, the number of rural-to-urban migrants in China's cities has
been estimated at one hundred million at any one time, i.e. more than the total
population of any European country. Most of these are temporary migrants who
return to their communities of origin. The effects on individuals, families, and
communities in these places of origin are expected to be far-reaching and many-
sided. This project will survey 300 households in three rural communities in
Panzhihua Municipality, Sichuan Province, China, in order to describe and
explain effects of recent labor migration from the communities at the
individual, family, and community levels. At the individual level, the research
will examine the health effects of migration and the changes in values stemming
from exposure to urban society. At the family level, it will examine changes in
family economy, in reproductive behavior, and in marriage practices. At the
community level, it will examine changes in community leadership and in class
stratification within the communities. The research will build upon previous
survey research about family economy, family organization, individual
educational and labor histories, and individual reproductive histories conducted
in 1988 by the PI in collaboration with Sichuan University and the Panzhihua
Artifacts Bureau.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The opportunity to return to communities
that were studied in the late 1980s and to see what has changed since labor
migration has become common presents a rare chance to observe migration effects
against a known background of the communities' previous realities. In addition,
because the three communities are so different, and because there differences
are so well-documented, we can come to understand how a general social
phenomenon such as migration has effected different communities
differently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research are
related to the attention paid in the press and by international organizations to
the working conditions of Chinese factory laborers, why they migrate and what
effect their migration, the money they earn, and their return to their villages
has on their lives and their families' lives. Knowing the broad range of
effects, we should be better able to formulate policies toward investment in
China and toward international labor relations. In addition, since two of the
three villages to be studied are populated by members of minority ethnic groups,
study of whether these migrants feel more or less integrated into Chinese
society after their migration experience will help gauge the potential for
increase or reduction of ethnic tensions, which are also a major worry for
today's Chinese state. &lt;br/&gt;