* 0454558
* Mantle Composition and Dynamics as Inferred from the Structure of the Upper Mantle Discontinuities
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Hersh Gilbert, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 01/31/2007
* USD 47,165.00

0454558&lt;br/&gt;Gilbert&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upper mantle discontinuities
at the nominal depths of 410 and 660 km demarcate the upper and lower bounds of
the mantle transitions zone and provide important constraints for constructing
thermal and compositional models of the Earth. As seismic processing techniques
and data density have improved, images of discontinuity structure have revealed
more heterogeneous structure. These heterogeneities include variations in the
depth, sharpness, and impedance contrast across the discontinuities over
distances of just a few 100 km. Such variations require a revision of mantle
compositional models and our understanding of factors responsible for
discontinuity depths. This project is aimed at determining the depths and
structure of the upper mantle discontinuities from the initial USArray data and
developing techniques to study the degree to which anisotropy may be present at
transition zone depths. The scientific goals of this work will be achieved by
undertaking a systematic investigation into mantle structure in order to provide
a seismic framework for future mantle models by estimating the sharpness of the
upper mantle discontinuities and assessing the variability of discontinuity
sharpness. Additionally, the azimuthal dependence of seismic properties in the
mantle will be investigated in order to determine whether it can be due to
anisotropy at the base of the upper mantle or transition zone. These
observations will then be integrated with, and compared to, constraints from
mineral physics experiments in order to improve models of mantle composition,
and water content.