* 0454597
* SHINE: Comparison and Assessment of the Flux Cancellation and Breakout Models for Coronal Mass Ejection (CME) Initiation
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Zoran Mikic, Leidos, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 02/29/2008
* USD 316,763.00

A key goal of the SHINE program and of solar physics in general is to understand
the initiation of coronal mass ejections (CMEs). These immense eruptions propel
plasma and magnetic flux outward from the sun, and are believed to be the
primary cause of major geomagnetic storms. At recent SHINE workshops, two
mechanisms, "flux cancellation" and "breakout," have received prominent
attention as the possible trigger for CMEs. The workshops have featured lively
discussions arguing either in favor of or against these mechanisms for specific
events, but no consensus has been reached concerning the plausibility of either
mechanism. The central difficulty is that most of the simulations that have been
put forth as examples of flux cancellation or breakout have been too idealized
to address the key features observed in the specific
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the proposers describe a three-
year program to investigate the flux cancellation and breakout models of CMEs.
The overall goal is to determine whether either of these models can produce
eruptions for parameters similar to real events. Specifically, the PI and his
team will: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Develop MHD models of the corona for the time
of two well studied events: the May 12, 1997 CME event and the July 14, 2000
"Bastille Day" event;&lt;br/&gt;* Investigate the magnetic field topology of the
configurations when solar wind is included, especially changes to the location
of separatrix surfaces (which are crucial for the breakout model);&lt;br/&gt;*
Study whether flux changes leading up to the event with the SOHO MDI instrument
are sufficient to produce eruptions;&lt;br/&gt;* Diagnose the role of the
competing effects of reconnection through separatrix surfaces (breakout) versus
reconnection at the photosphere (flux cancellation) in producing eruptions;
and&lt;br/&gt;* Assess each mechanism's feasibility as the trigger for these
events.