* 0454843
* The Mutual Interaction Between Ice Production and Ocean Heat Transport in a Greenhouse Warming Scenario
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Cecilia Bitz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 02/28/2009
* USD 324,406.00

Most global climate models predict an increase in the northward oceanic heat
transport north of about 60 N in future climate scenarios as compared to the
present day. This increase in heat transport is reminiscent of explanations
posed for recent observed warming in the Atlantic layer in the western Eurasian
Basin of the Arctic Ocean. An implication is that warmings like those that
occurred in the recent past, which have been attributed to wind variations by
some, could also occur in the future due to greenhouse gas
forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work hypothesizes that the increase in heat
transport in the future greenhouse scenario is in response to the transition
from perennial to first year ice in the Barents Sea and Arctic Ocean, and the
attendant increase in heat loss and brine rejection in fall and winter. Sea ice
production rejects brine, driving gravitational convection, which creates dense
shelf waters and encourages heat and mass exchange from the Atlantic layer to
the surface. If the hypothesis is correct, the ice production-heat transport
interaction must outweigh the increase in stability from increased precipitation
and runoff in the Arctic in a warmer climate. Such a mechanism would further
accelerate the transition from perennial to first year ice and reduce the
overall sea ice cover in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations with the
Community Climate System Model Version 3 (CCSM3), a fully coupled atmosphere-
ocean model that explicitly resolves the sea ice thickness distribution, show
that northward oceanic heat transport (and the meridional overturning
circulation) peak at about the same time that ice production peaks in the Arctic
Ocean in a future scenario. This is a two part study: the first objective is to
investigate the reason that heat transport increases into the Nordic Seas and
Arctic Ocean in future scenarios with global climate models and assess the
consequences of this increase for the sea ice cover. The second objective is to
understand the sensitivity of the sea ice thickness distribution to increased
greenhouse gases, and its relation, if any, to the increase oceanic heat
transport into the Arctic in future climate change scenarios. This investigation
of a positive feedback between sea ice-ocean system may explain the increase in
oceanic heat transport into the Arctic that is seen in greenhouse warming
scenarios with climate models. A transformation from perennial sea ice to first
year sea ice in the Arctic, and the attendant increase in ice production is the
first step of the feedback process. This work will also develop a general method
for predicting the change in the ice thickness distribution in response to a
climate perturbation.&lt;br/&gt;