* 0454525
* Collaborative Research: Structural-Petrologic Characterization of the San Andreas Fault Zone in the SAFOD Drill Holes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Frederick Chester, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2008
* USD 119,982.00

0454525&lt;br/&gt;Chester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
objective of SAFOD is to understand the physical and chemical processes of
&lt;br/&gt;deformation and earthquake generation within an active, plate-
bounding fault. Comprehensive &lt;br/&gt;understanding will be possible only if
the structure and geochemistry of the fault zone are &lt;br/&gt;thoroughly
documented and integrated with other data. This collaborative effort will
characterize &lt;br/&gt;the composition, structure and deformation mechanisms of
the San Andreas fault at the &lt;br/&gt;Observatory. Observations of core and
cuttings from the pilot hole and first two phases of drilling
&lt;br/&gt;(2004-2005), and of samples from fault exposures near the drill site,
will be integrated with &lt;br/&gt;geophysical and hydrologic data presented in
other SAFOD studies to address key questions &lt;br/&gt;regarding structure,
physical properties and mechanics of the fault, and to test hypotheses of
&lt;br/&gt;earthquake rupture dynamics, energy balance, and fault weakening.
Work includes determining &lt;br/&gt;fault rock lithology, and distributions and
orientations of fractures, secondary faults, veins, and &lt;br/&gt;particle
sizes, and targeting key structures for detailed microstructure, mineralogy, and
&lt;br/&gt;geochemistry analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;