* 0454203
* CRI: Collaborative Research :  A Community Resource to Support Controlled Experimentation with Program Analysis and Software Testing Techniques
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2010
* Matthew Dwyer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 06/30/2010
* USD 874,636.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program: NSF 04-588 CISE Computing Research
Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;Title: CRI: Collaborative: Next Generation CiteSeer
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lead Proposal: CNS 0454203&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gregg
Rothermel&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Nebraska-
Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal CNS 0454348&lt;br/&gt;PI: John M.
Hatcliff&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Kansas State University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will create and disseminate a repository of
software-related artifacts sufficient to support rigorous controlled
experimentation with program analysis and software testing techniques for a
broad community of researchers and educators. Software written in the C and Java
programming languages along with supporting elements such as multiple versions,
faults, test requirements, specifications, test cases, functional behavior
specifications, and state-machine models of program behavior will be included.
Methods to retrieve program information will be developed. This resource will be
an enabling technology for controlled experimentation for program analysis,
software testing, and education in software engineering and software testing.
Broader impacts of this project include the impact of the resource on enabling a
broad range of research and improving capacity for software education in a wide
range of institutions.&lt;br/&gt;universities.&lt;br/&gt;