* 0454717
* Collaborative Research:    Water Storage and Routing Within Glaciers Via Planar Voids, a New Model of Glacier Hydrology
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* William Clement, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 02/28/2010
* USD 297,827.00

As the climate warms, meltwater hydrology and water's influence on glacier
motion will be an increasingly important aspect of thermal and dynamic processes
of large ice masses. With influence on sea level, ocean circulation, and the
general climate system, the sliding stability of ice sheets has strong bearing
on globally important processes and, thus, warrants full understanding.
Unfortunately, in situ investigations of the mechanical linkages between water
input and enhanced motion are difficult on thick ice sheets. This problem
motivates interest in the hydrology and dynamics of smaller mountain glaciers,
where the manageable scale can be utilized to investigate key glaciological
processes. We cannot expect to ever fully understand basal motion without
advancing our knowledge of the hydrological processes in operation within and
beneath glaciers. Understanding of these processes will greatly aid our ability
to interpret time/space variability in glacier motion, and ultimately, our
ability to predict future changes to glaciers or reconstruct climate history
under given glacial scenarios. With these goals in mind, the Principal
Investigators will focus on advancing our knowledge of a critical link between
hydrological processes and basal sliding: mechanisms of englacial water storage
and routing of surface water to the bed. Recent work at Bench Glacier and work
at the polythermal Storglaciaren have revealed an englacial network of planar
void spaces. Because these are very different glaciers, it is probable that void
spaces are a ubiquitous englacial feature. Water has been observed flowing
through the voids by both groups. Englacial water flow through a fracture
network is a hydrological model in stark contrast to the currently accepted
model of an arborescent network of semi-circular conduits (Rothlisberger
conduits). The Principal Investigators will test the hypothesis: planar voids
are an important part of the englacial hydrological system, capable of storing
and routing water from the surface to the bed and perhaps, along the bed. This
work will have strong implications for their ability to model and predict the
routing of water from a glacier surface to its bed. This work will be conducted
at Bench Glacier, Alaska, where there is a known englacial void network. They
will test their hypothesis using a series of borehole experiments and
geophysical imaging techniques. Many of the geophysical experiments will utilize
data acquisition and processing methodologies that have not previously been
applied to glaciers. Hence, this work will advance our understanding of both
glaciological processes and shallow geophysical imaging.

