* 0454676
* When Juveniles are Tried as Adults: The Effects of Voir Dire on Jury Composition and Juror Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2004,03/31/2006
* Margaret Bull Kovera, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 03/31/2006
* USD 125,182.00

This research will examine whether voir dire results in a more conviction prone
jury in cases where juveniles are tried in adult courts. Juveniles who are
transferred to adult court have the same rights as adult criminal defendants,
but are the rights of juvenile offenders to a representative and impartial jury
abrogated when they are transferred to adult court? This research will use four
studies to address the following questions: Do judges ask veniremembers
questions about the possible penalty during voir dire in youthful offender cases
and what effect do these questions have on juror decisions? Are juvenile waiver
attitudes correlated with demographic variables such that minority group members
are likely to be excluded from jury service because of their anti-waiver
attitudes? Does the inclusion of jurors with anti-waiver attitudes increase the
ability of a jury to evaluate the quality of the evidence presented? Finally,
does exposure to voir dire questions in juvenile offender cases result in a more
conviction-prone jury? To answer these questions, the principal investigator
will collect and content analyze transcripts from a sample of cases in which
juveniles were tried in adult courts. This initial exploration will allow the
researchers to characterize the typical voir dire that occurs in these cases. In
Study 2, the researchers will examine whether particular attitudes and
demographic characteristics are correlated with anti-juvenile waiver attitudes.
In Study 3, a jury simulation will be conducted in which half of the juries
include jurors with anti-waiver attitudes and half do not, varying the strength
of the evidence. To investigate whether exposure to "juvenile qualification"
produces a more conviction prone jury, the researchers will expose some jurors
to a simulated voir dire in a juvenile offender case and other jurors to a voir
dire that lacks questions about juvenile waiver attitudes in Study 4. The
results of these four studies will provide information about the voir dire
process in juvenile waiver cases.