* 0454432
* CRI: Scalable Embedded Wireless Sensor Network Evaluation Facility
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Sosale Sastry, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 07/31/2010
* USD 1,343,017.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CNS 0454432&lt;br/&gt;PI: David E.
Culler&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California-Berkeley
&lt;br/&gt;Program: NSF 04-588 CISE Computing Research
Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;Title: CRI:Scalable Embedded Wireless Sensor Network
Evaluation Facility&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Investigators at UC Berkeley will
build an inter-related family of flexible, large-scale evaluation facilities for
wireless embedded sensor networks that will enable empirical evaluation of
critical protocols at a scale and completeness that is not possible today. This
will allow rigorous testing of protocols and distributed data processing
algorithms under real conditions of noise, interference, loss, and variations in
connectivity that are extremely difficult to capture accurately under
simulation. They will build an indoor, large-scale set of over a thousand
heterogeneous wireless nodes with extensive logging capabilities. The testbed
will utilize the newest generation of Berkeley motes, redesigned for these
testbeds, as well as newly developed, embedded Linux-class nodes. This will be
complemented with a dedicated server side infrastructure to schedule
experiments, operate nodes, store and analyze the experimental data, and emulate
enterprise capabilities that interact with sensor networks. Traces of sensor
data streams will also be stored in the infrastructure and replayed into the
wireless network to allow repeatable experimentation with realistic in-network
data processing algorithms. In addition to the sheer number of nodes, the
facility will stress the heterogeneity likely to be encountered in practical
deployments by including higher-powered nodes, higher bandwidth networks, and
mobile motes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure will enable research in
Wireless Sensor Networks which represent a very new and important class of
networked systems. Issues to be addressed include routing, information
dissemination techniques, energy efficient communication protocols and reliable
communication with intermittent connectivity, the use of vision and high
bandwidth sensors, mobile and high power nodes in heterogeneous WSN, and
networked information theory. Finally, approaches to security in WSN such as
analysis of key pre-distribution protocols, secure routing, secure aggregation
and privacy research will be highlighted on the testbed. In addition to
supporting about 25 researchers at Berkeley, the testbed network will become
available to the broader research community through Internet login or on-site
visits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the project include exploring
technology for eventual deployment of a new information infrastructure to a
large number of critical physical infrastructures, including electric power,
heating and cooling of buildings, water, oil and gas pipelines, refineries, etc.
This project will examine high confidence services: reliable, fault tolerant and
resistant to attack. These same capabilities represent a potential breakthrough
for many areas of science, including environmental monitoring, civil
engineering, eco-physiology and others.&lt;br/&gt;