* 0454840
* Connecting Cyberspace to Place: Understanding the Evolution of Transactions and Value Chains in Electronic Commerce
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2011
* Matthew Zook, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2011
* USD 143,999.00

Connecting Cyberspace to Place: Understanding the Evolution of Transactions
&lt;br/&gt;and Value Chains in Electronic Commerce &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Matthew
A. Zook (PI) &lt;br/&gt;Thomas R. Leinbach (co-PI)&lt;br/&gt;University of
Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines the forms, processes and
geographies of E-commerce across a diverse set of firms in the U.S. More
specifically, it examines how E-commerce contributes to firms' competitive
advantage through the (re)formulation of value chains (comparing physical to
virtual) and thereby affects existing geographies of production, distribution
and sales. The first objective examines the degree to which structural
characteristics of manufacturing firms in select industries relate to engagement
in E-commerce. A second objective explores why firms engage in E-commerce and
how E-commerce evolves in their operations. The third and paramount objective is
to understand how the adoption of a particular form or model of E-commerce
alters the nature of a firm's value chain. Of special interest are the spatial
manifestations of this reconfiguration and the question of whether value chains
and changes in their geographies differ among industries, companies and
products. The project uses a series of sequential and complementary
methodological efforts to accomplish the research objectives which have been set
out. First E-commerce data is analyzed for a sample of individual firms from the
Census Bureau's Annual Survey of Manufacturers. Second a more detailed
interlocked mail/telephone survey of E-commerce is conducted using an additional
sample of firms. This survey will provide evidence of the motivations for
engaging in E-commerce, the sequential process of expansion, as well as, details
on the linkages and the changing structure of value chains under E-commerce.
Third, a series of in-depth interviews will be conducted from a select set of
the above sampled firms in order to deepen information and findings gathered
from the mail survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of the research can
be characterized in a variety of ways. First and foremost, virtually none of the
existing literature in geography and business/economics has examined E-commerce
(and changes in firms' value chains) from a spatial or structural perspective.
To address this deficiency, the project makes the following important
contributions: (1) The provision of new insights on the incidence and magnitude
of E-commerce and its relationship to firm structural and operational
characteristics across manufacturing firm types. (2) The creation of new
knowledge on the changing nature, both structural and geographical, of the
interrelations between physical and virtual value chains by firm types across
business models. (3) Increased understanding of how E-commerce enhances specific
business operations and increases firms' competitive advantage; how efficiency
gains are achieved; how E-commerce affects the range of products a firm offers;
and how E-commerce affects networks of relationships between suppliers,
customers and competitors. Finally, (4) the research will contribute to the
literature on the theory of the firm, particularly from the broad "embeddedness
and networks" perspectives. The project will show how E-commerce is affecting
the spatial relations of firms with their suppliers/markets and will allow
assessment of how E-commerce innovations in firms may impact the regions in
which they are located. Finally the project results will be important to firms,
local governments and development agencies which are now exploring the use and
impact of E-commerce. Given the innovative capacity of E-commerce, these actors
are eager to learn how it may affect their business models, location of jobs,
and value chains. &lt;br/&gt;