* 0454030
* MIP: Analysis of endophytic colonization by Klebsiella penumoniae 342 in wheat
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Eric Triplett, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2010
* USD 335,000.00

The interior of plants is a vast unexplored habitat for bacteria. Every gram of
growing plant tissue on earth is probably home to at least 10,000 bacteria. The
contribution of these bacteria to plant growth and development is largely
unknown. However, recent evidence shows that one of these bacteria can provide
fixed nitrogen to wheat, the most important crop in the world. Further
understanding of this nitrogen fixation in wheat may one day permit the
elimination of nitrogen fertilization to agronomic grasses in the United States
such as corn, wheat, barley, rice, and others. Nitrogen fertilization is very
expensive to farmers and pollutes ground water supplies. In this work, the means
by which this nitrogen-fixing bacterium enters wheat plants will be determined.
The effects of this bacterium on other bacteria present within wheat plants will
also be investigated. In addition, the basis of the ability of some bacteria to
enter plants better than others will be explored. With this new knowledge,
systems may be designed to improve the amount of nitrogen provided by the
nitrogen-fixing bacterium to plants so that these systems may one day be applied
to agriculture.

This work also has a significant educational component. A national curriculum
in microbiology will be prepared for a target audience of 1 million 4H youth
nationally. The objective of this effort is to provide science-based information
on those issues that are affected by the wide array of bacteria in our
environment including emerging diseases, food safety, bioterrorism, water
quality, and even climate change. With this curriculum, a large number of
American youth will be equipped to make informed decisions on these issues. Over
time, this curriculum may also be available to middle schools nationally.