* 0454887
* Supramolecular Formation, Complexation and Dynamics in Colloidal Polyelectrolyte-Surfactant Complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2005,10/31/2009
* Benjamin Chu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 10/31/2009
* USD 350,000.00

The emphasis in this project will be on soluble colloidal polyelectrolyte-
surfactant complexes (CPSCs). The complex formation and supra-molecular assembly
of colloidal particles with condensed and encapsulated polyelectrolytes, e.g.,
DNA fragments, require the introduction of more challenging designs on the
nature of the surfactant and the surfactant molecular topology. Star tri-arm
surfactants are proposed which consist of a hydrophilic block , a charged
soluble block, and an additional biodegradable and flexible hydrophobic bloc
(B), and which have the potential of being universal surfactants having micelle
formation properties in both hydrophobic and hydrophilic environments. Kinetic
processing is an essential element to manipulate the complex formation due to
strong electrostatic interactions. Time-resolved observation of the binding
process should play an important role in reaching a better understanding of the
mechanism of C-PSC supra-molecular formation. The biodegradable hydrophobic
block (B) in the surfactant will be designed to serve several useful functions.
It can modify the hydrophobic surface of the PSC segments. The CPSC can thus be
designed to be soluble in both the aqueous and hydrophobic environments. The
presence of a duality of hydrophobic and hydrophilic chains on the PSC surface
could increase the protection for the polyelectrolyte (e.g., DNA) in the CPSC.
Furthermore the biodegradable block will be designed to destabilize the CPSCs
for eventual release of the polyelectrolyte. Star tri-armed surfactants have
synthesized . Fundamental studies will be carried out with emphasis on (i) the
micellization of this new type of surfactants in selective solvents, (ii) their
directed complex formation with polyelectrolytes in aqueous and hydrophobic
environments, and (iii) the disassembly of CPSCs, in terms of (a) surfactant
morphology and architecture, including chemical composition of the three blocks,
total block length, and block ratio, (b) pH, (c) ionic strength, (d) the nature
of counter ions, as well as solvent quality, concentration and temperature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study deals with
scientific investigations on the micro-phase behavior of polyelectrolyte
condensation and encapsulation, using surfactants that can undergo hydrophobic
and electrostatic interactions. The findings should provide new pathways on the
design of better carriers for polyelectrolytes in general and for DNA fragments
in particular. It could have an impact on the use of block copolymers as
vehicles for gene and drug delivery, based on the coil-to-globule transition and
the self-assembly of more complex block copolymers with oppositely charged
polyelectrolyte. Its biological implication for in-vitro non-viral gene therapy
applications could be especially fruitful from the polymer science
viewpoint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach
has potential for practical applications to drug and gene delivery, as well as
tissue engineering. These are important topics that can take advantage of our
knowledge in materials science for applications to biology and medicine.
Furthermore, the project has unique and natural connections among the
disciplines of polymer synthesis (chemistry), polymer processing (engineering)
and characterization (physics), as well as polymer theory with specific timely
objectives. The fertile grounds are appealing subject matters for the next
generation of scientists and engineers, from high school to post-doctoral
students.&lt;br/&gt;