* 0454814
* (SGER) Cascading Consequences:  Adaptive Management and the Science Behind Dam Decommissioning in Fossil Creek, Arizona
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Jane Marks, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 08/31/2007
* USD 66,000.00

With NSF funding, an educational documentary will be produced, capitalizing on
the upcoming restoration of Fossil Creek, Arizona where a large hydropower dam
will be decommissioned this December. The documentary, Cascading Consequences,
speaks to the complex environmental issues that inform large restoration
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project has four
components. First, the documentary will integrate ecosystem ecology with geology
by showing how changes in the fluvial geomorphology of the stream could affect
decomposition and primary productivity. Second, the video will document the
biological implications of prior water management by showing the ecological
effects of the hydropower dam on stream ecosystems. Third, the video will show
the consequences of progressive water resource management, incorporating
ecosystem services. Fourth, the video will highlight how organisms, including
humans, are interconnected in food webs, illustrating how management decisions
ripple through food webs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
proposal have three components. First, the video will inform the general public
television audience about the scientific rationale behind dam removals, and will
objectively discuss both the positive and negative consequences of dam
installation and decommissioning to aquatic ecosystems. Second, the video will
provide a venue for university professors to use a case study to illustrate how
basic research and research tools including stable isotopes, decomposition
experiments, food web studies, and natural history surveys can be applied to
management decisions in a real world scenario. Third, by providing accompanying
educational materials for high school teachers, this project will reach a new
generation of students preparing them to be leaders in ecosystem restoration,
breaking down barriers between scientists, policy makers, and resource
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;