* 0454583
* Characterizing a Target Locus of a Behavioral Genetic Hierarchy
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ginger Carney, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 08/31/2007
* USD 414,093.00

GINGER E. CARNEY 0321473&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LAY ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Animals
display a suite of behaviors necessary for their existence and reproductive
success. Many researchers have attempted to correlate specific human genes with
behaviors, but the complexity of genetic and environmental interactions, as well
as the multiple functions of these genes, makes it difficult to definitively
identify them. Determining the genetic basis of behaviors is an important
intellectual challenge because our current knowledge does not allow us to
understand how gene expression results in particular behavioral
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;Reproduction in Drosophila melanogaster is an excellent
system for the study of complex behaviors. One recently identified locus
necessary for egg-laying behavior, logjam (loj), is expressed in the female
Drosophila central nervous system and ovaries. This gene's predicted protein
product shares homology with a family of important intracellular trafficking
proteins that are evolutionarily conserved across a variety of taxa, including
mammals, yeasts, and plants. &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to
characterize loj and its role in egg-laying behavior. The proposed experiments
use a combination of molecular, genetic and cellular techniques to arrive at
answers to these questions and to further general understanding of principles
governing genetic and molecular networks that must function to specify a
behavioral outcome.&lt;br/&gt;This research program will enhance research at the
Georgia Institute of Technology because the Principle Investigator will provide
expertise in genetic model systems and developmental biology. One important goal
of this research plan is to contribute to the training of undergraduate and
graduate scientists. The genetic control of behavior is an interesting topic to
the public at large, so the PI will use this focus as a means to engage non-
scientists, particularly children and teachers, in scientific issues by talking
at elementary schools and opening my lab to summer projects for K-12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;