* 0454056
* CRI: A Core Experimental Facility for Computer Vision and Artificial Intelligence
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Ronald Parr, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Urban
* 06/30/2007
* USD 299,848.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CNS 0454056&lt;br/&gt;PI: Carlo
Tomasi&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Duke University&lt;br/&gt;Program: NSF 04-588 CISE
Computing Research Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;CRI: A Core Experimental Facility
for Computer Vision and Artificial Intelligence &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Duke
University will construct a facility for the measurement of three-dimensional
shapes and the motion of human bodies, to be used for both training and
performance evaluation of computer vision and artificial intelligence
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;Shapes will be measured with a high-quality laser range
finder. Structured light, stereoscopic and monocular images of the same scene or
object also will be collected from sensor systems of varying quality, and whose
positions and orientations relative to the laser range finder are precisely
known through calibration. Similarly, the motions in space of one or a few
people will be recorded with an accurate motion capture system, as well as with
several sets of color and black-and-white cameras and structured-light systems
recording at the same time. Research project on stereo vision, robot
localization, visualization, gesture analysis and dermatology are
planned.&lt;br/&gt;The laser range finder and motion-capture system provide
accurate training and ground-truth data, and the other sensors yield the type of
input that a computer vision algorithm or an artificial intelligence inference
system would use to determine or reason about a scene or an event. Because of
the broad need for this data, the proposal also envisions the creation of a
course on the principles underlying sensing and geometric measurements whose
materials will also be made public, and of a web repository for the measurement
data collected both at the facility and elsewhere. &lt;br/&gt;