* 0454372
* Collaborative Research: Crustal Deformation Measurements and a Multidisciplinary Geophysical Investigation of the Rio Grande Rift
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2011
* Mousumi Roy, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 124,214.00

0454372&lt;br/&gt;Roy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rio Grande rift is the
easternmost deforming province within the tectonically active western margin of
North America. Located just east of the Colorado Plateau, the rift is undergoing
stretching and extension manifested by slightly higher probabilities of
earthquake occurrence than in surrounding regions. Rates of motion are estimated
at sub-mm to 5 mm/yr, but uncertainties in measurements of total extension are
typically of the same order as the estimates themselves. This project brings
together a team of researchers from the University of Colorado Boulder and the
University of New Mexico to establish current rates of motion along the Rio
Grande rift with high precision. The team is measuring rift motions using state-
of-the-art global positioning system (GPS) instruments at 24 sites in Colorado
and New Mexico. Each measurement epoch lasts six months and data are being
collected for four epochs, providing rates encompassing a three-year span. The
slow rates of motion in the region make this project especially challenging. The
monumentation, observing time, and innovative post-processing strategies are
designed to optimally resolve deformation at the sub-millimeter per year scale.
&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of the project is to understand what stretching rates
measured at the surface imply about the stretching of the plate at deeper
levels. An intriguing possibility is that stretching in the Rio Grande rift is
heterogeneous, with different processes operating in the crust and the mantle.
Available geologic observations also suggest that the character of the rifting
changes dramatically from north to south, with a narrow rift zone marked by
linear topographic depressions in Colorado and northern New Mexico grading to a
broad region of multiple valleys ("basin and range") in south-central New
Mexico. The factors that drive this variable character of the Rio Grande rift
are not well-understood, but could have significant bearing on our understanding
of how and why tectonic plates undergo stretching and of earthquake and volcanic
hazards within rift zones. To examine these issues, the team is comparing their
measured rates of motion with all other available datasets, including seismic
velocities in the crust and mantle, gravity, surface heat flow, and geologic
data. These diverse datasets are being used to build computer models of
processes that control how tectonic plates undergo rifting. &lt;br/&gt;The
project involves training graduate and undergraduate students in GPS measurement
and analysis and spreading the group's knowledge in a variety of ways,
including: training K-12 school teachers in the research process (the
'Earthworks' project of the Cooperative Research in Environmental Sciences at CU
Boulder); involving middle schools in the siting and "adoption" of GPS sites;
and interactions with agencies interested in earthquake and volcanic hazards
along the Rio Grande rift including state Geological surveys, local and federal
emergency management agencies, local governments, city planners, and engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;