* 0454384
* Collaborative Research: Analyzing Development Finance Using PLAID Data
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Daniel Nielson, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2008
* USD 99,183.00

This project analyzes development finance at the project level to answer
unresolved questions in the literatures on international relations, comparative
political economy, foreign aid, and multilateral lending.&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators apply a variety of principal-agent (PA) models on both the donor
and recipient sides to explain the amount, type, and distribution of overseas
assistance. They explore how changing preferences in the donor countries have
altered the priorities of development agencies and multilateral institutions.
These underlying changes in principal preferences are mediated by collective-
action problems among the principals, information asymmetries vis-a-vis their
bureaucratic agents, and delegation problems in recipient countries. The
researchers test these hypotheses alongside conventional alternatives.
&lt;br/&gt;The scholarly debates raise three overarching questions: (1) why and
how do donors provide aid to particular countries? (2) What drives recipient
countries in their pursuit and consumption of the assistance? And, (3) what are
the effects of development finance - both intended and unintended?&lt;br/&gt;The
completion of this project-level aid (PLAID) database will help answer these
questions by allowing systematic tests of a large number of core hypotheses from
the international relations and development-finance literatures. To date, such
inclusive specifications and general tests have been lacking. Theory in this
literature has developed in the context of plausibility probes and qualitative
case studies in small-n samples. Quantitative work, conversely, has been largely
descriptive and employs incomplete and biased data. Theoretically informed
hypotheses are rare in extant quantitative work. Hence, accumulation of
knowledge in this field has been limited. Hypotheses have not been
systematically tested with data gathered at the appropriate level of analysis:
at the level of development projects. Instead, scholars have aggregated
incorrect and biased sums of aid and loans at the sectoral or country level. The
reason: most quantitative studies are based on OECD data, for which the
investigators have identified persistent and systematic
errors.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Value: The PLAID dataset will provide detailed coding
of key variables for over 500,000 development projects by bilateral and
multilateral foreign aid agencies and concessional loans by international
financial institutions. It will thus allow scholars (and policymakers), for the
first time, to examine the universe of development finance data at the level of
each project. With the data we explore the effects of international and domestic
delegation on development finance.&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate the PA hypotheses and
their alternatives, the researchers employ a variety of limited dependent
variable regression techniques, including Tobit, Cragg, and Heckman estimation.
With these tools they can test the effects of core independent variables-
principals' preferences, collective-action problems among donors, information
asymmetries with aid agencies, and recipient credibility and demands-
simultaneously on both the receipt of a project and the project's amount. These
quantitative tools are supplemented by ongoing qualitative research within both
recipient and donor countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;