* 0454502
* Native American Perspectives and Preferences Bearing on EarthScope Deployments in the Southwest, Spring 2005 workshop
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Peterson Zah, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 12/31/2007
* USD 29,998.00

0454502&lt;br/&gt;Semken&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Native American
Perspectives and Preferences&lt;br/&gt;Bearing on EarthScope Deployments in the
Southwest:&lt;br/&gt;A Workshop to Build Awareness and
Support&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State University, Principal Investigator:
Steven Semken&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Researchers will deploy a grid of EarthScope
geophysical stations in the southwest USA within the next four years, including
a significant number sited on Native American homelands. To facilitate
permitting and access to Native lands for research activities, and to initiate
EarthScope education and outreach partnerships with Native American schools and
communities in concert with the research, a special spring 2005 workshop, Native
American Perspectives and Preferences Bearing on EarthScope Deployments in the
Southwest (NAPP-ES), is being held at Arizona State University. The workshop
brings together a group of experts in cultural resources and education from each
of the seven Arizona Native nations affected by EarthScope.&lt;br/&gt; At the
NAPP-ES workshop, researchers are presenting a thorough introduction to
EarthScope objectives and logistics, including physical demonstrations of
station deployment and removal. The visiting Native experts are providing
information on timely permitting and access, potential cultural conflicts with
the research, and appropriate and effective ways to conduct education and
outreach activities in their communities. The results of this workshop will be
disseminated by means of an online, technical report and interactive website
linked to EarthScope. An Advisory Board of Native experts is also being formed
to review and guide future proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;