* 0454457
* The Greco-Arabic Optical Tradition In and Beyond Ninth-Century Baghdad
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* Elaheh Kheirandish, Kheirandish Elaheh
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/29/2008
* USD 80,997.00

Project Summary The proposed project is to conduct research on the Greco-Arabic
optical tradition, a tradition initiated in ninth-century Baghdad, and continued
as a basis for the important and outstanding "Optics" of Ibn al-Haytham, known
in Europe as Alhazen or Alhacen (d.1040 CE). The focus is on two earlier Arabic
compositions: "The Book of Optics and Burning Mirrors", attributed to a certain
A?mad ibn ' and the recently discovered "Rectification of Errors and Problems of
Euclid's Optics", by the prominent scholar, Ya'qb al-Kind (d. ca. 870 CE). The
research project aims to produce new and conclusive knowledge based on
previously unavailable sources and methods, with two immediate objectives: (a)
to expose and illuminate a historically important scientific tradition within
the context of a largely understudied period - that of the early optical
translations and compositions in and around ninth-century Baghdad; and (b) to
investigate and advance the long-unresolved problem of the composition date and
author identity of the "Optics" of A?mad ibn ', a name associated with several
figures in the 8-10th centuries CE, through evidence provided by the "Optics" of
Al-Kind, itself the only extant Arabic text of its author on optics proper.
These texts were selected for their comparable content (including exact
overlaps), derivable date (of about mid ninth-century), and extendable
knowledge, in particular their impact on the work of its famous author. The
expected results will include English editions for the two texts, the first
currently available in two Arabic manuscripts and a Hebrew transcription, and
the second, in an apparently unique manuscript copy. Intellectual Merit Through
linguistic analysis of those and other relevant texts, the project will solve
long- standing problems of the translation and transmission of those texts from
the ancient Greeks to Islamic culture. The project will contribute to the
knowledge and understanding of science in ninth-century Baghdad, and as a result
will provide important new insights into Islamic science. It will likewise
examine the transmission of those texts to Europe in the Middle Ages and will
thus explore their impact on optics and other fields of science in the Latin
West. The project is also a contribution to the fast growing specialty area of
Islamic science. Through the analysis of those texts, their relationship to
Greek prototypes, and their impact on the comprehensive and influential volumes
of Alhazen, the project will yield new information about Islamic science, the
role of patrons and scholars, and the processes of transmission and translation,
all still largely unappreciated by the general public. Broader Impacts The work
will yield new insights into one of the most important developments of western
science in general: the transmission and appropriation of ancient Greek science
by Islamic culture, and its subsequent transmission to the West. Through the use
of new electronic technologies, this project will make the translations widely
available to those in the scholarly community and beyond. Using electronic
media, in particular the 'IOTA' Project (Index for Optical Terms in Arabic)"
this proposal will make the texts and the understanding of science in an
increasingly vital geographical area, widely available. In teaching, the project
will redress source limitations by making those and other largely untapped and
understudied sources much better known and more readily accessible.