* 0454947
* Non-Equilibrium Systems:   Spreading, Deformation, Adhesion and Friction
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2010
* Mark Robbins, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2010
* USD 560,000.00

TECHNICAL EXPLANATION This research addresses fundamental non-equilibrium
processes that impact many technologies: spreading, plastic deformation,
adhesive failure and friction. Traditional engineering approaches to these
phenomena start from macroscopic continuum equations with phenomenological
constitutive relations and boundary conditions whose validity is questionable,
particularly as dimensions approach the molecular scale. Molecular simulations
will be used to test existing continuum descriptions, provide connections
between molecular interactions and macroscopic behavior, develop new mesoscale
models, and provide input for macroscopic models that cannot be obtained from
experiment.

Simulations of spreading will study the singular stresses that are predicted to
exist near the contact line where a fluid interface intersects a solid. Several
competing mechanisms have been proposed for removing the singularity and it is
difficult to distinguish between them using experiments. Molecular dynamics and
hybrid atomistic/continuum methods will be used to test new theories based on
diffusion and variations in interfacial tension. The results will enable
construction of mesoscale models for larger length and time scales. These will
be applied to dynamics in more complex geometries to study contact angle
hysteresis and multi-phase flow in porous media.

NON-TECHICAL EXPLANATION Studies of deformation, adhesion and friction will
focus on amorphous polymer glasses, which are a major component of many
adhesives and structural materials. The connectivity of the molecules leads to
entanglements that dramatically alter mechanical properties, particularly at
large strains. A new method will be used to visualize entanglements and
correlate their evolution to stress/strain curves during craze formation and
shear deformation. Atomistic and hybrid atomistic/continuum simulations will be
used to study the fracture energy and mechanisms in bulk and thin films.
Different polymers will be studied to determine what aspects of molecular
interactions select the failure mode. Work on friction will explore the relation
between constitutive relations for friction and bulk deformation, the contrast
between nanoscale and macroscopic friction coefficients for some polymers, and
the effect of molecular alignment near the surface on friction.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research addresses fundamental issues about how
molecular level processes control macroscopic properties and how behavior
changes as dimensions approach the atomic scale. These issues are relevant to
many processes and materials systems. The research will also serve as a testing
ground for new hybrid techniques that couple very different descriptions of
matter. The resulting atomistic/continuum algorithms are expected to be widely
applicable to many other problems and systems with a wide range of length and
time scales. Progress in developing mesoscale and continuum models from
molecular simulations is also likely to enable related work in other fields.
Broader Impact: An improved understanding of spreading, deformation, adhesion
and friction would have broad impact in coating of materials, processing of
polymers, and the design and formulation of improved adhesives and structural
materials. The project will contribute to the workforce by training students and
a postdoc in a wide range of interdisciplinary modeling methods. A new course on
multiscale modeling will be developed to expose students from engineering and
science departments to these and related techniques. Finally, outreach efforts
will bring research results to a wider audience through the annual Physics Fair
at Johns Hopkins and collaborations with local high school teachers and the
Maryland Science Center.