* 0454613
* SHINE: Understanding Characteristics of Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs)
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Jie Zhang, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 02/29/2008
* USD 333,423.00

The objective of this project is to enhance understanding of coronal mass
ejections (CMEs) by extending a prior SHINE project, entitled "A Study on
Origins of Coronal Mass Ejections from 2002 to 2004." In the prior project, one
of the findings was that CME acceleration can vary by three orders of magnitude,
while the acceleration duration can also vary over the same broad dynamic range,
from several minutes to more than 20 hours. In this project, the PI plans to
further study CME characteristics based on extended observations from the SOlar
and Heliospheric Observatory - Extreme-ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (SOHO EIT),
Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph Experiment (LASCO), ground-based Mauna
Loa coronagraphs, and many other relevant solar disk observations. There are
five major tasks:

(1) To make unambiguous association with flares for thousands of CME events
observed from 1996 to 2007, and make a comprehensive association study between
CMEs and flares. (2) To calculate true CME acceleration in the inner corona
using the flare rise time as a proxy for CME acceleration time. (This
statistical information about CME acceleration will add one important dimension
to the existing statistics of CME velocity and size.) (3) To classify CME
characteristics through comprehensive correlation studies among CME parameters
and flare parameters. (4) To identify CME kinematic properties through
comparative study of a group of events that have distinct characteristics and
have been well observed by a variety of solar instruments. (Issues here include
why some CMEs are extremely impulsive while others are extremely gradual, why
some CMEs are particularly fast, and why some flares are eruptive and why others
are confined.) (5) To study the possible factors that may determine the
intrinsic size of a CME.

This project directly addresses one of the major objectives of SHINE program,
namely, to understand solar properties of CMEs and related phenomena, including
their ultimate origin, precursors, and near-Sun evolution. This project will
have significant broader impact, especially in integration of research with
education, since George Mason University (GMU) has recently started an academic
training program in space weather science. This project will support a full time
graduate student at GMU.