* 0454870
* Paleo-Ocean Chemistry Based on Trace Element Records in Marine Sedimentary Opal: Implications for Aeolian Fluxes and the Effect of Fe on Biological Productivity
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Devendra Lal, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 02/28/2009
* USD 416,070.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0454870&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite clear evidence for iron
limitation in the modern ocean, the sedimentary record of "paleoproductivity"
has not provided a link between changes in dust flux and regional/global
productivity. A scientist from Scripps Institute of Oceanography will examine
the relationship between trace element chemistry and paleoproductivity through
analysis of biogenic opal. Results from a pilot study wherein a newly developed
technique was used to separate and purify sedimentary opal from detrital
contaminants indicated that this mineral phase faithfully records dissolved
oceanic concentrations of cosmic ray-produced radionuclides (10Be, 26Al) and
trace elements (Fe, Mn, Ti, Zn). Thus, one sedimentary phase within the sediment
column could be used to compare directly a proxy for aeolian input of
micronutrients (Fe, Ti) with a proxy for production (26Al/Al ratios). As part of
this project, the PI will continue to extend the pilot study using sediment
cores from the Southern Ocean diatomaceaous ooze belt to provide an integrated
assessment of paleoproductivity in this region. In addition, the temporal
records of trace elements and cosmic nuclides will be determined in sediments
from the equatorial Pacific and the southeastern Atlantic, two contrasting
regions of upwelling and productivity. These areas are expected to differ in
their response to global climate fluctuations and micronutrient input, thereby
providing a comparison/contrast with records obtained from the Southern Ocean.
It is anticipated that this study will reveal how the chemistry and biological
productivity in the marine environment has changed with climate in the past.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the broader impacts, this study will document
to use of biogenic opal as a recorder of dissolved trace element concentrations
and cosmic ray-produced radionuclides, as well as provide the ocean science
community with a new techniques for separating biogenic opal from other detritus
within a sediment sample. Results from this study will be included in a new
climate exhibit dedicated to how scientists use the marine sedimentary record to
infer about past climate entitled Nature's Time Capsule opening in the Fall of
2006 at the Scripps Explorers Galley in the Birch Aquarium. Training and support
of graduate and undergraduate students has been included in the study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;