* 0454474
* Collaborative Research:  From Latrines to Landscapes: Effects of Temporal and Spatial Variation in Nutrient Transport by Coastal River Otters on Terrestrial Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Nathan Nibbelink, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2009
* USD 466,701.00

Abstract

We can no longer think of ecosystems as distinct entities. Much like human
societies, the natural environment is connected through a wide range of
transport and communication processes. Movement of energy and matter between
ecosystems can modify food web interactions and nutrient cycling, as well as
affect the number and diversity of plants, animals, and other organisms.
Connectivity of ecosystems may be interrupted, however, by disruption in these
transport processes through time. In our quest to understand complex ecological
processes, we must explore the spatial and temporal variation (ecological
topology) of such phenomena. For example, we need to ask how natural communities
respond to changes in inputs of energy and nutrients through time. Coastal river
otters (Lontra canadensis) transport nutrients from sea to land by feeding in
the marine environment and scent-marking at latrine sites. This social
communication of river otters creates "hotspots" where marine carbon (C),
nitrogen (N), and phosphorus (P) are deposited along the coast. Sociality in
otters is driven largely by the benefits of cooperative foraging on schooling
fishes, such as salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) and herring (Clupea pallasi).
Therefore, any changes in the abundance and distribution of these fishes through
global warming, pollution, or harvest, could change the transport of nutrients
to otter latrines. This linking of marine and terrestrial systems through otter
activity provides an excellent model system to explore the effects of spatial
and temporal variation in inputs of marine nutrients on terrestrial plants and
soil organisms. Using stable isotope analyses and genetic markers we will
measure the variation in nutrient transport by river otters. We will then
explore the effects of variation in otter fertilization on the diversity of the
soil microbial community, nutrient cycling, plant uptake of marine nutrients,
diversity of plants, plant growth, flowering and fruiting rates. Using isotopes
measured in tree rings, we will also evaluate the time scale in which "hotspots"
shift along the coast. After establishing these relations, we will develop a
model that will simulate potential changes to the terrestrial landscape based on
changing distributions of schooling fish, otter activity, and C, N, and P
transport by river otters.