* 0454425
* CRI: Global-scale Data Sharing using Statistics and Probabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Dan Suciu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2009
* USD 249,508.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CNS 0454425&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dan
Suciu&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;Program: NSF
04-588 CISE Computing Research Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;Title: CRI: Global-scale
Data Sharing using Statistics and Probabilities &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address the problem of semantic heterogeneity that occurs in large-
scale data integration by exploring the scalability of novel techniques to very
large amounts of data. Two such techniques will be considered. One is corpus-
based schema matching, where a large collection (corpus) of schemas is stored,
analyzed, and preprocessed in order to enhance automatic schema matching. The
second technique consists of probabilistic-based query answering, which
efficiently computes complex SQL queries on probabilistic databases. To study
the scalability of these techniques to large-scale data integration tasks, a
significant fragment of the Web will be downloaded, and stored locally, on a
cluster of servers. Data instances and their schemas will be extracted
automatically from these Web pages. The resulting corpus of schemas will be
matched using a variety of techniques, and the matches interpreted
probabilistically.&lt;br/&gt;The resulting data organization is called the
semantic cache. Users will be able to formulate rich queries over the semantic
cache, for example in a language like SQL. Each query will be evaluated on the
global data, and given a probabilistic interpretation. The answers will be
returned to a user ranked according to their probabilities. This project has
potential, if successful, to impact a variety of applications where large scale
data integration is currently impossible to achieve, such as from scientific
data sharing, electronic commerce, and emergency management
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;