* 0454664
* SHINE: Ion Acceleration and Evolution of Spatio-Temporal Profiles in Energetic Storm Particle Events
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Yan Li, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 12/31/2008
* USD 295,704.00

The proposers have carried out kinetic simulations of shocks in space plasmas
for more than 15 years, and started developing large scale, 2D and 3D kinetic
simulations more than 5 years ago. Based upon this experience and the successful
results of such work, the proposers plan to investigate the acceleration and
evolution of energetic ions at interplanetary shocks through large-scale ion-
kinetic simulations, in combination with a detailed analysis of relevant ACE
data at shock passage. The prime objective is to understand theoretically and
quantitatively how peak fluxes and their spatiotemporal profiles depend on
plasma and shock parameters through the solar cycle. The PI's simulations and
observations will determine the most important qualitative and quantitative
features of the energetic ions and associated turbulence, and address the
question of how the various acceleration and scattering mechanisms work together
to produce relatively large energetic ion fluxes at medium and low Mach number
interplanetary shocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shock acceleration is one of the
most widely implicated processes for energetic particle generation in cosmic
plasmas. To date, no study of ion acceleration at interplanetary shocks and
associated Energetic Storm Particle (ESP) events has been performed under
consideration of the large-scale, truly self-consistent, kinetic turbulence
present in the far upstream and downstream. A stated goal of the SHINE program
is to understand the transport and shock acceleration of ions in the
interplanetary medium. With the presence of the MURI and SolarCISM groups at
SSL/ UC Berkeley, there is already a significant involvement with the SHINE
community, including timely sharing of results, collaboration, and taking on
community responsibilities. The proposers will disseminate results broadly
through printed and online media, and are preparing to allow remote Internet
access to observations and simulation results. A graduate student will be
trained in all components of energetic particle observations and modeling. The
PI's exceptionally strong background in the creation of interactive pedagogical
applications will be retained to start a new educational outreach program
surrounding the Space Weather and SHINE themes, building on concrete examples of
this project.&lt;br/&gt;