* 0454832
* Envisioning the Survey Interview of the Future Workshop, University of Michigan, Institute for Social Research; Fall 2005
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2008
* Frederick Conrad, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2008
* USD 65,000.00

This award provides support for a Workshop on Envisioning the Survey Interview
of the Future, to be held at the University of Michigan, Institute for Social
Research, in autumn 2005. The workshop will bring together leading researchers
in survey methodology and communication technology in order to (1) develop
theories of technology-meditated survey response, (2) contribute to a better
understanding of the survey response task and how it differs from the tasks for
which communication technologies have been developed, and (3) introduce survey
methodologists to new communication technologies that might potentially be
relevant for data collection. In order to address these objectives, the workshop
will include the following activities: Several communication scientists will
introduce theoretical ideas from their field and then the group will discuss how
to apply these ideas to survey-specific problems. Presentations about the
response task and measurement error as well as human-computer task structure and
user performance will precede a general discussion of future technology's likely
impact on the survey response task. The workshop also will feature
demonstrations of several cutting edge and future communication technologies
that have high potential impact for survey methodology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will promote interdisciplinary research and
discussion of practical and ethical questions that ultimately will improve the
quality of survey data collected with communication technology. Survey
methodologists will gain a deeper appreciation of communication theory that will
help them evaluate and deploy up-and-coming technology. Communication
technologists should emerge from the workshop with a broader appreciation of the
nature of information exchange tasks and greater appreciation of the
intellectual challenges posed by the survey response task. The survey research
community will be served by a published volume, edited by the organizers, which
will come out of the workshop. Selected presenters from both disciplines will be
invited to contribute chapters.&lt;br/&gt;