* 0454933
* Development of a Dual-beam Integrating Sphere Spectrophotometer for Measuring Absorption of Diffuse UV-VIS Radiation in Leaves and other Biological Samples
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2009
* Thomas Vogelmann, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 07/31/2009
* USD 477,586.00

This award is for the development of an integrating sphere spectrometer that
will make it possible to measure the optical properties of leaves and other
biological samples irradiated with diffuse and partially diffuse light. The
instrument will be developed in the following stages: design of optics and
electronics, assembly of the instrument, testing and validating the measurements
against spectral standards and calculated values, creating a user interface, and
making test and demonstration measurements of leaves and other biological
samples. This integrating sphere spectrophotometer will make it possible to
measure total reflectance (diffuse plus specular), transmittance, and
absorptance in samples within the biologically important regions of the
spectrum: ultraviolet-B (280-320 nm), ultraviolet-A (320-400 nm),
photosynthetically active region (400-700 nm), and far-red near infra-red
(700-1000 nm). The new instrument will significantly advance the measurement
capability over current instrumentation, which allows for measurements only when
samples are irradiated with direct light. The ability to quantify the radiation
budget of samples irradiated with diffuse and partially diffuse light should
have wide-ranging applications in a variety of disciplines where information
about radiation interception and transport are fundamental, such as ecology,
plant physiology, photobiology, photosynthesis, and studies of global climate
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The amount of sunlight that reaches the Earth's
surface is one of the most important factors determining the productivity of
crops, forests, and natural ecosystems. Sunlight is necessary for human and
animal health as well, but it can also cause damage, as in the case of sunburn.
In order to study the effects of light on plants and animals, it is necessary to
accurately measure the amount of light that is absorbed by their tissues. This
measurement is easy to make when light travels as a beam but is not possible to
make when light is diffuse, as is the case on a cloudy day. Diffuse light
represents a significant portion of the light environment on Earth, it enhances
ecosystem productivity, and it is expected to increase with global climate
change. The goal of this research is to develop new instrumentation that will
make it possible to measure how much light is absorbed when plant or animal
tissues are irradiated with diffuse light. The project will support the training
of graduate and undergraduate students, high school teachers and students; and
it presents an opportunity to recruit members of underrepresented groups to
science.&lt;br/&gt;