* 0454704
* High Resolution Near-Field Raman Spectroscopy of Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2009
* Lukas Novotny, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2009
* USD 235,000.00

Professor Lukas Novotny of University of Rochester is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry program for near-field Raman spectroscopy of
carbon nanotubes. The idea is to bring a near field tip close to the surface of
a carbon nanotube and then to irradiate the tip with a laser. Enhanced Raman
signals yield the vibrational spectrum of that locality on the nanotube with 10
nanometer resolution. Translating the tip along the sample allows the PI to map
the local vibrational character along the tube's length and to study the tube
ends and on-tube junctions. The PI is also studying the mechanism of the Raman
enhancement. Previously, carbon nanotubes have been difficult to study
spectroscopically because a macroscopic sample is heterogeneous, encompassing
many lengths. By studying one tube at a time, the PI and his group are able to
get the isolated spectra that reveal features such as defects and dopants if the
tube is loaded with another element such as boron. The PI collaborates with Todd
Krauss, also of U. Rochester, to fabricate the samples.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role of dopants in the uptake of hydrogen by carbon
nanotubes is relevant to fuel cell technologies. Further, the valuable feedback
on the physical properties of carbon nanotubes will lead to new device concepts,
and provide input for improved synthesis. While the work is particularly well
suited to nanotubes, the development of the method will also benefit efforts to
chemically image other small structures such as those that might be found inside
a living cell. Chemical imaging of samples is an important goal for
understanding the relationship of structure and function in biological and
material systems.