* 0454741
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Anthropogenic Impacts on Carbon Cycling in the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta- Changes in Source, Nature and Age of Organic Carbon
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Stuart Wakeham, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing grant
* Ann Russell
* 02/29/2008
* USD 99,990.00

Intellectual Merit Organic carbon is the source of the energy that fuels
biological production at the base of the foodweb. In aquatic ecosystems, organic
matter derives from broken-up pieces of plants, algae and phytoplankton in the
water and soil. Some sources of organic matter are imported by rivers from
upland sources including soils and plant detritus (terrigenous sources), which
tends to be lower in quality and less useful to aquatic organisms as a food
source. Other sources of organic matter are produced within marshes, lakes and
other aquatic systems and tend to be of higher nutritional value. In recent
decades, human activities have altered aquatic ecosystems by changing freshwater
flow, introducing exotic or non-native species, contributing to declining water
quality through nutrient enrichment, and by the construction of dams. These
activities have altered the amount, sources, and quality of carbon supplied to
aquatic ecosystems. This project will use the Sacramento-San Joaquin River
Delta, CA (referred to as the "Delta" hereafter) as a model system for
understanding how human modifications influence the abundance, sources and age
of carbon in sediments representing the past 100-200 years. The project will
examine the organic carbon composition of sediments collected from sites
representing key sub-environments of the Delta using "biomarkers", naturally-
occurring chemical tracers that allow us to identify the sources of organic
carbon. The objectives of this study will be to use these "biomarkers" to: (1)
identify the sources of the aquatic and terrigenous components of sedimentary
organic matter (SOM) currently being deposited within sub-habitats of the Delta;
(2) determine how anthropogenic activities have altered the composition of
organic matter delivered to the Delta using biomarker distributions in sediment
cores, and (3) use the natural abundance of radiocarbon to determine the average
age of organic carbon (TOC) and source-specific biomarkers to apportion organic
matter sources and determine the radiocarbon ages of aquatic and terrigenous
components of the SOM.

Broader Impacts This project will address basic questions related to human
impacts on carbon quality in a representative highly modified ecosystem-the
Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta and will test fundamental hypotheses about
the determinants of community structure and degradation of deltaic habitats.
Deltaic habitats provide habitat for fishes and invertebrates that feed a large
proportion of the world's human population and sustaining these dynamic
ecosystems is of clear scientific, social and economic significance. To the best
of our knowledge, our study will be the first to apply a multi-biomarker
approach to questions of environmental change in deltaic environments and assess
these changes within the context of potential restoration issues. The broader
impacts of the proposed work also include a unique training opportunities for
students to conduct interdisciplinary research that addresses questions of
fundamental importance to ecosystem science at the interface between basic and
applied research. This project will also engage under-represented groups and
students at various stages in their training (high school, undergraduate and
graduate) in aquatic sciences research through specialized programs at the three
institutions involved in this study.