* 0454408
* Collaborative Research: SHINE: Solar Longitude Dependence of Solar Energetic Particle Events
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Nariaki Nitta, Lockheed-Martin Advanced Technology Center
* Continuing grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 12/31/2008
* USD 44,875.00

This proposal includes seven collaborators and will systematically examine the
longitude dependence of solar energetic particle (SEP) characteristics through
studying: (1) solar data from SOHO, TRACE, Yohkoh, and RHESSI; (2) SEP data from
the Solar Isotope Spectrometer (SIS) and the Ultra Low Energy Isotope
Spectrometer (ULEIS), both on the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE)
spacecraft; and (3) radio data from Wind/WAVES, Culgoora, and Bruny Island,
Australia. Identified SEP events will be characterized according to several
criteria, including elemental abundances and ratios measured at a range of MeV
energies per nucleon. Radio signatures, shock transit speeds, CME speeds, flare
magnitudes, flare durations, flare longitude/magnetic connections (and other
relevant parameters) will then be examined in terms of this characterization.
Particular focus will be placed on radio type III bursts as indications of open
magnetic field lines and the solar connection to the identified flares of
interest, as determined by the potential field source surface (PFSS) model. How
the characterization of the SEP events depends on solar longitude (accounting
for the magnetic connection) will be important in evaluating and constraining
any theory attempting to provide explanations for the large variation in the
energy-dependent elemental composition observed in SEP events. This effort will
help quantify the plausibility of the currently competing hypotheses.

Results will be disseminated to the broader community through campaign web
sites, peer-reviewed scientific journals, and public newsletters, as well as
through future SHINE meetings, where students are especially encouraged (and
often funded) to attend. The benefit of this research to society is strongly
related to the increasing need to predict space weather and the SEP-related
radiation hazards faced by astronauts, sensitive space equipment, and even some
commercial airline flights. In particular, SEP longitude dependence is crucial
for forecasting the effects at locations far from the Sun-Earth line, as will be
necessary within NASA's new Space Exploration Initiative. In order to make
useful space weather predictions at any location, understanding the connection
between what is observed remotely at the Sun and the resulting SEP event is
critical. The proposed research furthers this endeavor in an area of currently
vigorous debate. This proposal employs two women (one being the PI) and includes
funds for training an undergraduate student. Many of the collaborators have a
strong history of collaboration in the fields of radio spectrometry, solar
physics, and particle physics, as well as in giving presentations to young
scientists and students at colleges, high schools, and middle schools.