* 0454914
* ITR Collaborative Research:  Single Spin Measurement for Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Alexander Rimberg, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2008
* USD 578,364.00

This is an Information Technology Research (ITR) medium award. Quantum
information processing and computing offer the prospect of new technologies that
rely fundamentally on quantum coherent phenomena for their operation. For such
technologies to be successful, means of storing and reading out quantum
information must both be developed. This project will focus on using the
electronic spin to store quantum information. Spin, unlike charge, interacts
weakly with its surroundings and better maintains quantum coherence. The same
weakness of interaction, however, makes readout of individual electronic spins
difficult. This proposal focuses on development of two different schemes for
detection of individual spins in semiconductor quantum dots. Both rely on
readout by means of spin-charge transduction, in which spin information is
converted to charge information. In one case, spin blockade, in which the Pauli
exclusion principle causes spin-dependent tunneling between dots, will be
detected using a radio-frequency single-electron transistor. In the other,
transduction will be accomplished by spin-dependent microwave excitation of an
asymmetric quantum dot. Both schemes will initially be demonstrated in GaAs
quantum dots, and later transferred to SiGe dots, which will be more compatible
with existing microelectronics. A coordinated theoretical component will focus
on calculations of decoherence times and on modeling of the devices themselves.
This research could help in development of new information technologies based on
detection and manipulation of individual spins. Science education and outreach
are integrated into the project both in terms of training and in the development
of curricular materials flowing directly out of the research. %%% This is an
Information Technology Research (ITR) medium award. Quantum information
processing and computing offer the prospect of new technologies that rely on
fundamentally quantum mechanical phenomena for their operation. For such
technologies to be successful, means of storing and reading out quantum
information must both be developed. This project will focus on using the
intrinsic magnetism, or spin, of an electron to store quantum information. The
spin of an electron, unlike its electrical charge, interacts weakly with its
surroundings, so that the quantum information is less easily lost. The same
weakness of interaction, however, makes readout of the spin difficult. This
proposal focuses on development of two different schemes for detection of
individual spins in semiconductor quantum dots; both use conversion of spin
information to charge information for readout. In one case spin-dependent
electron transfer between a pair of quantum dots will be detected using a fast
and sensitive electrometer called a single-electron transistor. In the other,
conversion will be accomplished by spin-dependent microwave excitation of an
asymmetric quantum dot. Both schemes will initially be demonstrated in gallium
arsenide dots, and later transferred to silicon-based ones that will be more
compatible with existing microelectronics. Coordinated theoretical research will
model the devices and calculate the time scales on which quantum information is
lost. This research could help develop new information technologies based on
detection and manipulation of individual spins. Science education and outreach
are integrated into the project both in terms of training and in the development
of curricular materials flowing directly out of the research.