* 0454755
* Sensitivity of NAEP to the Effects of Reform-based Teaching and Learning in Middle School Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/2005,11/30/2008
* Donald McLaughlin, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 11/30/2008
* USD 508,517.00

The project will assess the validity of the NAEP in mathematics by testing the
adequacy of the NAEP for detecting effects of mathematics education reform
(using the "Connected Mathematics Program") by comparing student achievement on
the NAEP, state assessments (Arkansas' use of the ITBS and the Colorado state
assessment), and the NSF supported "Balanced Assessment in Mathematics (BAM)."
The project hopes to determine whether large-scale assessments are sensitive
enough to monitor instructional impacts on higher-level cognitive abilities
(what the BAM purports to assess).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is a joint
effort between the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) and two
divisions (REC and ESIE) within the NSF. The project hypothesis is that the NAEP
will be more effective than traditional multiple choice tests (ITBS in Arkansas
and a state assessment program in Colorado), but not as effective as BAM in
capturing student learning gains (and performance in process areas) in Connected
Mathematics Program (CMP) classrooms. Such results have the potential to advise
if not revise the NAEP and state assessment programs. Given the November, 2004,
Loveless report (Brookings Institute) that critiques existing assessments for
having an insufficient number of arithmetic NAEP items, this research may
provide useful scientific evidence about the role and importance of such items
within assessments and curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;