* 0454564
* SGER:     Collection of Remote Sensing Imagery and Building Damage Information in the Aftermath of Hurricane Charley
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Kishor Mehta, ImageCat, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Thomas A. Birkland
* 04/30/2006
* USD 41,255.00

Collection of Remote Sensing Imagery and Building Damage Information in the
Aftermath of Hurricane
Charley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Charley,
which struck the coast of southwest Florida on August 13, 2004, was the most
severe US windstorm since Hurricane Andrew in 1992. It devastated the cities of
Port Charlotte and Punta Gorda, causing an estimated $15.4 billion in damage.
There is a pressing need to capture perishable information concerning the nature
and severity of building and critical infrastructure damage, together with the
distribution of debris caused by extreme windstorms. However, there is a narrow
time window for damage documentation, as clean-up and repair operations are
typically initiated as soon as possible. In addition to traditional ground-based
survey, it is increasingly acknowledged that advanced technologies, such as
remote sensing, have a valuable role to play in post-disaster reconnaissance.
Hurricane Charley is the first major hurricane in US history for which high-
resolution optical satellite imagery is available before and in the immediate
aftermath of the event. Accordingly, this 'quick-response' research focuses on
streamlining the collection of time-critical damage data after Hurricane
Charley, using a novel technology-driven approach. Rapid damage assessment will
be conducted throughout the affected areas through deployment of VIEWS
(Visualizing Impacts of Earthquakes with Satellites). VIEWS is a notebook-based
system originally developed for earthquake reconnaissance, which integrates
satellite imagery acquired before and after the event, with a real-time GPS
(global positioning system) feed, digital video and digital photography.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of intellectual merits and broader impacts, the
data collected through this initiative will extend the role of advanced
technology innovation in improving crisis response. Specifically, it will extend
the application of rapid post-disaster damage assessment tools developed for
earthquake to multiple hazards. The unprecedented windstorm damage dataset will
also support new and extended engineering research activities, which will
ultimately result in improved disaster response and community
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;