* 0454823
* SGER: Profile of Signal Molecules in a Soil Microbial Community
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Jo Handelsman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2006
* USD 147,214.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) award to identify and
sequence metagenomic clones derived from Alaskan soil that produce biologically
active small molecules. This exploratory project was stimulated by two recent
events: first, the development of a rapid intracellular assay to identify clones
that produce signaling molecules; and second, recently published studies of the
metagenomes of the Sargasso Sea and an acid mine drainage community,
respectively, that illustrate the power of obtaining vast amounts of sequence
data from metagenomic sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slicing complex microbial
communities many ways is necessary to construct a comprehensive portrait of
them. Some of the most fruitful approaches to obtain slices of microbial
communities include: culturing, PCR amplification of 16S rRNA sequences,
identification of phylogenetic anchors on metagenomic clones, and analysis of
random end sequences of metagenomic clones. The phylogenetic anchor approach
involves sequencing all clones that contain a certain phylogenetic marker. The
collection of clones containing 16S rRNA phylogenetic information provides the
basis for inferences from nucleotide sequence about functions performed by the
organisms from which the fragments of metagenomic DNA originated. By contrast,
this project will introduce the use of a functional anchor - the converse of the
phylogenetic anchor approach. The function anchor approach will be used to
identify all clones in a library that express a certain function and then
sequence them to obtain phylogenetic information about their origins. If
successful, this will become a new standard of analysis of metagenomic libraries
that will provide access to new genes whose functions might not have been
suspected by inspection of their sequences and phylogenetic inference about the
origins of those functions. Undergraduate students will also be involved in the
project, with the investigators utilizing and evaluating two different
approaches to attracting and incorporating members of underrepresented groups in
science.