* 0454726
* Collaborative Research:     Attachment/Detachment of Algae to/from Sea Ice:    Mechanisms and Consequences for Biogenic Fluxes and Polar Ecosystems
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Andrew Juhl, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 01/31/2009
* USD 134,726.00

The association of ice algae with exopolymeric substances (EPS) and the role of
EPS in other forms of microbial adhesion, suggest that EPS are important in
algal attachment to ice. This attachment appears to be episodically overcome
during seasonal ice melt, based on evidence that algae leave the ice in local
pulses. Evidence suggests several physical mechanisms that detach algae from
ice, but quantitative data that would allow prediction of algal release from ice
do not exist. Funds are provided to support research that combines controlled
laboratory experiments in specially-designed ice tanks with field observations
of coastal fast-ice bottom communities near Barrow, AK. The research will
address how ice algae attach to ice, the physical processes that may cause flux
of algae out of the ice, and the biogeochemical characteristics of particles
released from ice under different conditions.

The role of EPS in attachment of algae to sea ice will be assessed in
experiments using artificially-created, sea-ice sheets colonized by ice algae.
The time course of algal flux from the ice during melting will be compared
between ice enriched in EPS and ice with chemically-degraded EPS. Additional
experiments will focus on four specific mechanisms that potentially trigger the
release of algae from sea ice: a) excess density and loss of attachment sites,
b) flushing by surface meltwater, c) local heating due to light absorption, and
d) under-ice currents. Each mechanism will be experimentally isolated to
determine its impact on algal flux out of experimental ice sheets. For each
mechanism, the minimal conditions necessary to trigger an algal pulse from the
ice will be quantified for comparison with field observations. During these
experiments, biogeochemically-relevant characteristics of the particles released
from the ice will also be measured, including: size, sinking rate, and organic
carbon, organic nitrogen, chlorophyll, and EPS concentrations. Complementary
field studies are proposed in each year of the proposed research. Time series of
algal abundance in the ice and water column will be used to identify release
events. Comparison to time series of physical variables relevant to the four
proposed detachment mechanisms will allow assessment of the factors that may
have triggered the pulses.

Algae that are attached to the ice form a significant portion of the primary
production in ice-covered seas. Thus, understanding the processes associated
with their attachment to and detachment from the ice will enhance our
understanding of the food web of polar seas, its spatial variability, and its
potential response to global climate change.