* 0454906
* Paleoclimate and Paleoecology in High Latitude, Terrestrial Vertebrate Communities from the Early-Middle Eocene of Ellesmere Island, Nunavut, Arctic Canada
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2005,07/31/2008
* Jaelyn Eberle, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

The Principal Investigators will test hypotheses concerning the Eocene global
warm period and its effects on high-latitude terrestrial ecosystems by
reconstructing paleoclimate and -ecology from d18O(PO4), d18O(CO3), and d13C
values of biogenic phosphate in vertebrate tooth enamel from Early-Middle Eocene
localities on Ellesmere Island, Canada (~79degrees N). Specifically, they will
test the hypothesis that Eocene vertebrates inhabiting the High Arctic preferred
temperatures and habitats similar to their living analogs and are therefore
accurate paleoclimate and paleoecologic proxies. &lt;br/&gt;By comparison to
published sea surface temperatures (SSTs), the Principal Investigators will test
the hypothesis that quantitative climate changes in northern high-latitude
terrestrial environments correlate to those determined for high-latitude open
marine environments. The project will provide quantification of latitudinal
gradients by determining d18O values of multiple vertebrate taxa (e.g.,
alligators, brontotheres, and tapirs) that co-occur in mid- and high-latitude
North America. Quantitative climate estimates for Early - Middle Eocene
localities on Ellesmere Island should also provide data critical to
understanding the onset of the Cenozoic cooling trend, purported to have begun
with during early Middle Eocene time. &lt;br/&gt;Comparison of the Eocene
mammals, particularly the large herbivores, from Ellesmere Island with living
relatives and analogues, combined with d13C analysis of the biogenic phosphate
in their teeth, should provide insight into their habitat preferences (i.e.,
open habitat vs. closed canopy). Additionally, comparison of d13C values from
the same genera coexisting at both mid- and high-latitudes (e.g., Coryphodon and
the brontotheres Eotitanops and Palaeosyops) may illuminate important
paleoecological differences that would otherwise not be evident in their
morphology. &lt;br/&gt;Extensive paleontological field work in Eocene strata of
the Eureka Sound Group on Ellesmere Island by the Principal Investigators
provides paleoclimatic and paleoenvironmental estimates that are inferred from
the fossil plants and animals, in addition to numerous specimens on which to
conduct isotope analyses&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will result in
the first comprehensive, quantitative paleoclimate data set from northern high-
latitude terrestrial environments for the most significant global warming event
in the last 65 million years (the Early Eocene), which is critical to
understanding the impacts of future global warming on Earth's biota. The
research will provide important high-latitude terrestrial data points for
paleoclimate modelers concerned with Eocene climatic variability and latitudinal
temperature gradients. This study will be the first to infer paleoecology of a
high Arctic terrestrial vertebrate community on the basis of coupled carbon and
oxygen isotope analyses (in conjunction with comparisons to mid-latitude taxa
and modern analogs). The project will engage students, the general public
(including the Inuit community), and scientists in a multidisciplinary,
collaborative research alliance, and foster international and intercultural
discourse. Results of the research will be broadly disseminated to scientific
and lay audiences. &lt;br/&gt;