* 0454331
* Flint Sources and Intraregionality Mobility in the Paleolithic of the French Midi-Pyrenees
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Margaret Conkey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 58,454.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Margaret Conkey will
expand research concerning the prehistoric peoples who lived at the end of the
Ice Age in the Central Pyrenees region of southern France , where they decorated
caves and implements with animal and other images, as part of successful
hunting-gathering ways of life by both Neanderthals and modern humans. Building
on a decade of original archaeological survey and geo-morphological analysis,
Conkey's research team has recovered more than 5000 stone tool artifacts from
plowed fields and vineyards, attesting an extensive life style outside of the
well-known cave sites within a 260 square kilometer region. They now have a
robust collection of stone tools, primarily made from flint, from both caves and
the open air, which can be analyzed to better understand the movements of these
mobile hunter-gatherers ,their sense of "territories" in terms of where to
obtain their valued flint resources, and what implications these resource
procurement patterns might have for understanding social relationships and land
use. These are questions that can only be partially addressed from the abundant
cave archaeology that has predominated to date.

The primary goal of the project is to develop an extensive reference catalogue
of the different flint sources used by these prehistoric peoples, building upon
a successful pilot project that has been analyzing geological and archaeological
samples of flint from the survey region. Analysis of the flint raw material from
some well-dated cave deposits has already demonstrated precisely where the cave
occupants obtained their flint, which allows a definitive link to be made
between the cave occupants and a specific flint source and a newly discovered
open air site, found as part of the project's initial survey and test trenching
activities. The highly specialized analyses of the flint samples to obtain a
"signature" of their characteristics, which will allow the differentiation of
flints, will be carried out by Dr. Sebastien Lacombe, from the University of
Toulouse-Le Mirail , who has been a collaborator and overseeing project lithic
analysis. He will use a suite of new techniques for the determination of the
geochemical structure of the flint sources, including multiple microscopic
analyses that have previously not been carried out in combination for the
identification of different flints.

This research project will continue to involve undergraduate and graduate
students in the laboratory and field, from several different countries and
universities. The research is being conducted within the context of a formal
convention for collaborative research between UC Berkeley and the University of
Toulouse-Le Mirail developed by Conkey and Lacombe. The laboratory where some of
the research is being carried out is often visited by K-12 students as part of
an outreach program, and Berkeley undergraduates are formally enrolled in an
Undergraduate Research Apprentice Program. The project will contribute to
understanding hunter-gatherer mobility, to the methods of landscape archaeology,
to the interpretation of Paleolithic cave sites ( including those with art)
within a regional context, and to materials sciences approaches to the
characterization of a most ubiquitous raw material resource for prehistoric
peoples everywhere in the world, namely, flint.

