* 0454698
* Organic-Mineral Interactions in Coastal Margin Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Richard Keil, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2010
* USD 499,950.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0454698&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four
physical forms of organic matter (OM) in marine sediments; free of mineral
association, bound within biogenic minerals, clustered with lithogenic minerals
forming aggregates, and sorbed to mineral surfaces. Proportions of the types of
OM change with depositional regime and oxygen exposure time (OET). In sediments
underlying suboxic waters (OET &lt; 1y), the predominant form of OM is as
distinct debris (65% of the total OM). Along continental margins, where most OM
is stored and where OET is more moderate (years to centuries), the predominant
form of OM is within mineral aggregates (50%). Along the continental rise, where
sediments are exposed to oxygen for longer periods (centuries to millennia), the
little OM that is present is predominantly sorbed to lithogenic minerals (60%).
OM in association with biogenic minerals is a consistently small (&lt;10%)
component of total OM except for the rise, where biogenic- protected OM
approaches 20% of total OM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers
at the University of Washington will conduct laboratory experiments to evaluate
the short-term effects of aggregation and OET on early diagenesis. These
experiments will directly test whether it is oxygen itself that causes the OET
effect, or whether fauna and mixing are more important contributors. Similarly,
a field investigation of sediment dynamics in a closed fjord system (Clayoquot
Sound, British Columbia) will address this question. To look at the longer-term
effects of aggregation on diagenesis (and vice-versa), a set of sediment
multicores recovered from the Washington and Vancouver margins will be split
into different physical fractions and probed using a combination of .14C and
d13C isotopic analyses (to determine age and source), amino acid analyses (to
determine degradation state), elemental analyses, and X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS; to determine OM and mineral interactions and OM glue
thicknesses). This multi-faceted approach will permit quantitatively estimation
of both the short-term degradation rates of the different physical forms of OM
(even if they have similar bulk OM compositions) and the longer-term influence
of physical reworking and OET on aggregate abundance and OM preservation. This
study will also help probe the processes that may be responsible for the loss of
terrestrial OM and its replacement by marine OM during lithogenic mineral
transport and burial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: An understanding of
organic matter cycling and storage is important on a broad scale and is amenable
to evaluation at a variety of levels of detail and experience. This project will
provide quantified rate and fate information on carbon cycling and training for
graduate students. In addition, it will leverage an undergraduate mentoring
program, the Apprenticeship Learning Program, where undergraduate researchers
are mentored by two faculty members and receive multidisciplinary research
training&lt;br/&gt;