* 0454514
* Scientific Drilling into the San Andreas Fault: Fluid Transport Analysis - Rare Gas "Ages" of Matrix Porosity Fluids in Drill Core
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2005,12/31/2007
* Peter Schlosser, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 12/31/2007
* USD 179,986.00

0454514&lt;br/&gt;Stute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Drilling into the San
Andreas Fault: Fluid Transport Analysis - &lt;br/&gt;Rare Gas "Ages" of Matrix
Porosity Fluids in Drill Core&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Martin Stute, Peter
Schlosser, Gisela Winckler &lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigators&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The currently favored
explanation for the low friction slip along the San Andreas Fault Zone (SAFZ) is
the presence of fluids under very high pressure. Since fluid transport is
subject to wide variation in both time and space, the in situ measurement of
pressure gradients and permeability in a fault zone drill hole will establish
the current conditions but provide little indication of pressure/transport
patterns over the time interval for pressurization cycles of the fault
(decades). This study conducted by researchers from the Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory of Columbia University tests a methodology to determine the flow of
fluids into/from the fault zone using the distribution of rare gas
concentrations in pore fluids recovered from cores obtained at depth in the
SAFZ. &lt;br/&gt;Uranium and Thorium decay-series-elements, and Potassium in
rocks produce 4He and 40Ar as well as nucleogenic (21,22Ne) and fissiogenic
(132,134,136Xe) rare gases. Fluid 'ages' derived from rare gas concentrations
depend on the production rates and the release rates into the pore fluids.
Vertical and horizontal profiles of these gases in pore fluids can be modeled to
determine fluid flow velocities and directions. Samples for these analyses are
being obtained by sub-sampling fresh drill core recovered in the framework of
the EARTHSCOPE/SAFOD project from various depths in the SAFZ. Because rare gas
loss from the rock occurs over a timescales of hours to days, drill core is sub-
sampled to remove the outer rind (which has already lost rare gases) and the
internal sections are then placed in high vacuum containers in the field. The
rare gases released to the headspace over a period of weeks to months are
determined by mass spectrometry and the total pore fluid by weight. The entire
suite of measured noble gas isotopes (3,4He, 20, 21, 22Ne, 36, 38, 40Ar,
84,86Kr, and 129,131, 132, 134, 136Xe) is used to separate the non-atmospheric
(produced in the rocks and accumulated in pore fluids) from the atmospheric
noble gas components. The study also investigates the concentrations of rare
gases in the rocks and of the elements producing them to determine the source
function for excess rare gas abundances in matrix pore fluids. &lt;br/&gt;Some
of the approaches described above have seen numerous applications in studies of
shallow aquifers and in a few cases of deep drilling, but it has never been used
in its entirety in the context of deep scientific drilling. This study will
establish the methodology providing key information for the source, direction
and magnitude of fluid flow that underlie the hypothesis that superhydrostatic
fluid pressures are responsible for low friction slip along the SAFZ on
timescales of decades. This has wide ranging implications for the understanding
the SAFZ and earth quake prediction, affecting millions of people in California.
Broader impacts of the study include the training of a graduate student, and the
integration of results of this study in the Earth Science curriculum at Columbia
University. This work is also integrated in the research and educational
activities of Columbia's Center for Hazards and Risk Research (CHRR) whose
mission it is to advance the predictive science of natural and environmental
hazards and the integration of science with hazard risk assessment and
management. &lt;br/&gt;