* 0454533
* NIRT:  Optical and Electronic Processes in Metal Nanoparticle-Conjugated Organic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/21/2004,08/31/2010
* Theodore Gore Goodson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2010
* USD 354,792.00

The preparation and investigation of conjugated organic chromophores attached to
metal nanoparticles is the focus of this NIRT project. The investigators will,
a) synthesize organic chromophore-metal nanoparticle systems b) investigate
steady-state and time-resolved absorption and fluorescence properties, c)
determine two-photon absorption spectroscopic properties d) characterize charge
transport properties and e) probe electronic interactions at the surface
utilizing scanning tunneling microscopy. Specifically, this project will probe
the electronic coupling (due to multipolar and electronic overlap interactions)
between the states of the organic-chromophore and the metal particle surface
plasmon. The broader impacts of this project will include the production of
novel nanoparticle systems with potential applications in fluorescence sensing,
nonlinear optics, and nanoscale electronic devices such as DNS sensors. The
activities of this program will be closely correlated with industrial partners
that are also intensely focused on creating revolutionary materials and better
trained scientific and engineering workforce. Students participating in this
program will receive integrated interdisciplinary research training in state-of-
the-art research laboratories which will help graduates find future positions in
industrial and academic institutions. The experience for students from
underrepresented groups will help build interest and confidence in participating
in this area of scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns
the creation of new nanoscale materials composed of organic dyes attached to
small metal particles. The interaction of these two components may give rise to
new and interesting properties which may be applied to biomedical imaging, novel
eye protection materials, as well as ultra-small electronic devices. The project
will develop new materials which will subsequently be investigated by various
sensitive optical and surface experimental techniques. These experiments will
help us to develop an understanding of the behavior of organic dyes connected to
small metal particles. The activities of this NSF-NIRT program will involve
collaboration with industrial partners that are also interested in developing
and understanding new materials that can be useful for electronic and optical
devices. Students participating in this program will receive an integrated
interdisciplinary research training in cutting-edge research laboratories and
device fabrication facilities. This experience will help graduate students in
future positions at industrial and academic institutions. The experience for
students from underrepresented groups will help build interest and confidence in
participating in this area of scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;