* 0454665
* Accretion Disks Around Young Massive Stars
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Peter Hofner, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 05/31/2006
* USD 85,955.00

" Accretion Disks Around Young Massive Stars"&lt;br/&gt;AST-
0098524&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Massive stars are responsible for many of the basic
characteristics of spiral galaxies. They effectively dictate the properties of
the interstellar medium through their strong ionizing radiation, vigorous
outflowing winds and eventual demise as supernovae explosions. They also
influence the formation of subsequent generations of stars by triggering the
initial collapse of cloud cores of molecular dust and gas. The dominant
mechanism by which high mass stars form remains one of the outstanding problems
of stellar astrophysics. Most likely, the mechanism is similar to that which
produces low mass stars through the formation and collapse of protostellar
disks. But, in the case of massive stars, there must be important modifications
to the star forming process brought on by the enormous radiation pressure from
the massive protostars. The possibility exists that there is an alternative
route for producing stars in the high-mass range but first it is important to
look hard for the signatures of disks. Through this award the PI will turn to
radio astronomy and exploit the capabilities of the Very Large Array (VLA) and
the Very Large Baseline Array to search for and subsequently study disks of this
type. The VLA will be used to directly image the dust continuum emission from
the accretion disk at a wavelength of 7 mm. The VLBA will be used to identify
accretion disks in another way, via the strong water maser line at a wavelength
of 1.3 cm and to use this as a kinetic probe. Whether the accretion disks are
detected or not, the proposed observations will provide high angular resolution
observations of matter in the vicinity of young massive
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;