* 0454504
* Correlation Effects and Transport in Nanostructured Materials:  An Argentina-Brazil-USA Collaboration
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Adriana Moreo, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 245,628.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration project addresses correlation
effects and transport in nanostructured materials. The project brings together
groups led by Adriana Moreo, Florida State University, and Sergio Ulloa, Ohio
University, in the US, Guillermo Chiappe, Universidad de Buenos Aires, in
Argentina, and Maria Davidovich and Enrique Anda, Pontificia Universidade
Catolica, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The main scientific goals of this effort
are: (i) to study the subtle quantum properties of transport across nanosystems,
such as quantum dots and molecules, by applying a variety of computational and
analytical methods, and (ii) to search for common aspects in the physics of
artificially created nanostructures and self-generated nanoclusters in oxides,
such as manganites and cuprates.

The activities significantly contribute to the training of young researchers,
who achieve a broad education in both condensed matter and computational
physics. In addition, the collaboration strengthens the research environments in
the participating institutions, and establishes new partnerships in the
continent. The project includes organization of a workshop on correlation
effects in nanostructured materials, that brings together about 30 researchers
from all the Americas to further stimulate exchanges and collaborations among
experimental and theoretical groups. This award is supported by the Division of
Materials Research, the Office of International Science and Engineering, and the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.