* 0454453
* Scholars Award to Model Uncertainty in Fishering Research Combining Anthropology and Fishery Science
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2006
* Michael Paolisso, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2006
* USD 49,810.00

Coastal fisheries worldwide are experiencing profound ecological changes due to
increased human exploitation, pollution and broader economic and social
developments along shorelines. Assessments of the challenges to developing
sustainable fisheries consistently call for the integration of traditional and
commercial fisher knowledge with science-based research, with the goal of
creating new management approaches that sustain fish populations and coastal
fishing communities. This Scholars Award in Methodological Training seeks to
integrate anthropological study of commercial fishers' knowledge and experience
with current efforts by marine scientists to estimate fish population dynamics
and sustainable harvest rates. The anthropologist researcher will study fishery
science in order to better model scientists' estimation techniques. The
geographical focus of the research is the Chesapeake Bay region, with a
particular focus on the blue crab fishery. The theoretical focus of the research
is cognitive and environmental, and argues that the integration of commercial
fisher knowledge and scientist expertise requires an understanding of the
underlying cognitive and cultural models each group implicitly uses to
understand each other and blue crabs. Furthermore the project focuses on how
commercial fishers and scientists both model uncertainty in the fishery and fish
population, an area of keenly shared interest that has not been sufficiently
studied from a comparative perspective for different stakeholders for the same
fishery or fish population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has broader
implications in terms of informing and educating other scientists and natural
resource user groups, including farmers and ranchers for example, on how
underlying cognitive models of nature, livelihoods and community can be used to
promote the exchange of valuable environmental information useful in our efforts
to manage fisheries, rural lands, reserves and other areas of high ecological
and economic value to diverse stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;