* 0454997
* Rapid Assessment of Recent Changes in Land Cover and Carbon Balance in Beringia
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Patrick Webber, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 03/31/2009
* USD 398,018.00

Funds are provided to develop and test a methodology for the rapid assessment of
the patterns of decadal time scale land cover change at multiple sites
throughout the Beringia region and to gauge the probable impact these changes
have had on ecosystem carbon balance. The project is made possible by
participation in the Swedish Beringia 2005 Expedition. Land cover change will be
assessed at the plot level in collaboration with a Russian colleague who
established marked plots throughout the region between 1984 and 1986. At the
landscape level, land cover change will be assessed using modern high-spatial
resolution satellite imagery to derive supervised land cover classifications
that will be compared to land cover maps derived from newly archived historical
air photos and/or recently declassified military spy imagery. Component land-
atmosphere fluxes of carbon dioxide and methane will be measured in
collaboration with a Swedish colleague in multiple land cover types at each site
visited. Component fluxes will be extrapolated to the landscape level for each
multi-temporal land cover assessment and the probable changes in carbon balance
over time and space will be estimated. Monolith, soil, and vegetation samples
will be collected for controlled laboratory experiments and analyses that will
enable cross-site comparison of a range of biogeochemical processes.