* 0454700
* Collaborative Research:  Testing models of magmatic and hydrothermal segmentation:  A 3-D seismic tomography experiment at the Endeavour Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2006,01/31/2014
* Andrew Barclay, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 01/31/2014
* USD 409,659.00

Competing models for controls on the segmentation and intensity of ridge crest
processes are at odds on the scale of mantle and crustal magmatic segmentation,
the distribution of hydrothermal venting with respect to a volcanic segment and
the properties of the thermal boundary layer that transports energy between the
magmatic and hydrothermal systems. The recent discovery of an axial magma
chamber (AMC) reflector beneath the Endeavour segment of the Juan de Fuca ridge,
as well as systematic along axis changes in seafloor depth, ridge crest
morphology and hydrothermal venting provide an ideal target for testing
conflicting hypotheses. The scientific objectives of this project are to: (1)
Determine if the segmentation and intensity of the magma-hydrothermal systems at
the Endeavour ridge are related to magma supply or to the magma plumbing between
the mantle and crust, and (2) Constrain the thermal and magmatic structure
underlying the Endeavour hydrothermal system in order to understand the patterns
of energy transfer. An active source seismic tomography experiment, using an
array of 64 three-component ocean-bottom seismometers, will image the 3-D
seismic structure of the crust and topmost mantle along an 80-km-long section of
the Endeavour ridge. The experiment will image four targets: (1) crustal
thickness variations within 25 km of the axial high (0 to 900 kyr); (2) the 2-D
(i.e., map view) structure of the uppermost mantle beneath the spreading axis;
(3) the 3-D structure of the crustal magmatic system and (4) the detailed 3-D,
shallow crustal thermal structure beneath the Endeavour vent field. The results
of imaging will define the recent history of magma supply, the pattern of melt
delivery from the mantle to the crust and the structure and segmentation of the
subseafloor magmatic and hydrothermal systems. These measurements are essential
to testing critically competing hypotheses for what regulates the intensity of
ridge crest magmatic and hydrothermal processes.