* 0454540
* Optical Spectroscopy of Electronic Matter Close to Quantum Criticality
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* George Gruner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2008
* USD 360,000.00

***NON-TECHNICAL*** In the vast majority of metals and semiconductors, such as
copper and silicon, the behavior of electrons is well understood and is
described by theories developed decades ago. The same is true for electronic
devices, such as the transistor, built using such materials. The focus of this
individual investigator research will be on materials where a change of
composition or magnetic field leads to so-called "quantum phase transitions"
between metallic, semiconducting and superconducting behavior. In the vicinity
of such transitions, and also in molecular wires where the current flows in one
dimension, new electron states arise. In order to gain insight into these new
electron states the frequency dependent electrical conductivity will be measured
in the microwave and millimeter wave range of the optical spectrum. Electronic
devices having potentially new principles of operation and characteristics will
also be fabricated using the same materials. The research will involve graduate
and undergraduate students, who will be trained in both electronics and optics
techniques. ***TECHNICAL*** This individual investigator research will focus on
the behavior of electrons under circumstances where the change of composition or
magnetic field leads to a quantum phase transition. The low energy
electrodynamics of the disorder driven metal-insulator transition and the
magnetic field driven superconductor-insulator transition will be investigated
through the measurement of the low energy optical response in the dc to the
millimeter wave spectral range. The frequency dependent optical conductivity
will be evaluated and analyzed in terms of scaling relations. The unusual
metallic state in molecular nanowires will be also investigated using the same
experimental tools. Electronic devices will be fabricated using the same
materials. A search for evidence of novel collective electron states will be
undertaken through the examination of the device characteristics. Both graduate
and undergraduate students will be involved in research and technique
development in the spectral range of electromagnetic spectrum that has
significant application potential.