* 0454852
* Proposal to Provide Workshop(s) to Utilize the Expertise of MIEs to Expand The K-12 Pool of Potential STEM Graduates
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Courtney Tanenbaum, McKenzie Group
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 04/30/2008
* USD 397,239.00

&lt;br/&gt; Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The McKenzie Group (TMG) proposes a two-year
workshop and planning pilot initiative&lt;br/&gt;to support the NSF Model
Institutions for Excellence (MIEs) (and subsequently
other&lt;br/&gt;institutions) to broaden their strategies for recruiting and
preparing African-American,&lt;br/&gt;Latino, and Native-American students to
pursue careers in science, technology,&lt;br/&gt;engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). As the first stage towards developing a&lt;br/&gt;framework for bridging
STEM training and recruitment efforts undertaken by MIE&lt;br/&gt;institutions
at the undergraduate level with those implemented at the middle school
and&lt;br/&gt;secondary education levels, TMG seeks funding to convene
representatives from the&lt;br/&gt;six MIE institutions, MIE graduates who are
now graduate students or serving as&lt;br/&gt;professionals in STEM fields, high
school counselors, representatives from&lt;br/&gt;community colleges, recognized
researchers and practitioners in K-14 or High&lt;br/&gt;School-College
partnerships, and representatives from exemplary pre-college
STEM&lt;br/&gt;programs serving African-American, Latino, and Native American
students. The&lt;br/&gt;workshop convening will permit these researchers and
practitioners to plan an&lt;br/&gt;integrated, research-based design and
framework for implementing appropriate&lt;br/&gt;programmatic strategies that
eventually will then be piloted at MIEs and 1 or more&lt;br/&gt;non-MIE
university sites. During the pilot phase, TMG will provide each site with
support&lt;br/&gt;for addressing programmatic challenges and enhancing success.