* 0454233
* CRI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Automated facial expression measurement: toolbox and database
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2010
* Marian Bartlett, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 308,398.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Program: NSF 04-588 CISE Computing Research
Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;Title: CRI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Automated facial
expression measurement: toolbox and database &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lead
Proposal: CNS 0454233&lt;br/&gt;PI: Marian S. Bartlett&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California-San Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal CNS
0454183&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mark Frank&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rutgers University New
Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This community resource project will
package and release to the CISE research community a collection of software
tools for vision based perceptual primitives for human-computer interaction
studies and a database of facial expressions that has been coded by facial
expression experts. The tools enable recognition of basic emotions and facial
actions from the Facial Action Coding Systems (FACS). The tools and database
have been developed with experts from machine learning and facial expression
fields. Broader impacts of this community resource include enabling research and
education in this area for a broader community in the U.S., use of automated
facial expression in education and machine tutoring applications, enabling
advances in computer vision, enabling advances in behavioral science and
medicine related to emotion, cognition, and human-machine communication, and
applications in homeland security.&lt;br/&gt;