* 0454390
* Ship-Board Atmospheric Sounding over the Kuroshio Extension: A Supplement to CLIVAR KESS
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Shang-Ping Xie, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/2009
* USD 219,707.00

The Kuroshio Extension (KE) is a region where the deep winter mixed layer allows
locally and remotely forced subsurface variability to affect sea surface
temperature (SST) on decadal and longer timescales. The Kuroshio Extension
System Study (KESS) is a field experiment to "study the dynamic and
thermodynamic processes governing the variability of, and the interaction
between, the Kuroshio Extension and the recirculation gyre". While recent
studies suggest that SST fronts in the KE region affect surface wind, cloud,
atmospheric baroclinicity and storm track, few in-situ observations exist in
this region that are necessary to test hypotheses regarding these ocean-
atmospheric influences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will launch Global
Positioning System sondes on the KESS cruises planned for May/June 2005 and
2006, acquiring vertical profiles of temperature, humidity, pressure and wind
velocity. These observations, together with already funded KESS oceanographic
component, will yield joint ocean-atmospheric transects of temperature and flow
velocity from 1 km below the sea surface to 20 km above. Analysis of these field
measurements combined with satellite observations will offer new insights
into:&lt;br/&gt;(i) atmospheric boundary-layer adjustment to sharp SST
fronts;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) the formation and variations of fog and stratus cloud
deck north of the KE; and,&lt;br/&gt;(iii) ocean's role in maintaining the
atmospheric storm track. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research expands the scope of
KESS by adding atmospheric sounding that allows the study of KE's effect on
regional climate. Shipboard GPS-sonde observations require little additional
ship time, and the logistics and feasibility have been established in cruise
surveys the PI and his collaborators successfully conducted over the region in
the 2003-04 winter. The observations and analysis will improve our understanding
of KE's influence on and interaction with the atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The Meiyu-Baiu front is the most
important climate phenomenon for East Asia. This research offers a better
description and understanding of the ocean's role in formation and variations of
this phenomenon, thereby helping enhance society's ability to plan and respond
to its weather and climate. The resultant observational data, will be
disseminated to the community via the KESS project website and the University of
Hawaii (UH) Asian-Pacific Data Research Center's data servers. The research
fosters interdisciplinary and international collaborations between
oceanographers and meteorologists, and between US and Japanese scientists.