* 0454803
* Isotopic composition of HNO3 and NOx at Summit Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Eric Steig, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 03/31/2009
* USD 414,994.00

Intellectual merit of the proposed activity. &lt;br/&gt;Variability in the
burden of reactive nitrogen compounds (primarily NOx = NO + NO2) is a first-
order research question in atmospheric chemistry. Because of their central role
in the tropospheric ozone (O3) cycle, these compounds largely determine the
lifetimes of volatile organic compounds, methane and other natural and
anthropogenic trace gases. Little is known about the magnitude of natural
variability from sources such as biomass burning, soils, and lightning records
of nitric acid or nitrate (NO3-) Concentrations from ice cores can extend our
knowledge of natural NOx variability. However, nitrate deposition rates are only
indirectly related to atmospheric NOx mixing ratios, and interpretation of
concentration data from ice cores is complicated by post-depositional changes.
Recent work by the Principal Investigator's group and others suggests that the
triple-isotopic composition (15N/14N, 18O/16O and 17O/16O) of deposited nitrate
can be related directly to NO2/NO ratios and OH and O3 photochemistry, and can
possibly be used to infer NOx mixing ratios in the past. Results also show that
there is potential to diagnose changes in NOx source. Their analytical
technique, using bacterial denitrification to convert NO3 - to N2O for mass
spectrometric measurement, permits the analysis of isotope ratios in solutions
with very low (~1 M) nitrate concentrations, necessary for the low atmospheric
and wet-deposition concentrations typical of remote regions. Before they can
fully utilize the potential of nitrate-isotope measurements in ice core
research, they will need more complete knowledge of the various factors
controlling NOx and HNO3 isotope ratios. Both modeling studies and laboratory
and field-based measurements will be necessary. This project will address the
field-based aspect of the problem, with emphasis on obtaining data from Summit
Greenland, where the deep GISP2 and GRIP ice cores were drilled. The goal is to
better characterize the isotopic variability in NOy (= NOx + HNO3, HONO, etc.)
in air and snow. The Principal Investigator will collect and analyze samples of
fresh snowfall, aged snow surfaces, and buried snow in snow pits over the course
of several summer and winter field seasons to examine variability in nitrate
isotope concentrations due both to diurnal, seasonal, and interannual changes in
source, and to depositional and post-depositional processes. The staff from
Summit will collect fresh snowfall and surface snow daily. These snow and firn
measurements will be complemented by analysis of isotopes in atmospheric NOy,
using a combination of air sampling techniques (mist chambers for HNO3 and HONO,
triethanolamine scavengers for NOx and PAN, and aerosol filters for particulate
NO3). The atmospheric sampling will be conducted in parallel with routine
meteorological and atmospheric sampling programs that are ongoing at Summit to
allow for a comprehensive record of both isotope variability and relevant mixing
ratios of important chemical (NOx, O3) and environmental variables. A new 4"
diameter ice core will be obtained to a depth of ~100 m, to obtain a record of
the last ~200-300 years at subannual resolution, to investigate longer term
variations in mean nitrate isotope ratios.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting
from the proposed activity. &lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a
comprehensive baseline data set for use in validation and&lt;br/&gt;refinement
of theoretical understanding of natural and anthropogenic NOx variability.
Because NOx has a significant impact on terrestrial and aqueous chemistry
through deposition as nitrate (NO3) important contributor to acid rain and a
source of nitrogen fertilization, this work will also contribute to ecological
studies, particularly in Arctic regions. This project will support the education
and career development of a graduate student and a post doc at the University of
Washington; both have contributed to this proposal and have considerable
experience with the analytical methods.&lt;br/&gt;