* 0454081
* CRI:   'SmartCampus'  - A Wireless Mobile Community System with People-To-People-To-Places Services
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2005,07/31/2011
* Starr Roxanne Hiltz, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 07/31/2011
* USD 807,998.00

Abstract

Proposal: CNS 0454081 PI: Constantine Manikopoulos Institution: New Jersey
Institute of Technology Program: NSF 04-588 CISE Computing Research
Infrastructure CRI: 'SmartCampus' A Wireless Mobile Community System with
People-To-People-To- Places Services

This project will create a mobile, wireless NJIT campus community system that
will serve as a dispersed laboratory for the study of location-based, online
communities with People-To-People-To-Places (P3) Services, in terms of: 1)
community building; 2) co-ordination of mobile teams; 3) user privacy [personal
location data]; and 4) security. This campus-wide facility will allow the
integration of activities across many laboratories and enable anywhere, anytime
participation by both students and faculty. SmartCampus will aid the analysis
and understanding of the underlying technical and social issues and their
interactions, taking into account rising privacy concerns. The latter will be
addressed from two perspectives: 1) improving system security and trust with the
development of ConexGuard, a novel SmartCampus security-on-demand framework for
its heterogeneous environment, and 2) creating privacy-sensitive applications
that exploit relevant contextual factors - properties of people and places, and
relationships between them - thus addressing issues distinct to P3-Systems. The
team includes social scientists, computer scientists and electrical engineers in
an interdisciplinary effort addressing issues of emerging interest -
particularly privacy in community systems. Broader impacts include education and
field testing in Newark New jersey.