* 0454849
* CAREER:   Topics in Electronic and Optical Properties of Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Lok Lew Yan Voon, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/2005
* USD 18,399.00

9984059&lt;br/&gt;Lew Yan Voon&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award establishes a
semiconductor research program at Worcester Polytechnic Institute which also
incorporates a number of education activities. The research objective of this
grant is to carry out new evelopments in the fundamentals of empirical band-
structure theory and implement them on the computer. An example is an exact
envelope-function theory of quantum wells and laterally composition-modulated
structures. The methodology will involve the study of a number of electronic and
optical properties of semiconductor nanostructures which are either still
controversial or which cannot be fully explained by all currently available
empirical band-structure models. Examples include birefringence and selection
rules for light absorption in semiconductor quantum wells, and quantum dot and
short period superlattice band structures. The solutions lie in the development
and implementation of fundamentally, as opposed to numerically, improved band-
structure models. A key aspect of the proposed research is to compare and
contrast a number of different empirical techniques (tight binding, effective
mass, empirical pseudopotential) and identify and develop extensions relevant to
the physical properties to be explored. Most of the studies will benefit from
direct collaborations with various experimental groups at universities and
national laboratories in the USA and abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated
with this research is an educational plan which will serve as a model for a new
approach to solid state physics pedagogy. This involves applying research
philosophy to both undergraduate and graduate classrooms, where case studies
and, for undergraduates, peer instruction will be used. In addition, a new
interdisciplinary course, Quantum Engineering, will be developed with a focus on
nanostructured devices. One objective is to train "classical" engineers to think
"quantum." Finally, there will be an education outreach program for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award establishes a semiconductor
research program at Worcester Polytechnic Institute which also incorporates a
number of education activities. The research objective of this grant is to carry
out new evelopments in the fundamentals of empirical band-structure theory and
implement them on the computer. An example is an exact envelope-function theory
of quantum wells and laterally composition-modulated structures. The methodology
will involve the study of a number of electronic and optical properties of
semiconductor nanostructures which are either still controversial or which
cannot be fully explained by all currently available empirical band-structure
models. Examples include birefringence and selection rules for light absorption
in semiconductor quantum wells, and quantum dot and short period superlattice
band structures. The solutions lie in the development and implementation of
fundamentally, as opposed to numerically, improved band-structure models. A key
aspect of the proposed research is to compare and contrast a number of different
empirical techniques (tight binding, effective mass, empirical pseudopotential)
and identify and develop extensions relevant to the physical properties to be
explored. Most of the studies will benefit from direct collaborations with
various experimental groups at universities and national laboratories in the USA
and abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated with this research is an educational
plan which will serve as a model for a new approach to solid state physics
pedagogy. This involves applying research philosophy to both undergraduate and
graduate classrooms, where case studies and, for undergraduates, peer
instruction will be used. In addition, a new interdisciplinary course, Quantum
Engineering, will be developed with a focus on nanostructured devices. One
objective is to train "classical" engineers to think "quantum." Finally, there
will be an education outreach program for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;