* 0454601
* Collaborative Research:     A Holocene Context for Current Arctic Warming Derived from the Vanishing Plateau Ice Caps of North-Central Baffin Island
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Jason Briner, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 02/28/2009
* USD 45,102.00

ABSTRACT Miller OPP-0454662 Briner OPP-0454601 Intellectual merit: Instrumental
records show that the Earth has warmed ca. 0.7 degreesC over the past century,
with the most dramatic increase in the decades since the 1960s. The Arctic has
experienced a similar pattern, but the magnitude is greater, with average annual
temperature increases of 2 to 5 degreesC across portions of the Arctic since
the1960s. The short time span of direct observations makes it difficult to
evaluate the roles of natural climate variability and greenhouse gas forcing in
explaining these observations, but the pattern of change is consistent with
Global Climate Model (GCM) simulations of the consequences of increased
greenhouse gases. The Principal Investigators will provide a Holocene context
for 20th century Arctic warming. How unusual is the rate and magnitude of this
warming? When was the Arctic last as warm as it is now? Is this degree of warmth
within the range of natural variability or is it unprecedented? The Arctic
instrumental record is limited in time and space, so natural archives of proxy
climate data must be exploited to address these questions. Extensive, thin,
cold-based ice caps mantling the north-central plateau of Baffin Island, Canada,
have receded by 97% in area since their Little Ice Age (LIA) maxima. One ice cap
studied in the 1960s and early 1980s has now completely melted; many others are
predicted to vanish in the next five to ten years, and all are expected to be
gone before 2050. This research will identify three ways that these ice caps can
contribute to the Arctic warming debate: 1) Aerial rates of ice-cap retreat over
the past 50 years will be defined from air photo and satellite imagery, from
which their final disappearance can be predicted; 2) Plant remains preserved
beneath extant plateau ice caps will be collected by boring through the ice
along transects from the ice margin to the ice divide. Radiocarbon ages of the
entombed vegetation define the last time the Arctic was warm enough to
completely melt these ice caps, 3) In situ 14C produced in quartz collected
along transects from the current ice margins to beyond the edge of the LIA
margin will define exposure histories across the plateau. The duration of
surface exposure defines what proportion of the Holocene the plateaus have been
ice-free since regional deglaciation, providing a longer-term perspective on
current warming.

Broader impacts: Why is the Arctic warming, and how much warmer it may become
are questions of immense societal importance. Defining how unusual is the
present warmth, and quantifying the rates of ice-cap melt, will help focus the
debate over greenhouse gases and the potential consequences of global warming.
Research activities under this award will be made accessible to indigenous
peoples by translating the goals and eventual results into Inuktitut, making
posters that describe the research, and by offering public lectures in Iqaluit,
the capital of Nunavut, and at Clyde River, the INSTAAR field base. This
research program will train a PhD student, and provides opportunities for
undergraduates to become involved with research, building on successful
traditions from previous years. This projectl is a direct consequence of
incorporating research into undergraduate teaching. While updating a lecture on
Arctic warming for a freshman class in 2003, Miller discovered that the ice cap
he studied in the1980s was unexpectedly gone, and following that lead, led to
this proposal.





