* 0454596
* SHINE: Constraining Solar Wind and Coronal Mass Ejection (CME) Models Using in situ Ionic Composition Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Thomas Zurbuchen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 12/31/2008
* USD 311,621.00

The PI proposes to utilize and model in situ solar wind charge states measured
by the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE) and Ulysses spacecraft since 1998. He
plans to solve critical science questions regarding the source and acceleration
of the slow and fast solar wind, the boundaries separating them, and the
initiation mechanism of Interplanetary Coronal Mass Ejections (ICMEs). The
proposed work will require collaboration between solar and heliospheric
physicists and lead the SHINE community to an improved understanding of the
corona and heliospheric systems as a whole. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dedicated
effort seeks to reconcile theories with observations, enabling the determination
of compositional and thermal constraints for CME and solar wind models. Solar
wind ionic composition is a unique and important measure of the thermal
environment of its coronal source region, as well as the source regions of
plasma associated with ICMEs. Charge states in the solar wind reflect the
electron temperatures in the inner corona, and the thermal history of the solar
wind can be used to determine expansion properties and heat deposition in the
low corona. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort builds upon previous work that has
shown that ionic charge states of heliospheric plasmas are crucial in
identifying ICMEs and analyzing the sources of energetic particles accelerated
in the heliosphere. The proposers will develop a freeze-in code to model the
expansion and ionization of solar wind ions under a variety of coronal
conditions. They will apply physics models that will enable the calculation and
comparison of the modeled coronal electron temperatures with the observed
ionization states from in situ data. The PI will subsequently construct radial
temperature profiles by considering ions that freeze-in at different
heliocentric radii. The results of the proposed work will provide the most
comprehensive analysis of the thermal history of the solar wind close to the
Sun, based on a complete set of measurements of in situ ionization states.