* 0454355
* CRI:    Planning for Heterogeneous Data Repository for Computing Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2009
* USD 70,172.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Program: NSF 04-588 CISE Computing Research
Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CNS 0454355&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sumeet
Dua&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Louisiana Tech University &lt;br/&gt;Title: CRI:
Planning for Heterogeneous Data Repository for Computing Research
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Investigators at Louisiana Tech University
will plan an infrastructure project for an infrastructure proposal to build a
heterogeneous repository of biomedical related data. The anticipated project
will incorporate data such as free-text notes, instrument readings, and confocal
images. The data will support a computing science research program addressing
problems in data integration, data mining, database modeling, query translation,
query optimization, rule-based databases, object recognition, information
relevance feedback, extraction and indexing, and content-based queries. Partners
in the planning process in addition to Louisiana Tech University at Ruston, LA
will include the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, LA, Grambling State
University at Grambling, LA, the University of New Orleans at New Orleans, LA,
Louisiana State University at Baton Rouge, LA, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center&lt;br/&gt;at New Orleans, and Children's Hospital at New
Orleans, LA. Broader impacts of this project include participation of minority
institutions and potential partnerships with additional higher education and
industry groups.&lt;br/&gt;