* 0454239
* The Effects of Immigrant Entrepeneurship on Ethnic Attachment and Ethnic Solidarity:  Koreans, the Chinese, and Indians in New York
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2005,12/31/2007
* Pyong Gap Min, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2007
* USD 103,709.00

Title: The Effects of Immigrant Entrepreneurship on Ethnic Attachment and Ethnic
Solidarity: Koreans, the Chinese, Indians in New York &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study intends to systematically examine the effects of immigrant
entrepreneurship on both "ethnic attachment" (as the cultural, social and
psychological integration into the ethnic community) and "ethnic solidarity" (as
use of ethnic collective action) for Chinese, Indian and Korean immigrants in
New York. The two hypotheses that determine the major direction of inquiry are
that (1) immigrant entrepreneurship strengthens ethnic attachment for all three
Asian groups; (2) but that, mainly because of the differences in business
patterns, combined with the differential levels of population diversity, among
the three groups, immigrant entrepreneurship is likely to enhance Korean
immigrants' ethnic solidarity whereas it may rather weaken Chinese and Indian
immigrants' ethnic solidarity. A telephone survey involving about 300 Korean,
300 Chinese, and 300 Indian immigrants in New York City will be used to examine
the effects on ethnic attachment, whereas a review of The New York Times
articles and tape-recorded personal interviews with about 40 Chinese, 40 Indian
and 20 Korean community, business, professional, and labor organization leaders
in the New York-New Jersey area will be used to examine the effects on ethnic
solidarity. This study will make a significant contribution to sociological
knowledge by showing the effects of immigrant business patterns on two separate
ethnic phenomena. The traditional sociological approach has focused on examining
the effects of ethnic ties on immigrant entrepreneurship, neglecting to examine
the effects in the opposite direction. The broader impacts of this project will
include providing practically useful information about business patterns among
the three Asian immigrant groups and training 16 Chinese, Indian, and Korean
undergraduate and graduate students for sociological research on their own
communities. &lt;br/&gt;