* 0454469
* SHINE: Numerical Modeling of SHINE Campaign Events by Means of Coupled MagnetoHydroDynamics-Solar Energetic Particle (MHD-SEP) Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2005,06/30/2006
* Ilia Roussev, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 06/30/2006
* USD 193,998.00

This proposal seeks funds to improve our understanding of solar eruptions and
related solar energetic particle (SEP) events (with a focus on SHINE Campaign
Events), by means of coupled MHD-SEP numerical simulations. Using the state-of-
the-art 3D MagnetoHydroDynamic (MHD) code BATS-R-US, coupled with a new particle
code called FLAMPA (Field-Line-Advection Model for Particle Acceleration)
recently developed at the University of Michigan, the proposers plan to perform
detailed studies of selected SEP events in order to address the following
fundamental questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) How are solar eruptions
initiated and how do they evolve? &lt;br/&gt;(2) How are solar particles
accelerated and transported? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is generally
accepted that the largest SEP events result from CME-driven shocks in
interplanetary space, the relative importance of CME-driven shocks versus flare-
associated acceleration of solar particles is an area of active research and
debate. Part of this debate arises from our incomplete understanding of shock
evolution in the inner corona, and how the conditions encountered there may
contribute to SEP variability, especially at high energies relevant for space
weather. Only detailed modeling of CMEs throughout the corona can clarify these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop three-dimensional numerical
models of these events to investigate the dynamics of associated eruptions. In
particular, this effort will study how close to the Sun CME-driven shocks form;
how the strengths and geometries of these shock waves vary in time; and how the
time-dependent changes in shock properties explain the observed signatures of
gradual SEP events. The BATS-R-US code's adaptive grid capability will allow the
PI to achieve sufficiently high numerical resolution near the Sun to follow CME
and shock evolution. The FLAMPA code, on the other hand, will enable the PI to
examine the time-dependent transport and diffusive acceleration of solar
particles (from protons to the heavy ions of iron) at the CME-driven
shocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of these numerical investigations will
be compared with the available data from SoHO, Wind, ACE, and GOES satellites in
order to validate and improve the models. These will be the first three-
dimensional, coupled MHD-SEP studies focused on understanding the formation and
evolution of CME-driven shocks in the inner corona and their role in causing the
observed SEP variability.