* 0454615
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Inca Administration of the Peruvian North Coast.  A View from Cerro Colorado.
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Charles Stanish, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 11,996.00

In this dissertation project, Ms. Zannie Sandoval will examine the nature and
intensity of Inca control of the Peruvian north coast following the conquest of
the native Chimu state (Chimor) ca. A.D. 1462 - 1470. Chimor was the largest and
most powerful polity to contest Inca domination in the Andes. During the Late
Intermediate Period (A.D. 1000 - 1476), it controlled all of the north coast and
portions of the central coast. Its successor, the Inca empire, spanned over 4000
km of western South America at its height, encompassing territories from Ecuador
in the north to Chile in the south. The Incas adopted flexible strategies to
rule over the wide range of societies they conquered. These strategies ranged
from strong to loose forms of control, depending on local social and political
conditions and the goals of the empire. At one end of the continuum, direct rule
was highly intrusive, and demanded heavy investment in administration, security,
and physical infrastructure. At the other end indirect rule favored loose forms
of control, a less costly alternative. Ms. Sandoval's research will address two
questions: To what extent did the Incas disrupt the local Chimu administrative
infrastructure? And, is the Inca domination of Chimor an example of direct or
indirect rule within the Empire?

Archaeologists have traditionally regarded the Inca domination of Chimor as a
prime example of weak state control, based on written accounts - namely,
sixteenth-century Spanish Colonial chronicles and legal and administrative
records - and on surface-level examination of the north coast landscape, which
has yielded few traditional markers of Inca imperialism. Under the supervision
of Dr. Charles Stanish, Ms. Sandoval will directly test competing models of
direct vs. indirect control by assessing potential changes in the local feasting
assemblage and in public architecture - traditional symbols of political
authority in the Andes - in the aftermath of the Inca conquest. She will collect
these data through archaeological excavations at the site of Cerro Colorado in
the lower Jequetepeque Valley. The site is strategically located relative to the
major prehistoric field and canal systems of the Jequetepeque Valley, and
connected to known centers with Inca components via the coastal Inca road.

This research will provide insights into a poorly understood period in north
coast Peruvian prehistory. The Inca empire ranks as one of the largest and most
complex pre-industrial polities in world history. The data from this work will
enhance current knowledge on Inca imperial strategies on the Pacific coast and
serve as a case study for comparative anthropological analysis. Research
findings will be accessible through publication in Peruvian and American
academic journals, presentations in professional meetings, and lectures in
Spanish for local residents. This research will also provide training to
Peruvian and American archaeology students.