* 0454763
* Collaborative Research:    Development of a Novel Multiphoton Microscope for Measuring Biomolecular Dynamics Over 15 Orders of Magnitude in Time
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2009
* Ralph Jimenez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 344,822.00

This award supports the development of a novel multiphoton microscope that will
be capable of measuring biomolecular dynamics over 15 orders of magnitude in
time. The microscope will use microfluidics technology to provide microsecond
time-scale mixing, and low (ml/hour) sample consumption rates. Microsecond to
second time scale delays will be achieved by using a microscope to probe the
sample flow at increasing distances (corresponding to increasing time) along the
outlet channel. The optical system will implement three pulse echo peak shift
spectroscopy (3PEPS), a four-wave mixing method that has proven useful for
measuring the spectrum of fluctuations of cofactor-containing proteins. The
microscope will initially be employed in two lines of work: 1) studying the
evolution of flexibility and heterogeneity during protein folding and 2)
characterizing the dynamics of intermediate species in the photocycle of
photoactive yellow protein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct measurements of the
molecular motions of biomolecules over a broad time range is crucial to
furthering a microscopic understanding of biology. To fully appreciate the
relation between molecular motions and biochemical events, the time scale over
which molecular dynamics must be recorded is enormous - from femtoseconds (10-15
seconds) to seconds or even minutes. This collaborative work brings together the
expertise of an optical physicist, chemical engineer, and biophysicist, to
develop instrumentation that will advance knowledge in biomolecular dynamics.
This new instrumentation will stimulate broader application of powerful
femtosecond nonlinear optical techniques to biochemical studies, and will
further develop technologies with great promise in biological studies:
multiphoton microscopy and microfluidics. This research will benefit
interdisciplinary biophysics education at the undergraduate and graduate levels
by providing opportunities for students to work in multidisciplinary teams
including molecular biologists, chemical engineers, and optical
physicists.&lt;br/&gt;