* 0454610
* SHINE: Distinguishing Reconnection Scenarios for Solar Energetic Events
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* K Leka, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 04/30/2011
* USD 516,602.00

This proposal will investigate the origins of solar energetic events by focusing
on models of the trigger mechanisms, including those initiated by magnetic
reconnection (e.g., tether cutting, breakout models) and by other mechanisms
(e.g., the kink instability). Until now, only a few events have been studied in
depth to investigate pre-event coronal signatures, and models of solar eruptions
have only sparsely provided observables by which to test models. There are
finally sufficient archived observational data and testable predictions from
models that a rigorous statistical approach can be taken. The magnetic topology
and pre-event coronal dynamics of solar energetic events will be characterized
by parameterizations and moment analysis of coronal brightness maps and vector
magnetograms, in order to avoid subjective data interpretation. This
investigation will make use of data from the GOES, SoHO/LASCO, Yohkoh/SXT, and
SoHO/EIT archives, as well as the Imaging Vector Magnetograph at the University
of Hawaii's Mees Solar Observatory. The proposers' analysis will include control
data sets for quiet times and regions, against which to test the null
hypothesis. The variables derived from these data will be subjected to
Discriminant Analysis, a statistical tool well suited for this approach. The
power of Discriminant Analysis lies in its ability to differentiate between
known populations, e.g., event-producing vs. event-quiet data points, in a
multiple-variable parameter space. The assembled research team is well suited
for the tasks of data acquisition, analysis, and interpretation in the context
of the solar magnetic fields, plasma, and energetic events. Even if a specific
model for the initiation of energetic events cannot be identified, it should be
possible to put constraints on the processes involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this study will aid in the definition and development of upcoming
NSF-supported and collaborative projects, including the myriad ground-based and
space-based efforts that include in their science goals the understanding of
solar energetic events. By taking advantage of the archived data from long-
running observational programs, this project will help focus the scientific
approach and goals of future investigations.