* 0454822
* A Miniature Micropower Cell Phone for Tracking Migratory Animals
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2011
* Terri Fiez, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cort L. Anderson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 760,120.00

This award supports the development of a miniature radio tag capable of
communicating with cell tower receivers normally used by cellular phones. The
device is essentially a stripped-down version of a cell phone with low enough
mass (2 grams) to permit its attachment to migratory birds or other small
animals. To conserve power, a timer in the unit will keep it dormant until
preprogrammed dates when the transmitter will activate and attempt to make
contact with a nearby cell phone tower. Because the device will remain off
during an extended period, and then activate for only long enough to make
contact with the nearest receiver, a tiny battery is expected to provide
sufficient power for several contacts over a period as long as 2 years. Each
unit will communicate a unique identifying number, so that individual tagged
birds can be linked to a specific location. Following the contact, the PI will
receive notification of the tag identity and location from the cellular network
provider by email. The tag will be useful in studies of migration and dispersal,
both of which are nearly universal behaviors among animals, particularly birds.
Despite their importance, the impact of these behaviors on population dynamics
remain major unanswered questions in biology, in large part because of our
inability to track Individual animals throughout their annual cycle. The
strategy is expected to locate birds to within a 5 km radius, a completely
unprecedented level of precision for locating individual small migratory
animals. The project is a collaboration of ecologists and electrical engineering
researchers that will involve undergraduate and graduate students in
collaborative learning opportunities, including both design and field testing of
the instrument.