* 0454456
* Engineering Senior Design Projects to Aid Persons with Disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* John Enderle, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 04/30/2011
* USD 155,000.00

0454456&lt;br/&gt;Enderle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed
project is the design and construction of projects to aid persons with
disabilities by students in the University of Connecticut BME Senior Design
course. The purpose of the work is three-fold. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
purpose is to provide an opportunity for practical and creative problem solving
by students in addressing a well-defined problem for meeting the required design
component of their study program. A positive outcome of this involvement is that
persons with disabilities receive devices that provide significant improvement
in quality of life and independence at no cost to the recipients. This is
especially important in light of the distance learning component of this
proposal, as the clients to be served reside in an economically deprived
Appalachian region of Southeast Ohio. In many cases, development of devices
and/or software for an individual may lead to applications for others with
similar disabilities. Students are also exposed to a unique body of applied
information on current technology in the area of rehabilitation design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second purpose is to motivate students, graduate
engineers and other health care &lt;br/&gt;professionals to work more actively
in rehabilitation, towards an increased technology and knowledge base, to
effectively address the needs of persons with disabilities. This complements the
implementation requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
(ADA). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third purpose is to allow for the controlled
study of the pedagogical efficacy of the specific experiential teaching/learning
processes to be incorporated into the proposed design experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gilbert B.
Devey&lt;br/&gt;April 5,2005&lt;br/&gt;