* 0454869
* Uniaxial Pressure Measurements Near Quantum Criticality
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Rena Zieve, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 06/30/2010
* USD 345,000.00

Quantum critical points, phase transitions driven by quantum fluctuations at
zero temperature, influence many unusual low-temperature behaviors of metallic
systems. Samples near a quantum critical point exhibit complex phase diagrams
including superconductivity, antiferromagnetism, ferromagnetism, spin glass
behavior, and non-Fermi liquid regimes. Transitions among these phases are often
controlled by parameters such as pressure, alloying, or magnetic field.
Achieving a quantitative understanding of quantum critical phenomena will
greatly improve our grasp of many-body systems. This project uses the special
capabilities of a rare uniaxial pressure technique to study several heavy-
fermion systems. Tuning sample properties by pressure and comparing with results
from tuning by alloying will help distinguish the influence of a quantum
critical point from consequences of disorder. Measuring inherently anisotropic
samples will allow controlled variation of lattice constants and conduction
electron/f-electron hybridization, key parameters in determining the ground
state of a strongly correlated system. Finally, the ability to maintain the
sample temperature below 300 mK during pressure changes allows study of
hysteretic effects in low-temperature spin glass phases. Exposure to cryogenic
equipment and pressure techniques will prepare graduate and undergraduate
students for further work in academia, industry, or national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simplest theories of metals
ignore interactions among the electrons in a material. As a result, these
theories cannot explain the many interesting and important phenomena which
depend on electron-electron correlations, among them superconductivity and
magnetism. In the class of materials known as "heavy fermions," strong electron-
electron interactions dominate the behavior. These compounds often exhibit more
than one highly correlated phase, and can be tuned from one phase to another by
using magnetic fields or pressure. This makes the heavy fermions an excellent
testing ground for finding the precise conditions needed for superconducting or
magnetic phases. Studies on heavy fermions will improve understanding of their
relatives, the high-Tc superconductors, and may guide searches for other
superconductors. This project investigates heavy-fermion systems through a rare
pressure technique that provides a controlled means of tuning a sample among
phases. Pressure is particularly useful for varying the interatomic distances,
which in turn determine the electron interactions. This work will elucidate the
role of crystal defects, the importance of planar structures within crystals,
and memory effects upon phase changes. Exposure to techniques for measurements
under pressure and at low temperature will prepare graduate and undergraduate
students for further work in academia, industry, or national laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;