* 0454501
* Tropical Cyclone Response to Time-Dependent Heating and Theory of Tropical Cyclone Motion
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2011
* Hugh Willoughby, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2011
* USD 334,183.00

Forecasts of tropical cyclone (TC) track and intensity remain significant
operational challenges. Track forecasts have improved gradually over the last
five decades, largely in response to improved observation and modeling of the
environmental steering currents that control TC motion. By contrast, progress on
intensity has been slow and statistical techniques still provide the best
forecast guidance. The fundamental process in TC intensification is conversion
of latent heat extracted from the sea into available potential energy and
kinetic energy of the wind. The research to be undertaken under this award has
two aspects 1) analysis of the TC vortex response to imposed heat sources and 2)
theoretical studies of linear and nonlinear motion of a two-layer baroclinic TC-
like vortex. The analytical axially symmetric, baroclinic mean-vortex structures
used in these studies will be realistic representations of actual TCs derived
from a large sample of in situ observations.

The Principal Investigator will explore TC intensification processes by studying
the responses to imposed heat sources with these sources being represented as
truncated Fourier series in both time and azimuth. Only the axially symmetric,
temporally constant component of the heat source supplies net heating. Its
effect is readily computed from the classical Sawyer-Eliassen equation. The next
level of complexity uses an axially symmetric heat source that varies
sinusoidally in time. A single governing equation is derived from the Navier-
Stokes equations linearized on a mean vortex in hydrostatic and gradient
balance. The perturbation flow may be nonhydrostatic and sub- or super-gradient.
If the frequency with which the heat source changes is low enough, this model
calculation should resemble the results from steady forcing. At higher
frequencies, effects such as changes in the effective local deformation radius
due to time variation or projection onto gravity-wave modes can become factors.
The next level of complexity considers a similarly derived equation for
asymmetric heating with a given azimuthal wavenumber and frequency. Phenomena to
be studied include changes in vortex response as a function of forcing
frequency, the roles buoyancy and dynamic pressure, diabatically induced super-
and sub-gradient winds, evolution of the mean vortex as a result of eddy fluxes
of heat or momentum due to the perturbations, and hydrodynamic stability of
mean-flow vortices constructed to model real hurricanes.

The vortex-motion studies will use a two-layer semi spectral, vortex-tracking
model to study the resiliency and realignment. Questions to be addressed include
re-examination of resonant-damping theory, assessment of the roles of
nonlinearity and evolution of the symmetric vortex, study of environmental
potential vorticity and planetary vorticity gradients, and the effects of
realistic initial mean-vortex structures.

Broader impacts of this study include: fundamental new physical understanding
essential to accurate track and especially intensity forecasts and support of
Florida International University's (FIU) nascent meteorology program.