* 0454842
* Real-Time Electron Dynamics in Nanoscale Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Alexander Rimberg, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2007
* USD 137,783.00

Nanoscale electrical structures exhibit numerous interesting phenomena such as
the Coulomb blockade or quantum coherence. Such phenomena have traditionally
been studied using dc or quasi-dc measurement techniques, even though the
underlying electron dynamics take place on much shorter time scales. While such
measurements provide a tremendous amount of information, much more could be
accessed by studying the dynamics of individual electrons. For instance,
temporal correlations in electron tunneling are expected in transport through
Coulomb blockade nanostructures, but have never been observed directly. This
Individual Investigator Award supports a project that addresses such issues by
using a radio-frequency single-electron transistor to study the motion of
individual electrons in a quantum dot. Doing so will ultimately allow
investigation of electronic correlations and quantum coherence on time scales of
tens to hundreds of nanoseconds. A series of experiments on both single and
double quantum dots will be undertaken, with the goal of studying electron
correlations by means of their counting statistics and probing quantum coherent
phenomena on their intrinsic time scales. The techniques used in these
experiments are also relevant to the qubit readout problem in quantum
computation, and are expected to shed light on the quantum measurement problem
in general. This effort involves use of cutting-edge techniques in
nanofabrication and radio-frequency characterization, as well as cryogenic and
low noise techniques, providing the students involved with skills valuable in
either academia or industry.

For many nanoscale structures (whose physical dimensions are measured in
billionths of a meter), the motion of individual electrons plays an important
role in their electrical characteristics. While the roles of individual
electrons and the interactions between them have long been recognized,
electrical transport in nanostructures is usually probed by measuring the
average conductance. Although such measurements have provided a tremendous
amount of information, much more could be accessed by studying the dynamics of
individual electrons. This Individual Investigator Award supports a project that
addresses such issues by using a fast and very sensitive electrometer known as a
radio-frequency single electron transistor to study the motion of individual
electrons on a semiconductor quantum dot. By observing the motion of individual
electrons in a current driven through the dot, for instance, it will be possible
to extract additional information about how electrons interact in
nanostructures. Because electrons are quantum-mechanical objects, the research
will also focus on how the process of observing the electron motion affects the
motion itself. This problem, which is also important for measurement of a qubit
in quantum computation, is related to the question of how quantum mechanical
objects lose their wave-like properties (their quantum coherence) when affected
by a macroscopic object. The ability to measure individual electrons on short
time scales (millionths of a second or less) should shed new light on such
issues. This effort involves use of cutting-edge techniques in nanofabrication
and radio-frequency characterization, as well as cryogenic and low noise
techniques, providing the students involved with skills valuable in either
academia or industry.