* 0454699
* Defects and Fluctuations in Low-Dimensional Condensed Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Herbert Fertig, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This award involves theoretical research in condensed matter physics to study
defects and fluctuations in low dimensions. Topological defects play a central
role in our understanding of many physical phenomena in condensed matter,
particularly low-dimensional systems where spontaneous order is often not
possible due to thermal or quantum fluctuations. The state of these systems is
often characterized by defects which may or may not proliferate. This research
suggests studies of a variety of low -dimensional systems in which defects
and/or fluctuations play an important role, for situations where the paradigm of
defect unbinding in two dimensions - the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition - does
not apply. The studies will explore the properties and consequences of a novel
transition mechanism operative when a symmetry-breaking field is present,
leading at low effective temperature to linear confinement of defects, and
deconfinement via a string-proliferation mechanism at higher temperature. The
systems studied will include bosons in optical lattices, one-dimensional quantum
systems, bilayer quantum Hall systems, and thin superconducting
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to this, the research will focus on
unusual physics in quantum Hall systems. Prominent among these will be studies
of interlayer coherence in bilayers, which recently have shown properties akin
to superconductivity. Quantum Hall liquid crystal states, especially stripes and
bubbles, will also be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
work will be to develop new methods for the understanding of low-dimensional
systems that may be useful in a broad array of condensed matter and materials
systems. In addition, the work will be done in conjunction with students and
postdocs, and involves both analytical methods and numerical simulations that
will be part of their professional training. The results will be reported to the
physics community through publications, seminars, and conference presentations,
and, when possible, to the broader community through popular-level articles,
colloquia, and public presentations.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This award
involves theoretical research in condensed matter physics to study defects and
fluctuations in low dimensions. The physics of matter in dimensions less than
our normal three-dimensional world is often different. For instance, electrons
moving on surfaces of solids behave differently than electrons moving in the
interior of the solid. This research studies novel phenomena occurring on low-
dimension having to do with defects in these systems. These defects are usually
associated with a change in the normal, periodic geometry of the condensed
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work will be to develop
new methods for the understanding of low-dimensional systems that may be useful
in a broad array of condensed matter and materials systems. In addition, the
work will be done in conjunction with students and postdocs, and involves both
analytical methods and numerical simulations that will be part of their
professional training. The results will be reported to the physics community
through publications, seminars, and conference presentations, and, when
possible, to the broader community through popular-level articles, colloquia,
and public presentations.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;