* 0454861
* Miniaturization of Mediatorless Microbial Fuel Cells for High-Throughput Studies of Bacteria-Electrode Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2009
* Daniel Bond, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 07/31/2009
* USD 449,389.00

This award supports the development of miniaturized microbial fuel cells at the
University of Minnesota. These fuel cells will use recently discovered anaerobic
bacteria such as Geobacter that can directly transmit electrons to electrode
surfaces. The goal is to develop electrical devices that can utilize these
bacteria as catalysts and sensors. A new approach will be demonstrated using
silicon-based microfabrication techniques and electrodes directly printed on
membranes. The planned activity will fabricate and test a series of designs
intended to fit in a multiwell plate format, adaptable to other high-throughput
platforms. An additional goal is to fabricate microscale flow-through reactors
that will create a mechanism for exposing very small populations of bacteria on
electrode surfaces to conditions of constant laminar flow for continuous
sensing. These devices will reduce instrument size by two orders of magnitude
over typical systems, and they will provide researchers with tools to make
sensitive, parallel observations related to extracellular electron transport,
conversion of organic compounds into electrical signals by bacteria, and
processes related to corrosion and metal reduction. These proposed instruments
will measure electricity production by bacteria in a device designed to utilize
membrane-based electrodes similar to those optimized for state-of-the-art
chemical fuel cells. They will also provide a microfabricated interface allowing
direct conversion of an organic compound into an electrical signal using
electricity producing organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heart of any device
converting a chemical into an electrical signal is the catalyst. Examples
include fuel cells, which convert hydrogen or liquid methanol fuels directly
into electricity, or 'breathalyzers' which use catalysts to convert alcohol into
electricity for sensing. Typically, precious metals such as platinum are used as
catalysts, and they convert simple gasses or chemicals into electricity. It has
recently been discovered that some bacteria in underground aquifers and other
oxygen-poor habitats produce energy by transferring electrons to iron minerals
present in the sediment. This process of 'iron reduction' essentially involves
conversion of organic chemical compounds in the sediment into electrical
signals. When these iron-reducing bacteria are grown on electrodes, a full range
of sugars, fatty acids, and aromatic compounds can be converted into
electricity, suggesting a variety of possible electrical power-generating or
sensing devices. Research into this phenomenon is hampered by a lack of devices
for studying this unique process, and we propose to use microfabrication and
membrane printing techniques to build small microbial "fuel cells" from silicon
and conductive materials. By combining our new understanding of the microbiology
of this process with advances in electrical engineering and materials science,
we will develop instruments to allow simultaneous study of multiple cultures and
conditions, and make available the first tools for study of these bacteria as
catalysts in miniaturized sensors and other devices. &lt;br/&gt;