* 0454715
* Interactive Virtual Intelligent System for Scientific Inquiry in a Biology Learning Environment:  Project INVISSIBLE
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Brian Butz, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Hanych
* 05/31/2009
* USD 843,895.00

The proposed project will develop, test, refine and evaluate an intelligent,
interactive, multimedia system. This intelligent tutoring system will provide
high school biology students a virtual, hands-on, multimedia learning
environment. Specifically, this project is designed to: 1) Develop an innovative
curricular approach for scientific literacy in biology that is driven by
national standards. The curriculum is based on the three pillars of scientific
understanding to increase student learning regarding: (a) knowledge acquisition
of content, concepts and principles relevant to genetics, forensic science and
the biology of evolution; (b) relevant scientific process skills and knowledge;
and (c) knowledge of nature and methods of science. 2) Develop an intelligent
tutoring system that has the capacity to (a) create authentic multimedia
scenarios for self-directed, hands-on learning, (b) monitor a student's
performance and modify pedagogical strategies based on a dynamic assessment of
the learner and (c) provide adaptability to bridge interactions between teacher
and learner understandings. 3) Create an exportable Project Development Model
that includes design and development processes, stakeholder inputs, formative
assessments and feedback loops. 4) Disseminate achievement of the above goals to
science and educational communities.