* 0454066
* CRI: Computing Support for the Next Generation Application-driven Declarative Programming Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Brook Milligan, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Urban
* 06/30/2007
* USD 102,879.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CNS 0454066&lt;br/&gt;PI: Enrico
Pontelli&lt;br/&gt;Institution: New Mexico State University &lt;br/&gt;Program:
NSF 04-588 CISE Computing Research Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;Title: CRI: CRI:
Computing Support for the Next Generation Application-driven Declarative
Programming Systems &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's will acquire a
Beowulf cluster to support research in Logic Programming, particular a new
effort in Answer Set Programming (ASP). ASP addresses needs for constraint
programming and non-monotonic reasoning that are not present in traditional
logic programming. These needs arise in world situations in which knowledge of
the world changes such that prior true statements become false - violating
monotonic properties of traditional logic programming. The research to be
performed will include research on scalable and transparent methods to exploit
parallelism, research on reasoning in complex environments such as those
expressing sensing and actuation or actions with time constraints, and
development of a domain specific workbench to support the design data oriented
processes in evolutionary biology, such as phylogenetic inference. The
infrastructure will support research and education at New Mexico State
University, a minority serving institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;