* 0454996
* Maintenance, Development and Innovation of the Barrow Area Information Database and Internet Map Server (BAID-IMS)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Allison Graves, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Renee Crain
* 08/31/2009
* USD 462,686.00

Webber 04-54996&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key objective of this proposal is to
maintain, develop and innovate the prototype Barrow Area Information Database
and Internet Map Server (BAID-IMS) that we have developed over the past year.
BAID-IMS is a user-friendly web-based science, logistic and educational
informational portal that allows users to access, view and interact with a wide
range of spatial data and remotely sensed imagery focused on the Barrow area in
northern most Alaska. The area of interest for BAID-IMS spans 280,000 km2 and
extends from 100km offshore and north of the city of Barrow, east to Deadhorse,
west to the native village of Point Lay and south to the Brooks Range and the
village of Anaktuvuk Pass. The application encompasses over 100 data layers in
total and includes a range of air-borne and satellite imagery as well as
thematic data. Thematic data includes USGS topographic maps, administrative
boundaries, infrastructure such as roads, power lines, and native subsistence
cabins, nearly 4000 active and historic research sites, vegetation, topographic
and hydrographic maps, and distribution/sensitivity maps for select fauna. Users
can employ standard Geographic Information System (GIS) tools to zoom, pan,
measure distance, identify waypoints for uploading into Global Positioning
Systems (GPS), query a range of attribute data layers and make and print their
own maps. Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) standard metadata has been
compiled for most data layers and provides links to data centers where users can
obtain copies of BAID-IMS data for more advanced analysis. A help guide is
provided for all tools in the application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
increase the longevity and the functional and operational capacity of BAID-IMS.
Specifically, the awardee will (1) Continue acquisition of image, thematic and
site data to improve the utility of BAID-IMS; (2) Expand the informational
technology and server hardware backing BAID-IMS to enhance operational capacity;
(3) Continue to train graduate and undergraduate students in the maintenance and
development of BAID-IMS, and continue education and outreach activities
illustrating the use of BAID-IMS; (4) Publish, present and advertise the
functionality and technical underpinning of BAID-IMS and engage community input
in the development of BAID-IMS; (5) Encompass new technologies and opportunities
as these arise, including the development of wireless technologies for real time
access to BAID-IMS in the field, improved cross-browser compatibility and data
export capabilities to hand-held GPSs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;