* 0454407
* CRI: Reconfigurable computing infrastructure for high end and embedded computing applications
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2008
* Manbir Singh, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 06/30/2008
* USD 298,320.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program: NSF 04-588 CISE Computing Research
Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;Title: CRI: Reconfigurable computing infrastructure for
high end and embedded computing applications &lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CNS
0454407&lt;br/&gt;PI: Prasanna, Viktor K.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Southern California&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will acquire a
reconfigurable computer comprised of general purpose processors, field
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), a common memory, and an interconnect fabric
joined under a programming model that works with all the parts. The acquisition
of this machine will enable research at a realistic scale on actual
reconfigurable machines for performance testing, validation, and applications
demonstrations. This infrastructure will be robust enough to implement
application "kernels" such as (e,g, an LU implementation or n-body simulation)
that give realistic scale experimental results. Applications that will be
explored include matrix operations, computational genomics, molecular dynamics,
density functional theory, and finite element methods. The team will also be
able to work on energy efficiency for embedded FPGAs. Broader impacts of this
project include the potential impact on reconfigurable systems, use of FPGAs for
applications, and discoveries in the applications areas. The investigators
participate in USC's Minority Opportunities in Research (MORE)
program.&lt;br/&gt;