* 0454866
* Regulation and Function of Membrane Lipid Hydrolysis in Lipid-Based Signaling of Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Xuemin Wang, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald A. Berkowitz
* 07/31/2009
* USD 799,893.00

Signal transduction across membranes often involves the activation of
phospholipases that generate lipid or lipid-derived messengers. The goal of this
project is to understand the mechanisms by which phospholipase D (PLD), a major
phospholipase family in plants, and its lipid product phosphatidic acid (PA)
mediate cellular functions. Specifically, it will identify the molecular targets
of PLDs and PA in given signaling pathways. The central hypothesis to be tested
is that PA and PLDs mediate cell signaling by interacting with other cell
signaling components. The first objective is to characterize the novel signaling
interaction between PLD and the a subunit of heterotrimeric G protein (Ga) and
to elucidate the physiological function of this interaction. The second
objective is to quantitatively define the interaction of PA with a protein
phosphatase 2C (PP2C) and determine the cellular significance of the
interaction. The third objective is to analyze the binding of PA to mitogen-
activated protein (MAP) kinases and the potential role of PA in the formation of
protein kinase-phosphatase signaling complexes. These interactions of PA/PLD
with signaling proteins will be characterized using two complementary
approaches, isothermal titration calorimetry and surface plasmon resonance.
Other proteins and lipid species in the signaling complexes will be profiled
using mass spectrometry-based approaches. Genetic complementation and double
mutant analysis will be used to help define the signaling interaction and
physiological significance. The intellectual merit of this work is that it will
firmly establish the direct interaction of PLD/PA with key cell signaling
components, provide concrete evidence for direct targets of intracellular lipid
messengers in plants, generate insight into the mechanism by which lipids and
phospholipases mediate cellular responses, and provide critical pieces of
information that will help define the network of various molecules in plant
signal transduction cascades. Such knowledge will enhance the understanding of
the processes that regulate plant growth, stress responses, and
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;Results of this
study will fill critical gaps in current knowledge of lipid-based signaling in
plant biology. This project will provide opportunities to train postdoctoral and
graduate students in emerging, under-explored disciplines. It will also provide
a platform to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research.
Minority and woman students will be recruited through various national and on-
campus training programs. The information will be disseminated to enhance
science and education through lectures and seminars, in classroom teaching, at
national and international meetings, and through timely publications in peer-
journals. The materials and methods to be developed will be made available to
the research community. Results from this project will also have potential
benefits to society at large, because the molecular interactions studied are
important in mediating plant response to stress and environmental changes. Such
knowledge has the potential to be applicable to developing crop plants with
enhanced stress tolerance and growth performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;