* 0454074
* CRI: Experimental Platform for Robot Programming and Task Execution in Human Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Roderic Grupen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2010
* USD 316,280.00

Abstract

Proposal: CNS 0454074 PI: Oliver Brock Institution: University of Massachusetts
- Amherst Program: NSF 04-588 CISE Computing Research Infrastructure Title: CRI:
Experimental Platform for Robot Programming and Task Execution in Human
Environments

The investigators will construct a robotic platform that combines mobility and
dexterous manipulation capabilities with advanced sensing. This platform will
serve as the experimental testbed for an integrated research effort into
algorithms for programming mobile manipulators to perform complex tasks in human
environment. The infrastructure will support research on five projects. (i)
Probabilistic logic planning to develop plans using a representation of the
world. This research will develop adaptive strategies to deal with uncertainty
in the real world. (ii) Sensing for mobile manipulators deals with the challenge
of coordinating the motions of the manipulator and the mobility operations that
permit moving about the world. (iii) Sensing for mobile manipulators will
explore how to move sensors such as cameras to get multiple views of a scene and
improve understanding of the scene. (iv) Programming by demonstration will
develop techniques to learn from human operators how to perform a complex task.
(v) Programming by observation uses a hidden Markov model to deal with
hierarchical task decomposition. Broader impacts of this project include the use
of the facility in student thesis projects, REU projects that recruit from
nearby women's colleges, and participation in the SPUR program that provides
summer research opportunities to students from underrepresented groups.

