* 0454417
* 2005 Summer Institute in Political Psychology
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2005
* Jon Krosnick, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/2005
* USD 39,523.00

&lt;br/&gt;Political psychology is a thriving field of social scientific inquiry
with roots in political science and &lt;br/&gt;psychology and connections to a
range of other social sciences. Political psychologists attempt to
&lt;br/&gt;understand the psychological underpinnings, roots, and consequences
of political behavior. Some of this work attempts to understand political
phenomena by applying theories developed through research done in psychological
laboratories. Findings regarding mediation and moderation of real-world effects
have often led to extensions and revisions of the inspiring psychological
theories. Other political psychology involves the development of completely new
theory to provide psychological accounts of political phenomena, thus
contributing to basic understanding of how the mind works and of social
interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In light of the vitality of the field and
growing graduate student interest, the idea of establishing a &lt;br/&gt;summer
training institute in political psychology was initially developed at a "futures
conference" &lt;br/&gt;organized by Professor Margaret Hermann at Ohio State
University (OSU) in 1988. That conference was sponsored by the International
Society of Political Psychology and set out to develop a ten-year plan for the
Society's future. The notion of a Summer Institute emerged as a centerpiece of
the conference's proposals. With the support of the ISPP, the first Summer
Institute in Political Psychology (SIPP) was taught at Ohio State University in
1991. That first year, 60 participants came to Columbus, Ohio, for intensive
lectures, discussion groups, workshops, and information interactions. The
participants were primarily graduate students, but they also included
undergraduates, professors, and professionals from governments in the US and
abroad. Students were drawn from political science, psychology, sociology,
economics, history, and other fields. OSU offered SIPP every year from 1991
through 2003, and there was no decline in interest during these 13 years: 60
participants attended in 1991, and 58 &lt;br/&gt;participants attended in 2003.
In total 658 participants have attended SIPP between 1991 and 2003.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; After 13 years of hosting SIPP, Ohio State University
decided to end its run and pass it along to &lt;br/&gt;another university.
During all of its years operating SIPP, Ohio State invested a substantial amount
of money to cover cash expenses and also donated considerable faculty teaching
time. The new budgeting system the university recently adopted has made such
underwriting more difficult, as have departures of some faculty in political
psychology. After a lengthy evaluation period, the International Society of
Political Psychology has selected Stanford University as the new potential home
of SIPP. Stanford is prepared to take on this responsibility if sufficient
funding can be assembled, and this proposal seeks the remaining required funding
to supplement sources of funds already in place. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Social Value: The SIPP would enhance the social science capabilities of the
current attendees and would also contribute to better research and teaching for
generations to come. At Stanford, SIPP would be a 3-week program designed to
advance the research capabilities of &lt;br/&gt;graduate students from around
the world studying political science, psychology, and other social
&lt;br/&gt;sciences. The Summer Institute would aim to enrich the graduate
training experiences of participants by offering a broad and intensified
training experience to complement the classroom training that is usually
available at graduate institutions. By bringing together a large set of faculty
offering lectures on a diverse set of topics, SIPP seeks to expose graduate
students to (1) a broad range of research literature in political psychology,
(b) the research styles and approaches of an array of scholars working in
political psychology, and (c) training in the varied set of research methods
employed by political psychologists, as well as (d) creating inter-disciplinary
networks among the participants to support their on-going research efforts and
cement their long-term commitments to social science scholarship. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Stanford is well-positioned to take over hosting SIPP, in light of
its history and present. The &lt;br/&gt;university has a tradition of excellence
and leadership in political psychology among its faculty, including Alexander
George, Paul Sniderman, Shanto Iyengar, and Jon Krosnick. Krosnick was co-
founder of SIPP at Ohio State and was co-director of it for most of its years
there, so he has substantial experience with managing the enterprise. In
addition, other Stanford faculty are known for distinguished research relevant
to political psychology, including James Fishkin, Norman Nie, Richard Brody,
Karen Cook, Lee Ross, Robert Zajonc, Albert Bandura, Doug McAdam, Susan Olzak,
Deborah Gruenfeld, Dale Miller, Roderick Kramer, Jonathan Bendor, and others.
And nearby universities. faculties include many scholars who would be terrific
SIPP lecturers. One of the best ways to enhance research productivity in
political psychology over the long term is to recruit and train talented,
energetic, and motivated cohorts of scholars to join the field. Because of the
importance of political psychology's contributions to political science
throughout its history, an investment in feeding this pipeline for the future
seems well worthwhile. SIPP offers an opportunity to do so, and Stanford's
generous matching funds can make this possible with a relatively modest grant
from NSF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;