* 0454454
* Climate-driven changes in impacts of benthic predators in the northern Bering Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Jacqueline Grebmeier, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 02/28/2009
* USD 608,159.00

Funds are provided to investigate a mechanism by which sea-ice change might
affect the very productive, benthic-dominated food webs on shallow arctic
shelves - expansion of the ranges and numbers of mobile benthic predators owing
to increased temperature of bottom water. The main questions to be addressed
are:&lt;br/&gt;Is the benthic food web in the north-central Bering Sea limited
by top-down control by predators?&lt;br/&gt;Are the overwinter survival and/or
prebreeding condition of Spectacled Eider (SPEI) being impacted by climate-
driven trends in ice cover that are allowing populations of competing crabs and
groundfish to expand?&lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions, the PIs
will:&lt;br/&gt;Collect data needed to model the total impact of predators on
their main&lt;br/&gt;benthic prey in the north-central Bering Sea. These
predators include SPEI, groundfish, snow crabs, sea stars, and
gastropods,&lt;br/&gt;Simulate impacts on the energy balance of the main
endotherm predator &lt;br/&gt;(SPEI) of variations in crab and groundfish
populations expected to occur with changes in ice cover and resulting
temperature of bottom water, and&lt;br/&gt;Continue a long-term (1950-2004)
record of benthic communities in this area that will contribute to the modeling
and analyses listed above. Additionally, these data would also indicate whether
declines in organic matter supply to sediments that have been measured at a
subset of stations have occurred throughout the area, and whether these declines
correspond to a decrease in direct precipitation of phytoplankton during and
after the ice-edge spring bloom. &lt;br/&gt;A major unsolved challenge in
modeling food webs of large marine ecosystems is integrating across levels of
organization that operate at different temporal and spatial scales that might be
critical to the carrying capacity of a large marine ecosystem for the entire
predator community and determining how changes in that system affect the energy
balance and distribution of top predators. In a novel approach to this problem,
this study will integrate a spatially-explicit, individual-based model of the
foraging energetics of SPEI with less detailed spatial models of benthic prey
and less mobile predators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;