* 0454786
* 2005 GRC on Combinatorial &amp; High Throughput Materials Science; Queens College, Flushing, NY; 8/14-19/05
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2006
* James Cawse, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 04/30/2006
* USD 10,000.00

Interest in crystal growth and new synthetic tools is currently very strong
internationally due to a broadly based recognition of the technological
importance and scientific challenges involved in the discovery and study of new
materials. There is a steady influx of scientists from other disciplines who see
the opportunities for performing exciting research in this area. The2005 Gordon
Research Conference entitled 2005 Combinatorial &amp; High Throughput Materials
will provide the venue for a major international meeting in this area. The goal
of the conference is to facilitate international collaborations and information
exchange across a broad spectrum of researchers with interests in developing new
synthetic tools, new materials and applications. Areas to be discussed include
theoretical aspects of new materials discovery, biomaterials, catalysts,
electronic materials and polymers. The conference will play a key role in
providing opportunities for collaborations with the community at large which is
an important part of career development for the more junior participants. The
NSF funds will be permit participation by graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows and early career faculty, and also to support partially a few session
chairs and invited speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials synthesis and applications community has a
significant impact on technological advances of high significance to society
through the development of new materials for priority materials areas in
industry that include electronics and photonics, catalysis, and the design and
construction of novel devices such as sensor materials. This meeting will
provide students, post doctoral scholars, and early career faculty a forum that
will familiarize them with job opportunities in the major industrial and
academic laboratories that are becoming active in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;