* 0454672
* The NIST/NSF Center for High Resolution Neutron Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2005,10/31/2010
* Jeffrey Lynn, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
* Interagency Agreement
* Guebre Tessema
* 10/31/2010
* USD 17,157,824.00

This award from the National Facilities program in the Division of Materials
Research provide funds for continued operation of the Center for High Resolution
Neutron Scattering (CHRNS) at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology's Center for Neutron Research (NCNR). CHRNS develops and operates
state-of-the-art cold neutron scattering instrumentation, with broad application
in materials research, for use by the general scientific community. Over 400
scientists, postdoctoral fellows and graduate students use the CHRNS instruments
each year. The scientific staff at CHRNS provide assistance to users, lead and
collaborate on research projects carried out on the CHRNS instruments, and
strive to improve the measurement capabilities of the instruments in ways that
expand the user program into new areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHRNS comprises
six facilities: two small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) instruments for
characterizing the nano- to micron scale structure in materials ; and four cold
neutron spectrometers that probe dynamic processes in materials with
characteristic times from 100 nanoseconds to a fraction of one thousands of a
nanosecond. These six facilities cover as wide a range of length and time scales
as any neutron research center worldwide. This award allows CHRNS to maintain
the high level of use, reliability and support for users while continuing to
make improvements that extend their measurement capabilities. Some of the new
capabilities include time-resolved SANS measurements with sub-millisecond
resolution which will for the first time enable neutron diffraction studies of
materials, such as electro-rheological fluids and muscle tissue, that respond to
stimuli on these time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support is also provided for
the NIST annual summer schools, summer internships for undergraduates, web-based
tutorials and related education and outreach activities, to increase the breadth
and diversity of the U.S. community of researchers who include neutron
scattering in their collection of research tools. This includes plans to develop
alliances with educational organizations committed to increasing the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and engineering, and to
broaden the impact of its education and outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The growth in research related to nanotechnology will accelerate
demand for the techniques provided by CHRNS to determine nanoscale structure and
dynamics. Emerging developments in biotechnology and spintronics are two
examples of areas where cold neutron techniques are expected to play an
increasingly important role due to their unique sensitivity to hydrogenous and
magnetic materials, respectively. CHRNS will have significant impact in enabling
U.S. researchers to bring these tools to bear on a broad cross section of
forefront research in areas such as polymer science, structural biology,
materials chemistry, surfactant and colloidal science, and magnetism and
superconductivity. &lt;br/&gt;