* 0454993
* Intraurban Industrial Location under Institutional and Accessibility Constraints:  An Empirical Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2009
* Stuart Sweeney, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

An understanding of sector-specific intraurban industrial location lies at the
core of urban spatial structure theories and provides the knowledge-base that
informs a range of important policy issues. In terms of theoretical approaches,
there is still active research extending the bid-rent framework of neo-classical
economics, there is widespread interest in the role of Marshallian industrial
districts and agglomeration economies, and, there is, within geography,
increasing interest in the role of place-dependence (especially for
institutions) in shaping the evolution of urban economic space. Despite the
importance of understanding firm location choices at the intraurban scale,
empirical modeling has seriously lagged behind current theorizing. A significant
obstacle to developing relevant models has been the accessibility of firm
location data at scales suitable for intraurban analysis. Both theoretical and
policy formation are starved for new empirical work that would jointly increase
industry and spatial resolution and incorporate important institutional features
of the real urban landscape. This research will develop and evaluate a modeling
approach, based on hierarchical spatial Cox regression, that admits covariates
consistent with each of the three major theoretical approaches mentioned above.
Industry-specific location data will come from address geo-coded and
longitudinally matched establishment records from the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics. Institutional influences, in the form of zoning, will be
incorporated directly into the estimator using a sampling function to account
for the disjoint nature of urban economic space. Models will be fitted and
evaluated for several U.S. metropolitan areas that are selected to provide a
diverse set of institutional contexts. Rather than adhering to a single
theoretical perspective, the overarching goal of the research is to develop and
validate a modeling approach that will provide a common ground allowing for a
broader range of theory testing that bridges economics and geography.

Several urban policy and public investment decisions are directly informed by
theories of intraurban industry location. An important subset of these would
include: (1) transportation planning - siting decisions for new construction and
program designs for mass transit, (2) welfare-to-work programs which attempt to
alleviate spatial- and skills- mismatch issues, (3) community development
through industrial targeting (either local tax policy or incentives), (4)
environmental justice issues related to the location of dirty industries, and
(5) smart growth policies concerned with mitigating effects stemming from the
suburbanization of both industry and population. This research will develop and
test a statistical modeling approach that will admit more realistic
specifications of intraurban industrial location decision-making. The results of
the models will provide a stronger basis for urban policy analysis and will help
to refine theories of urban industrial structure and intraurban employment
dynamics.