* 0454835
* CAREER: Super Junction Power Semiconductor Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/27/2004,06/30/2009
* Zheng Shen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Advances in power semiconductor technology in the past two decades have led to
the rapid proliferation of power electronics into telecommunications, computers,
consumer, transportation, industrial applications, and all forms of environment-
friendly energy conversion. However, the performance of state of the art power
semiconductor devices is quickly approaching the theoretical limits of silicon.
This CAREER proposal aims to investigate an innovative device concept termed
super junction (SJ) that is capable of improving the power handling capability
of conventional silicon power devices by orders of magnitude, and effectively
integrate the research with education activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project has five objectives: (1) to investigate novel super-junction
MOSFET structures through extensive device modeling and simulation, which
overcome the limitations of the current device design and fabrication methods;
(2) to develop a practical SJ fabrication process by integrating the high aspect
ratio MEMS techniques with conventional planar DMOS processes; (3) to extend the
basic super-junction concept into other device types including the high voltage,
fast-recovery Schottky freewheeling diode; (4) to study circuit application
issues that are inherent to the unique characteristics of SJ devices such as
electromagnetic interference (EMI) and safe operating area (SOA) degradation;
and (5) to extend the super-junction concept to SiC and other wide bandgap
semiconductor materials. The unique contribution of the proposed research is in
the co-development of novel super-junction device and processing concepts; the
integration of MEMS and DMOS technologies; the integrated study of material,
processing, device, and circuit; the interactive use of modeling and
experimental means; and the close university-industry partnership. The outcome
of the proposed research will significantly advance knowledge in the field of
power semiconductors and power electronics and provide a foundation for the
next-generation, high-efficiency, low-cost, light-weight, and compact power
electronics technology to meet the society's needs in conserving energy and
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid proliferation of power electronics
will generate a serious demand for power-electronics-proficient electrical
engineers in the United States. The education plan addresses these emerging
needs. The primary goal of the CAREER education plan is to integrate the
proposed research into the existing power electronics and solid-state
electronics curriculum. It consists of five components: (1) developing new
courses to meet the emerging educational needs in power electronics, (2)
improving and enriching existing courses by incorporating research materials
into lectures and projects, (3) integrating research and teaching through
student participation in research, (4) mentoring students, especially women and
underrepresented minority students, and providing community services, and (5)
facilitating close interaction between students and industry. The proposed
education plan will help meet the emerging demand for human resource development
and significantly enhance the university's research and education
infrastructure. The student mentoring and community outreaching activities will
broaden the participation of underrepresented minority groups in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;