* 0454711
* SGTRF:  Doctoral Program in Industrial Heritage and Archeology
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2009
* Bruce Seely, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2009
* USD 296,396.00

SGTRF: Doctoral Program in Industrial Heritage and Archeology This proposal
requests a Small Grant for Training and Research (SGTR) to support a new
doctoral program in Industrial Heritage and Archeology opening in fall 2005.
This venture grows from a successful and unique Masters program in industrial
archeology (IA), begun in 1991. IA involves recording, interpreting, and
preserving physical remains of industrially-related artifacts, sites, and
systems within their cultural and historical contexts. Michigan Tech's Masters
program in IA integrates the history of technology and archeology in classes and
a required field experience. It includes attention to historic preservation,
architectural history, and material culture. Every graduate has found work in
the IA field, most often with CRM (cultural resource management) consulting
firms or government agencies; others have pursued doctorates. The growth of
heritage tourism also should expand the niche for future graduates. This
proposal seeks support for a doctoral program, including graduate student
stipends and a post-doctoral fellowship for the three-year term of the award,
and for an international conference on the history of technology, IA, and
material culture at the end of that time. The doctoral Program in Industrial
Heritage and Industrial Archeology reflects an emergent opportunity for Ph.D.s
prepared to interpret the history of industry and work and its material culture.
The proposal cites the increasing currency of Industrial Heritage by bringing
attention to the physical remains of the industrial past, and adds events of the
past 100-200 years to the historical landscape interpreted by museums and
historic sites. New national parks devoted to industrial history in Lowell, MA,
Pittsburgh, and the region surrounding Michigan Tech, mirror the world
industrial heritage sites recognized by UNESCO. The proposal is based on careful
consideration, including an external review that recognized the unique
qualifications of the Michigan Tech faculty, who, among other things, edit the
Society for Industrial Archeology's journal. The project's intellectual merit
rests first, in advancing a long-running scholarly interest in the history of
technology on the history of industry and work by integrating techniques, tools,
and skill sets from the historians of technology, archeologists, and others who
explore the material culture of industry. While industrial archeology is not
new, a doctoral program is; Michigan Tech's program will be unique in the U.S.
Interdisciplinary attention to material culture has always been visible in the
museum community within the history of technology, but this doctoral program
marks a commitment to examine objects and artifacts not only in light of the
newest currents of historical scholarship but also using current archeological
methods. The specific research objectives are developing projects of greater
scope and depth, some with an international perspective, while also grappling
with the sometimes problematic nature of the term heritage itself. The broader
impacts. First, this is an interdisciplinary educational project. Moreover, the
program is not oriented simply toward academic careers, for students will have
multiple options, including as leaders for private sector CRM firms and
government agencies. In addition, our existing MS program already attracts
female students (about 40% of admitted students), thus addressing gender
disparity in the history of technology. Program graduates will have a
significant impact upon public understanding of the industrial past, including
artifacts, buildings, and machinery. A conference at the end of three years will
insure dissemination of the results achieved through NSF support. Lastly, the
program will be international in flavor, with postdoctoral fellowships, faculty
and student exchanges, and joint research projects insuring the participation of
scholars from abroad.