* 0454956
* Faradaic Micro-Fluidic Devices for Complex Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Hsueh-Chia Chang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 06/30/2009
* USD 110,050.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT - 0454956&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new electro-
kinetic means of transporting, metering, controlling, separating and
concentrating liquid and bio-particles in a micro-fluidic device will be
investigated. Unlike existing direct-current (DC) and alternating-current (AC)
electro-kinetic techniques, this Faradaic AC Electro-kinetic (FACE) mechanism
produces large quasi-equilibrium polarization of microfabricated electrodes via
transient Faradaic electrode reactions to drive fluid and particle motions with
speeds in excess of 1 cm/s in micro-channels, representingone of the most
powerful nonmechanical micro-pump. Due to the high-frequency (&gt; 100 kHz) AC
field employed, the transient reactions do not produce bubbles and ionic
contaminants in the micro-channels. It is also not as damaging to DNA, proteins
and bio-particles as DC fields. A variety of new single-phase and multi-phase
electro-kinetic phenomena, with qualitatively different flow topologies and
instabilities, have been observed. The richness of the flow topologies is
attributed to two fundamental Faradaic polarization mechanisms that generate a
localized pressure sink and a tangential slip velocity. The proposed project
will carry out a fundamental analysis of this new electro-kinetic mechanism and
delineate/quantify its various flow properties. This fundamental study will
allow us to optimize the design of micro-fluidic components based on this new
mechanism, sometimes by harnessing the new phenomena. The studies include a
matched asymptotic analysis to replace the fast (us) reaction and capacitive
charging dynamics within the nm-sized double layer with time-averaged effective
electrostatic and slip boundary conditions, thus simplifying the relevant multi-
scale numerical studies. An analysis of tangential conduction and charge
accumulation at geometric singularities, which are believed to drive some of the
anomalous flows, will also be carried out to fully delineate the complex spatio-
temporal electrode polarization dynamics. The high shear rate afforded by the
strong flow causes many bio-particle segregation and aggregation phenomena,
which will be studied in detail to produce effective particle-fluid separation
strategies, bio-particle and virus for fluorescent tag detection.
Microfabricated AC electro-magnets will produce transverse Lorentz forces to
generate spiral flows as well as the current vortex and linear FACE flows. The
proposed fundamental work will allow us to fruitfully understand and exploit
this new FACE mechanism to build a functional micro-fluidic technology with
optimized electrode geometries and applied electric
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational Impact: The proposed work will provide
graduate students with an unusually rich educational experience. It combines
fundamental scientific studies of new physical phenomena with engineering design
projects to produce nearly commercializable micro-fluidic devices. It involves
sophisticated theoretical and numerical analyses, as well as state-of-the-art
fabrication technology. In the last four years, our laboratory has placed 5
group members in tenure-track faculty positions at major U.S. research
universities, two in leading industrial research centers and two undergraduate
members at top graduate programs. Four others will be seeking tenure-track
positions shortly. We expect the proposed project to make a comparable
educational impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific and Technological Impact:
Recent fundamental scientific research on chip-scale analytical techniques for
viral assays, bacteria detection, chemical chromatography, etc. has and will
continue to spur a major technological advance in the medical, environmental and
national security industries. A major component that is still under development
is micro-fluidics: the ability to precisely transport, mix and manipulate fluids
and, more importantly, micro- and nanoscale bio-particles within the chip micro-
channels. Electro-kinetics is one approach that utilizes mature micro-
fabrication technology to imbed micro-electrodes to produce the desirable
microfluidics. This project investigates a new electro-kinetic mechanism, first
revealed by the group, that promises to be more powerful, reliable and sensitive
than other micro-fluidic components. The proposed work will lay the fundamental
groundwork for the first functional micro-fluidic components based on this new
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;