* 0454324
* Micro-Instrumentation for Optical Manipulation of Biological Cells with Fine Orientation Control and Low Optical Intensity
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2009
* Suzie Pun, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 568,790.00

This award is for developing a new instrument, named "opto-plasmonic tweezers,"
for optical manipulation of biological cells with fine orientation control and
low optical-intensity requirement. Non-invasive manipulation of biological cells
with light is an important tool for basic biological research. Opto-plasmonic
tweezers use polarized light to excite localized surface-plasmon resonance,
which consists of a collection of oscillating electrical dipoles, on a metal
nanoparticle array. The orientation of these dipoles is parallel to the
polarization direction of the light. They generate a patterned-radiation
electric field that manipulates the cells through dielectrophoretic
interactions, with orientation control dependent on the polarization of the
light. Low optical intensity can be achieved due to the high gradient of the
radiation field. A micromachined polarization controller will also be fabricated
as the first step towards micro-instrumentation. The micro-polarization
controller is expected to achieve sub-millisecond response time and therefore
can achieve fast rotation control of the biological cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a new instrument for manipulating single
biological cells non-invasively using light. Such capability is important in
biological research and applications. A chief virtue of the technology is its
ability to rotate the cells with high resolution by changing the polarization
direction of the light, which cannot be achieved by most of the optical
manipulation approaches. Such capability opens the door to building structured
biomaterials for potential applications in constructing biofilms and human
tissue engineering. This instrument will also be miniaturized using
micromachining technology so that it will have a small footprint and low cost.
The success of this project will open up new directions for optical
manipulations in biological research. This project will also give students
valuable experience in doing interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;