* 0454625
* Chronology of Multiple Time-Scale Climate Events in the Americas; Yucatan, Mexico; March 10-12, 2005
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2005
* David Stahle, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 11/30/2005
* USD 13,750.00

This award helps support a conference at the University of Yucatan Field Station
in Hobonil, Yucatan entitled, "Chronology of Multiple Time-Scale Climate Events
in the Americas." The purpose of the workshop is to convene an interdisciplinary
group of scholars to discuss the extent and quality of information directly
relevant to the understanding of drought in the region over the past 1,500
years. The workshop will examine drought from the perspective of cultural,
historical, and scientific evidence and impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
organizer's objectives are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Define the history of
extreme annual, decadal, and multi-decadal droughts in the Americas with the
greatest accuracy and precision in dating possible. Evaluate the record of these
drought events in multiple historical and paleoclimate archives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Refine the chronology of El Nino/Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) events based on pre-instrumental and qualitative (historical) documentary
information from the Americas. Evaluate the pre-instrumental record of ENSO
events in the context of high-resolution regional paleoclimate records, such as
those from tree rings and ice cores. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;- Examine the record
of ENSO intensity and frequency to evaluate decadal changes in the ENSO system
and to learn how low-frequency changes in ENSO may have impacted societies in
the Americas. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;- Explore the means to use high-resolution
paleoclimate records to better define periods of persistent drought and floods
that could be related to ENSO variability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Highlight and
discuss possible significant societal impacts during the historical period of
the Americas since European arrival that may have a plausible connection to ENSO
variability.