* 0454860
* MIP: Microbial Novelty: Symbiotic Interaction Between Microbes within the Oceanospirillales and a New Metazoan Genus
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2006,12/31/2008
* Shana Goffredi, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2008
* USD 103,620.00

Symbiosis involving bacteria and invertebrates plays a critical role in
sustaining the high productivity observed in many marine environments. Perhaps
most unusual are symbiotic partnerships that have allowed organisms to exploit
ephemeral, recalcitrant, and sometimes toxic aquatic environments. Exploitation
of energy in these environments often requires metabolic and physiological
capabilities that cannot be accomplished by animals alone. One such symbiosis
includes a unique partnership between a newly discovered group of polychaete
worm Osedax (Latin = bone-devouring) and a microbe related to aerobic,
hydrocarbon-degrading members of the group Oceanospirillales. This unusual
association is the only known symbiosis capable of using the decaying bones of
sunken marine mammals as a sole source of nutrition. The symbiotic microbe
provides a nutritional bridge between high-energy compounds and the worm host,
yet very little is known about the specific mechanisms that enable this novel
ecological strategy. The goal of this project is to understand the specific
nutritional integration between Osedax worms and their endosymbionts, including
the metabolic capabilities of the novel symbiont and the pathways for converting
carbon substrates into energy. This will be investigated using culture
techniques to isolate the symbionts, along with molecular and biochemical
methods, including functional gene amplification and measures of enzyme activity
in both partners. These worms and their microbial symbionts likely play
substantial roles in the cycling of organic compounds in marine communities.
Remineralization of organic carbon, facilitated almost entirely by Osedax and
its symbiont, is approximately 2000 years faster than the typical avenue of
carbon delivery to the deep seafloor, a habitat representing approximately 50%
of the Earth's surface. This project includes the goal of expanding interest in
bacterial/animal interactions to the general public. Symbiosis, or the living
together of different organisms, has dramatically affected life on Earth.
Outreach programs, such as a proposed exhibit at the Long Beach Aquarium of the
Pacific will showcase this research, with emphasis on general marine
microbiology and microbial symbioses.