* 0454510
* Phylogenetics and Biogeography of Subtribe Butiinae (Cocoeae, Palmae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2004,07/31/2005
* William Hahn, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 07/31/2005
* USD 72,178.00

0212779&lt;br/&gt;Hahn and Noblick&lt;br/&gt;Dr. William Hahn of Columbia
University and Dr. Larry Noblick of the Montgomery Botanical Center are
combining their molecular and morphological expertise to study the systematics
and evolution of the coconut, Cocos nucifera, and its taxonomic relatives. The
coconut is one of the three most economically important species of palms, yet
its origins and relationships are poorly understood. The palm tribe Cocoeae
consists of 22 genera (including the coconut) with two genera in Madagascar, one
genus in South Africa, the coconut in Southeast Asia and the Pacific, and the
remaining 18 genera in the New World. Available taxonomies for the tribe are in
need of critical reevaluation as several different taxonomies have been proposed
over the past few decades. An estimate of evolutionary relationships is needed
to resolve these taxonomic debates as well as controversy over the geographic
origin of the coconut. The species appears to be native to Southeast Asia and
the South Pacific, but all of its close relatives are found in Africa,
Madagascar, or the New World. Because of its remarkable ability to disperse by
floating, both natural and human-mediated dispersal have been suggested to
explain its origins and current distribution. Two primary geographic scenarios
have been proposed: from Madagascar/Africa across the Indian Ocean or from the
Americas across the Pacific Ocean. An explicit examination of the coconut's
relationships to other palms is necessary to choose between these competing
biogeographic hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Hahn and Dr. Noblicks's research uses
modern molecular and morphological phylogenetic methods to reconstruct the
evolutionary history of the coconut and related species and to develop a
molecular clock framework for the evaluation of rates of diversification.
Morphological and molecular data will be accumulated to estimate evolutionary
relationships among the 22 genera that form tribe Cocoeae, with anticipated
improvements to genus-level circumscription and classification. Molecular clocks
(based on multiple nuclear and plastid genes) will be used to date divergence
events among the taxa in this tribe and to estimate the time of origin for the
coconut. Based on these results, tests of alternative taxonomic and
biogeographic hypotheses can be conducted, leading to a better understanding of
the evolutionary process in an economically important crop species. Both
graduate and undergraduate students will be supported in this project and will
be instructed in field, botanical garden, herbarium, computer, and molecular
evolutionary techniques. Results of these studies will also be presented in the
public education programs of the Montgomery Botanical Center in Miami,
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;