* 0454761
* SGER: Nature, Nurture, and Cortical Maps
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Kenneth Catania, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* J. Steven de Belle
* 12/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

One of the most fundamental and longstanding questions in the neurosciences is
how behavior patterns influence brain organization. This is the classic "Nature
versus Nurture" question in relation to adult and developing brains. What facets
of brain organization are genetically determined, and alternatively how much can
be influenced by behavior? As with other longstanding questions in the field,
major advances can be made by examining new and favorable model systems (e.g. we
owe much of our understanding of action potential conduction to the giant squid
preparation, and much of our understanding of auditory localization to barn
owls). The star-nosed mole, a new exceptional model system for examining the
relationship between brain maps and behavior will be used. Star-nosed moles have
the most well-developed sense of touch of any investigated mammal, and this
provides unparalleled advantages for these investigations. Our lab has
discovered 3 separate and anatomically visible cortical maps in their brains
that are closely correlated in size with patterns of star-nosed mole behavior.
How does this correlation develop? Our studies strongly suggest that behavior is
actively shaping the brain maps in this species and this in turn makes star-
nosed moles an ideal model system for examining how brain maps in mammals are
modified by experience. Because star-nosed mole cortical organization shares so
many features in common with mammals and primates in general, results from these
investigations can provide critical new insights into general principles of
brain plasticity. Alternatively, if star-nosed moles have unique mechanisms for
allowing adult brain plasticity, these mechanisms are equally important to our
understanding of brain function. We will begin these investigations by testing
two alternative hypotheses. The first is that behavior patterns are responsible
for shaping the brain maps in moles. The second is that the organization of
brain maps is fixed during development and unaffected by behavior. This question
will be investigated by altering the development of the star at early stages or
in adults, and then tracking the effect of the resulting new behavior patterns
on star-nosed mole brain modules. Cortical development and organization will be
investigated with a combination of anatomical and electrophysiological studies
in conjunction with precisely quantified behavioral observations. Results from
these studies wiill be of interest to a broad range of investigators,
illustrating several general principles. In additional, this project will
involve field and laboratory work for undegraduates, graduate, and post-graduate
trainees providing a uniques rangeof educatinal opportunities. The published
results will be discussed in scientific venues, as well as lectures to the
general public and K-12 students, and as part of Vanderbilt's "Research
Explorers" program and the Minority Access Research Centers
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;