* 0454673
* COLLABORATIVE PROPOSAL:  Muroid Rodent Phylogenetics Using Mulitple Nuclear and Mitochondrial Genes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Scott Steppan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/29/2008
* USD 214,247.00

Drs. Scott Steppan (Florida State University) and Ronald Adkins (University of
Tennessee Health Science Center) have received a grant to study the evolutionary
relationships of the most diverse family of mammals (Muroidea) that includes the
common mouse, rat, and hamster. Although Muroidea includes one fourth of all
mammals and has enormous importance to agriculture, disease, and biomedical
research, the relationships among these worldwide species are extremely unclear.
They will reconstruct the evolutionary family tree of Muroidea using computer
analysis of DNA sequences for many genes from over 270 species.&lt;br/&gt; The
laboratory mouse and rat are the premier research models for human disease and
have had their complete genomes sequenced. Additionally, members of Muroidea
harbor many human diseases, such as plague and hantavirus, and can account for
over half of the agricultural losses due to herbivores. Significantly, the
worldwide distribution of Muroidea grants them a unique role in understanding
the climatological, geological, and ecological changes that have shaped the
world. The evolutionary tree of these species will clarify the large-scale
genomic changes that distinguish rodents from other mammals (including humans)
and will greatly facilitate our understanding of their roles as biomedical
models and disease vectors, and will help determine how geological and
climatological events contribute to the evolutionary process. &lt;br/&gt;