* 0454152
* Hypoxia-Compatible Enzyme Electrodes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Adrian Michael, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2008
* USD 446,142.00

This award supports development of a new version of a specialized enzyme-based
electrochemical microsensor that measures the level of glutamate in brain and
other living tissues. In prior work, the PI has developed small, highly specific
sensors for measurement of glutamate or of other small molecules, including
glucose and lactate, that are of key functional significance in biological
systems. The existing sensors, all of which employ substrate-specific oxidases,
require a continuous supply of oxygen. This makes such sensors unsuitable for
measurements whenever the oxygen level is low enough to be rate-limiting. The
sensor to be developed employs a molecular sieve in conjunction with a second,
oxygen-generating electrode. This insures that the local level of oxygen is high
enough to permit physiological studies in tissues where the normal
concentratioin of oxygen is low. These include studies of animals known to
tolerate severe hypoxia during hibernation, and animals, such as turtles, that
tolerate low levels of oxygen while submerged for extended periods. The new
sensor will be part of a complete instrument that will include an electronics
module and a software package for sensor control and data acquisition. Users
will be able to choose which redox enzyme, and hence which analytical target,
will be applied to the sensor surface. The project is expected to provide first-
hand training in microfabrication for postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
and undergraduate students and to facilitate research by other undergraduates by
providing a source of low cost, mass produced microelectrodes.