* 0454737
* Analysis of the Role of the UNC-82 Protein Kinase in C. Elegans Muscle Function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/16/2004,07/31/2008
* Pamela Hoppe, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 07/31/2008
* USD 168,500.00

Muscle contraction is accomplished by the action of a highly ordered filament
system, called the contractile apparatus. The long-term goal of this project is
to understand at the molecular level the mechanisms by which the cell assembles
this precisely patterned structure. This research examines the physiological
role of the newly identified protein UNC-82, which is required for proper
formation of thick filaments and their incorporation into the contractile
apparatus in the nematode, C. elegans. To define the interaction of UNC-82 with
known components of the contractile apparatus, antibody probes specific for
UNC-82 protein will be generated and used to determine the subcellular
localization of UNC-82 in the muscle cells of normal and mutant worm strains.
Genetic screens and biochemical tests will be used to define regions of the
UNC-82 protein that are important for its function and to identify other
proteins that interact with UNC-82. The experiments will clarify potential
regulatory roles for UNC-82 in the formation of muscle contractile apparatus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Some of the same proteins required for proper
establishment of the contractile apparatus in muscle are also found in other
tissues. In C. elegans, UNC-82 is also found in neurons, and in skin, where it
is associated with a distinct filament system that maintains the structural
integrity of the epidermis. Although the organization of filaments in these
other cells is not as highly ordered as in muscle, non-muscle cell function also
depends upon the correct formation and maintenance of structural elements at
precise locations within the cell. Therefore, this project will further our
understanding of the genesis of cellular organization in a large number of
tissue types. The results should also be applicable to our understanding of
filament structures in other organisms, because sequence information from genome
projects has identified proteins with similarity to UNC-82 in other species.
Much of the research will be done by undergraduate students, who will receive
valuable research experience. &lt;br/&gt;