* 0455158
* Collaborative Research: Computational Methods for the Analysis of Political Event Data
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2005,09/30/2006
* Philip Schrodt, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2006
* USD 76,926.00

Formal models of political behavior have generally followed the lead of the
natural sciences and focused on methods that use continuous-variable
mathematics. Stephen Wolfram has recently produced an extended critique of that
approach in the natural sciences, and suggested that a great deal of natural
behavior can be accounted for using rules that involve discrete patterns. Given
&lt;br/&gt;the similarity between many of the models used in the natural and
social sciences, Wolfram's critique can readily be applied to models of social
behavior. Pattern-based models are especially relevant to modeling human
behavior because human cognitive abilities are far more developed in the domain
of pattern recognition than in the domain of continuous-variable mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;International event data---categorical data on who did what to whom
at what time---are one of the most common forms of information available for the
analysis of international behavior. Contemporary automated methods combined with
inexpensive full-text news sources such as FBIS, NEXIS, and Factiva allow event
data to be generated in near-real-time with relatively little effort. For
example, it is now possible for a graduate student to generate a customized data
set &lt;br/&gt;containing tens of thousands of events as part of a dissertation.
However, consistent with Wolfram's critique, the methods for analyzing, or even
visualizing, event data have generally not kept up with the advances in the
generation of the data, largely because categorical time series have no analogue
in other quantitatively-oriented social sciences such as economics and
&lt;br/&gt;demography. In these circumstances, the nearly universal tendency has
been to convert the data to interval-level measures using scales prior to
analyzing it. This has at least three disadvantages: first, the scales are
somewhat arbitrary; second information is lost when multiple events .cancel out.
and third, most psychological evidence indicates that decision-makers respond to
patterns of &lt;br/&gt;discrete events rather than numerical aggregations.
&lt;br/&gt;This project develops and test several pattern- and rule-based
analytical tools for the analysis of event data. These involve the development
of visualization methods, methods for specifying patterns and rules at various
levels of complexity, methods for statistically assessing and comparing patterns
and rules, and methods for rule induction. These tools will be deployed on a
publicly-accessible dedicated web server. That site will also provide a large
number of event data sets in an easily accessible form with basic downloading
and subsetting tools. All of the software developed on the project will be open-
source under the GNU General Public License; the event data sets and analytical
tools will be made available as they are produced rather than being embargoed.
The project will experiment with patterns applied to the Israel-Palestinian and
&lt;br/&gt;Israel-Lebanon conflicts for 1979-2005 and the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia for 1991-2001. &lt;br/&gt;It will start with the classic tit-for-tat
pattern, consider patterns designed to detect attempts at de-escalation, and
finally consider complex "meta-rules" that look at the relationship between
prior conflict and the propensity of the actors to engage in reciprocal
behavior. The principal investigators anticipate conducting half-day workshops
at the APSA and ISA to introduce researchers to the use of these tools.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: First, it will utilize undergraduate students,
typically honors students in international studies, extensively in the research
effort. Both Kansas and Utah are geographical regions under-represented in
scientific research so these opportunities are particularly critical. Second,
the project will produce new data and analytical tools that can be used by the
research community. Third, this approach is likely to be very attractive for the
policy community and may be used for forecasting and other policy-relevant
tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;