* 0455727
* Collaborative Research: Validating Global Magnetospheric Models with Theoretical Magnetograms
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2008
* Michael Liemohn, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 05/31/2008
* USD 150,000.00

This is a collaborative project between Rice University and the University of
Michigan to develop and implement a flexible computational module that will
calculate ground magnetic disturbance patterns, based upon input from various
theoretical space physics models. The module will compute time-series of
simulated magnetic field disturbances across the network of magnetic
observatories (i.e., theoretical magneto grams) using a distribution of currents
in the ionosphere and inner magnetosphere, and a specification of the global
magnetic field far from the Earth's surface, provided by a theoretical model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basis for the module is a method that combines
numerical integration of the Biot-Savart law over a finite volume with a scalar
potential representation of the field produced by unspecified currents external
to the volume. This approach attempts to take into account all major currents in
the magnetosphere-ionosphere system, including ground induction currents, field-
aligned and partial ring currents, and large-scale currents in the outer
magnetosphere and solar wind. Thus the computed ground disturbance fields will
be the most realistic possible for a given model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intended
as a general-use tool, the proposed module will provide the means of comparing a
broad range of models, including ring current models and convection models, as
well as comprehensive global magnetosphere-ionosphere-thermosphere models
currently under development. In the implementation phase of the project, several
issues related to the Earth's ring current will be explored with the ground-
magnetogram computational module. Traditionally, ring current models have been
tested against ground-based observations indirectly, through the Dst index and
its relationship to the total particle energy via the Dessler-Parker-Sckopke
relation. The new computational machinery will allow much more detailed model-
magnetogram comparisons that consider both the temporal and spatial variation of
the magnetic disturbance field. The comparisons will provide new information on
physical issues such as: (1) Magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling and the
ionospheric closure path for the partial ring current that develops in the main
phase of a geomagnetic storm; (2) The mechanism by which a self-consistent
conductance influences this closure path and how the feedback from the
ionospheric current results in a modification of the magnetospheric currents;
(3) Quantitative identification of the currents that contribute to the Dst
index, that will help resolve the ongoing controversy about the physical meaning
of that index. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several broader impacts of this
proposed research. Foremost is that it allows a more effective utilization of
the data from the vast array of ground based magnetometer stations. Advancing
our knowledge of the ionosphere-magnetosphere system will result in the creation
of more reliable space weather codes, which will benefit society. The project
also provides educational support for graduate students and a postdoctoral
fellow.