* 0455685
* Change Associated with Readiness, Education and Efficacy in Reform Science (CAREERS)
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2012
* Theresa Deeney, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 06/30/2012
* USD 2,247,148.00

The CAREERS study brings together researchers from education, psychology and the
sciences and scholar-practitioners to examine the factors that, once understood,
can be addressed in the preparation of both pre-service and in-service teachers
to guide elementary children in exploratory and inquiry-based science lessons.
The overarching goal is to develop models that describe the interconnections
among key constructs in order to reexamine the content of elementary science
methods courses, mentoring for early career teachers, and professional
development opportunities and coaching for teachers all along the Teacher
Professional Continuum. The main constructs of interest in this five-year study
are beliefs about science teaching, science content knowledge, readiness to
change teaching practice, teachers' sense of efficacy in teaching inquiry-based
science and transfer and fidelity to elements of professional development.
CAREERS is examining these beliefs, attitudes and knowledge for 300 pre-service
teachers and 500 mid-career teachers. Additionally, science teaching practice is
being examined for all 300 pre-service teachers during the science methods
course with a follow-up on 60 of these teachers through student teaching and 30
through their first two induction years. The science teaching practice of the 60
mid-career cooperating teachers who supervise these student teachers is also
being studied. The study design provides a longitudinal view of teacher
development that examines teaching effectiveness at critical transition points
(i.e., from science methods through student teaching and to induction) and how
eight hypothesized factors influence fidelity to methods taught in an inquiry-
based methods course. A randomized study examines the influence of
characteristics of cooperating teacher mentors (their degree of experience with
inquiry based instructions) on continued success on the student teachers in
maintaining their inquiry approach to teaching. &lt;br/&gt;