* 0455330
* Photo-Excitation in Nanosystems:  Control, Dynamics and Kinetics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2011
* Raoul Kopelman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 05/31/2011
* USD 675,000.00

New nano-probes and nano-tools will be developed, using magnetic and stochastic
control and modulation of photo-excited nano-particles. These consist of
composite, heterogeneous and hybrid nanoparticles that contain a mix of organic
and inorganic polymers and glasses, semi-conductors and metals, and are prepared
by a combination of chemical and physical methods. Their optimization and
miniaturization limits will be studied, as well as their use as nano-instruments
for the study of physical and chemical dynamics. Specific examples are size-
dependent viscosity measurements in complex fluids and chemical reaction
kinetics in nano-bottles. The extension of optical trapping to nano-particles
with sizes well below the optical diffraction limit will also be studied, as
will its optimization by the use of complex nanoparticles made of composite
materials. This will add the dimension of photonic control to the magnetic and
stochastic control of the nano-tools and probes. A combination of such nano-
systems will be utilized for basic studies on chemical reaction kinetics in
nano-bottles, nano-pores and other nano-domains, where the lack of convection is
expected to result in non-classical laws of reaction kinetics. These studies are
aimed at advancing the theoretical understanding of reaction kinetics laws for
small, confined domains. The intellectual challenges of the proposed project
include the design and preparation methods required for the optimization and
miniaturization of the complex nano-systems to be used as versatile tools.
Similarly, the design of nano-reactor systems for the basic understanding of
elementary reaction kinetics in nano-domains, as well as the selection and
monitoring of elementary reactions to be studied under these constraints,
present further intellectual challenge. On the other hand, the theoretical
understanding of the non-classical reaction kinetics laws that are prevalent in
nano-domains has wide implications and is needed for a better biochemical
understanding of intracellular reactions and drug interventions, as well as for
better control of etching reactions in nano-lithography. Also, the near-field
interactions between photons and composite matter, all confined to sub-
wavelength dimensions, are of both theoretical and practical interest, where the
latter encompasses both in-vivo optical imaging and photodynamic therapy. Such
composite nanoparticles, designed by the author's laboratory, have already been
applied by Molecular Therapeutics, Inc. (Ann Arbor, MI) for in-vivo brain cancer
(gliosarcoma) photodynamic therapy and, simultaneously, for contrast enhancement
of the in-vivo MRI used for monitoring the above therapy. Future advances in the
capabilities of such nanoplatforms are expected to lead to further and more
advanced biomedical applications for nanotechnology and bio-nanotechnology, such
as a rotating nanoparticle-based&lt;br/&gt;immunoassay method. The successful
execution of such biomedical and technological advances will be significantly
aided by solving the basic science challenges posed in this proposal. This
project will also educate graduate and postdoctoral students in novel
multidisciplinary aspects of nanoparticles and nano-systems subjects that are at
the cutting edge of research and require acquiring expertise that stretches from
physics to medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New nano-probes
and nano-tools will be developed, using nano-particles. These consist of a mix
of organic and inorganic polymers and glasses, semi-conductors and metals, and
are prepared by a combination of chemical and physical methods. Their
optimization and miniaturization limits will be studied, as well as their use as
nano-instruments for the study of physical and chemical dynamics. A combination
of such nano-systems will be utilized for basic studies on chemical reaction
kinetics in nano-domains, where we expect new laws of reaction kinetics. These
studies are needed for a better biochemical understanding of intracellular
reactions and drug interventions, as well as for better control of etching
reactions in nano-lithography (computer chip industry). Such composite
nanoparticles, designed by the author's laboratory, have already been applied by
Molecular Therapeutics, Inc. (Ann Arbor, MI) for in-vivo brain cancer
(gliosarcoma) photodynamic therapy and, simultaneously, for contrast enhancement
of the in-vivo MRI used for monitoring the above therapy. Future advances in the
capabilities of such nanoplatforms are expected to lead to further and more
advanced biomedical applications, such as a rotating nanoparticle-based
immunoassay method. The successful execution of such biomedical and
technological advances will be significantly aided by solving the basic science
challenges posed in this proposal. This project will also educate graduate and
postdoctoral students in novel multidisciplinary aspects of nanoparticles and
nanosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;