* 0455119
* U.S.-JSPS Postdoctoral Fellowship:  Bi-directional Traveling-wave Micropump Driven by Piezoelectric Actuators
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2005,09/30/2006
* Jacob Loverich, Loverich                Jacob          J
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2006
* USD 3,804.00

0455119 Loverich

This award supports an eighteen month Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(JSPS) Short-Term Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Jacob Loverich. He will be
collaborating with Professor Hidetoshi Kotera at Kyoto University in Japan. They
will be undertaking research on a bi-directional traveling-wave micropump driven
by piezoelectric actuators. Understanding the fundamental building blocks of
life, and the nano-scale proteins that sustain it, is becoming increasingly
important in the emerging field of bionanotechnology. Micro-fluidic systems that
can perform nano-scale protein analyses are primary tools for advancing these
bio-nanotechnology research efforts. One such micro-fluidic system, the so-
called Micro Total Analysis System (uTAS), is already beginning to serve as a
driving force for discovery in nano-scale cell biology, neurobiology,
pharmacology, and tissue engineering. Therefore, developing micro-fluidic
systems in general (and, more specifically, improving such systems' central
driving element, the micropump) is generating significant research interest. The
project will involve the research and development of a new uTAS micropump. The
new micropump will use a novel traveling-wave pumping technique that is
potentially more simple, versatile, and compact than existing micropump designs.
The primary objectives of this project are to miniaturize the traveling-wave
micropump concept to a scale that can handle single-cell manipulations, simplify
the design so that the production cost of the device will not limit its
applicability, and improve the flow velocity of the pump over current micropump
designs. The scope of the research project will encompass fabrication,
experimental evaluation, and model simulation of the new micropump design.

This project will offer a good opportunity to join efforts between two countries
that are both leaders in the nanotechnology area. Through the exchange of ideas
and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
promote international understanding and cooperation. Results of the research
will be disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific journals.