* 0455484
* Filler-Deficient Zone in Arc Welds
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Sindo Kou, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 06/30/2009
* USD 261,000.00

Dissimilar filler metals refer to filler metals that differ in composition from
that of the workpiece. They are routinely used in arc welding to prevent
cracking and to obtain desirable weld properties. The filler-metal droplets mix
with the melted base metal by strong convection in the bulk weld pool and the
resultant weld is uniform in composition except in the region near the base
metal where the weld metal composition differs from that of the filler metal.
The formation of this filler-deficient zone (FDZ) has been attributed to weak
weld-pool convection and hence poor mixing near the pool boundary. Fundamental
understanding is needed on how dissimilar filler metals affect the weld-pool
solidification process and why the melted base metal can solidify quickly
without mixing with the surrounding bulk weld pool. The objective of this
research is to better understand the FDZ formation in arc welds. The tasks
include: (1) proposing a mechanism for the FDZ formation by first clearly
defining the pool boundary with the liquidus temperatures of the base metal
(TLB) and the weld metal (TLW); (2) welding with selected dissimilar filler
metals that can make TLW significantly different from TLB; (3) examining the
microstructure and composition profiles across the resultant FDZ; (4)
calculating TLB and TLW to help explain the FDZ formation observed; and (5)
investigating the effect of the welding parameters on the FDZ formation, such as
the heat input, the welding speed, and the shielding gas. Aluminum and Ni-Cu
alloys are welded in the initial stage of the investigation. Aluminum alloys are
selected because in view of the absence of solid-state transformations the
solidification microstructure is much easier to understand than in steels or
stainless steels and reliable database and computer software are available for
calculating TLB and TLW in aluminum alloys. Ni-Cu alloys are selected because
the simple isomorphous Ni-Cu phase diagram offers a wide range for varying in
TLB and TLW. The intellectual merit of the study includes advancing the
fundamental understanding of welding with dissimilar filler metals and providing
a basis for better understanding of the FDZ formation in steels and stainless
steels, which are susceptible to hydrogen cracking and stress corrosion
cracking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the study includes
improving weld homogeneity through a better understanding of FDZ formation. This
is significant in view of the increasing use of aluminum in automobiles to
reduce weight and air pollution. The educational components include the training
of graduate students in welding science and the related use of solidification
computer software and databases. Useful materials are provided for teaching
welding metallurgy, involving undergraduate students in welding, and
demonstrating the welding process to K-12 students and their parents.
&lt;br/&gt;