* 0455009
* Laboratory Models of Cultural Evolution:  Fitting Theoretical Models to Experimental Data
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Peter Richerson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2009
* USD 140,000.00

Humans differ from other animals in their great capacity to learn from each
other. Recently, theories of cultural evolution have come to provide some
insights to many important questions in social sciences, such as cultural
variation, cooperation, social learning, and decision-making under uncertainty.
Different social science disciplines are currently addressing these questions
with divergent vocabularies and methodologies. Cultural evolution models and
evolutionary theories in general have the potential to bridge disciplinary
divides. Unfortunately, theories of cultural evolution have received little
empirical testing in either field or experimental studies. &lt;br/&gt;This
project will conduct a series of micro-society experiments to test the
behavioral implications of theoretical models of cultural evolution. Micro-
societies are groups of interacting human participants who receive variable
amounts of money based on how they perform over multiple time periods in an
experimental task. Laboratory micro-societies are an attractive method because
individual and population-level behavior can evolve and produce interesting
emergent patterns over time. The researchers will simulate critical features of
evolutionary models by controlling the structure of the experimental task and
the kinds of information available to participants. They will develop a series
of traditional and computer-mediated laboratory experiments, as well as
Internet-based experiments that can tap into a global pool of subjects from
diverse backgrounds and cultures, to test success-biased social learning
strategies where people use the payoffs of others to guide their own decision-
making. Theories of how people use the success of others to acquire their own
behavior are common in the social sciences, but empirical tests and refinement
of these theories is very uncommon. Thus this work will be of general importance
to many fields concerned with the details of how people make decisions in social
environments. The project will use maximum likelihood techniques to estimate how
much participants rely on individual versus social learning under different
experimental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the research relates to
the value of new knowledge about the evolution of patterns of cooperation,
institutions, and cultural norms and symbols. The research will help reveal the
basic behavioral mechanisms that underlie these processes, and therefore will be
useful to policy makers concerned with large-scale social changes that have
profound implications for human welfare. &lt;br/&gt;