* 0455781
* Development of K-8 Teachers' Knowledge and the Transition from University Student to Professional
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2005,09/30/2012
* John Madsen, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 09/30/2012
* USD 2,243,932.00

This research study uses Pedagogical Context Knowledge (PCxK) as a framework to
examine changes in preservice and inservice K-8 teachers' understandings of
science and pedagogy across a reform-based Professional Development Continuum.
The Continuum consists of a core curriculum of inquiry-based science and
education courses for elementary education majors, with a bridge to lesson study
communities of middle school science teachers in local schools. The Continuum is
intended to help teachers move from views of learning as the transmission of
knowledge to views of learning as knowledge creation. The PCxK framework extends
research on pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) by linking intellectual
transformations that inquiry-based approaches demand to transformed self-
understandings that, if resisted, can block the change process. The research
team of university science and education faculty and veteran teachers is using
quantitative and qualitative methods to examine different facets of teacher
knowledge development through a study of several longitudinal cohorts of
preservice, new, and experienced teachers as aggregate populations and through
case studies. This allows for comparisons among groups and individuals with
different levels of participation in the Continuum and at different stages in
their professional development. The project seeks to understand how teachers'
knowledge develops across inquiry learning experiences and how undergraduate
learning experiences and the contexts of classroom practice shape new teachers'
understandings and practice. The study is expected to inform models of STEM
teacher education that account for the interwoven intellectual and personal
dimensions of the challenging transition to inquiry-based
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;