* 0455295
* UMEB: Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Undergraduate Travel to Conferences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/02/2004,02/28/2007
* Carlos Castillo-Chavez, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 57,506.00

0227703&lt;br/&gt;Castillo-Chavez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This UMEB award will
provide financial support and mentoring for up to fifteen undergraduate students
per year from groups traditionally underrepresented in science to attend
national meetings in the area of mathematical biology, with a focus on
environmental mathematical biology. In the first year the students will all be
drawn for Cornell University's Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Institute, a
summer research experience with a very strong record of enabling minority
undergraduates to pursue careers in mathematical biology. In later years,
students not enrolled in MBTI will also be recruited and brought into the
meeting activities and mentoring opportunities provided by this award. The PI
has received endorsements and promised assistance from several professional
societies, including the Society for Mathematical Biology, the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project build on
efforts undertaken by MBTI and others to bring a broader range of students into
mathematical biology. It will help foster the professional growth of minority
students, provide a solid mentoring network for students to participate fully in
the conferences, draw more underrepresented minorities into areas where
mathematical biology and environmental biology overlap, and more actively engage
several professional societies in ongoing efforts to broaden participation. This
program is an important step towards meeting a national need of developing a
more quantitatively- prepared scientific workforce and to draw upon the full
range of intellectual talent from diverse populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;