* 0455137
* Conference:  What Does It Mean to Be a Fully Educated Member of the 21st Century Workforce
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Nancy Cantor, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Roosevelt Y. Johnson
* 09/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

What does it mean to be fully educated . especially in the sciences,
engineering, and technology&lt;br/&gt;-- in our pluralistic 21st century
society? To explore this question, Syracuse University
proposes&lt;br/&gt;hosting a workshop, using the intergroup-dialogue model
(IGD), to draw together select leaders&lt;br/&gt;from prominent research
universities, corporations, government and non- profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;The inaugural workshop will take place at Syracuse
University in spring, 2005, with the&lt;br/&gt;possibility of one or more
workshops to follow subsequently. We will extend invitations to&lt;br/&gt;twenty
university participants, including institutional presidents, provosts and
eminent scholars.&lt;br/&gt;Centrally important to this intergroup-dialogue
approach will be inclusion of contrasting -- and&lt;br/&gt;perhaps conflicting
-- perspectives within research universities (e.g., public, private
and&lt;br/&gt;technological institutions; geographically dispersed; with and
without medical schools). The&lt;br/&gt;individual scholars from sciences and
engineering selected for this workshop will have&lt;br/&gt;evidenced both deep
knowledge of specific domains and considerable breadth across
field&lt;br/&gt;boundaries. We will also invite select leaders from major
corporations, government agencies,&lt;br/&gt;and non-profit entities (e.g.,
FASEB, AAAS, NAE, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and&lt;br/&gt;Burroughs
Wellcome Fund, and NACME). The National Science Foundation will play a
key&lt;br/&gt;role in these workshops. &lt;br/&gt;Use of the intergroup model
applied to our core question . what does it mean to be a
fully&lt;br/&gt;educated member of the 21st century workforce . will impact both
higher education and society&lt;br/&gt;through the following project objectives:
(1) create a forum for diverse stakeholders to engage in&lt;br/&gt;intergroup
dialogue addressing the question .what does it mean to be a fully educated
member of&lt;br/&gt;the 21st century Workforce?. (2) develop recommendations and
possible strategies for higher&lt;br/&gt;education, government agencies, and
other key stakeholders to use to achieve this goal; and (3)&lt;br/&gt;assess the
effectiveness of the intergroup dialogue model in a new
application.&lt;br/&gt;The dissemination plan for this workshop will include
distribution of the written&lt;br/&gt;recommendations and the video recordings
from the sessions through the Syracuse University&lt;br/&gt;web site.