* 0455144
* Partial Support of the Board on Mathematical Sciences and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2006,01/31/2009
* Michelle Schwalbe, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 01/31/2009
* USD 466,000.00

The National Academies' Board on Mathematical Sciences and Their Applications
(BMSA) supports and promotes the quality and health of the mathematical sciences
and their interactions with science, engineering, medicine, and policy. It
accomplishes that goal by organizing studies and workshops that identify
research opportunities in emerging fields, build connections between the
mathematical sciences and other fields, and illustrate the value of the
mathematical sciences to new areas such as homeland security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent activities and their impacts
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A 2002 workshop illustrating how the mathematical
sciences contribute to homeland security, which has led to productive
discussions between the BMSA and the Department of Homeland Security and the
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency. Through the BMSA, both of those
organizations are learning how the mathematical sciences can contribute to their
missions. &lt;br/&gt; A 2004 workshop on Enterprise Risk Management, which
provided a forum for the exchange of perspectives among a wide range of
government and private-sector experts in risk modeling and analysis. This
provided a forum for demonstrating the relevance of the mathematical sciences to
the challenges of many federal agencies with which the mathematical sciences
community has had little previous contact.&lt;br/&gt; A 2005 report, Mathematics
and 21st Century Biology, recommended a significant broadening of the
mathematical sciences research program at the Department of Energy and
demonstrated to biologists more generally the value of collaborations with
mathematical scientists.&lt;br/&gt; A 2005 report, Basic Research in Information
Science and Technology for Air Force Needs, has resulted in $6 million in new
funds for the AFOSR Mathematics and Space Sciences Directorate, while cementing
the role of mathematical sciences in information science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More generally, the BMSA provides an interface
between the mathematical sciences community and leaders in other fields of
science, engineering, medicine, and public policy. In the past year, the BMSA
has interacted with the heads of NSF and the National Institute for General
Medical Sciences, leaders of the Federal Reserve System, and high-ranking
decision-makers at NASA and at the Departments of Defense, Energy, Homeland
Security, and Health and Human Services. Through such interactions, the
mathematical sciences community is becoming more widely valued and involved in
the early stages of development of major federal programs.&lt;br/&gt;