* 0455568
* Moss Flora of China ( English version )
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Si He, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/28/2009
* USD 136,671.00

0455568&lt;br/&gt;Crosby and He&lt;br/&gt; The Moss Flora of China is a print-
and web-based inventory of the moss species of China, conducted as a
collaborative international project between U.S. bryologists coordinated by the
Missouri Botanical Garden and Chinese specialists coordinated by the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, along with contributing treatments from bryologists in
Canada, Finland, Japan, and elsewhere. The project will provide a complete
floristic treatment of all the mosses of China and Taiwan. The Chinese moss
flora contains an estimated 65 families, 415 genera and 2400 species, and thus
represents about 20% of all the mosses known in the world. The aim of this
renewal project is to conclude the publication of this important work, focusing
on the last three volumes of an anticipated 8-volume treatment, with concise
species descriptions drawn from herbarium specimens and new field collections,
up-to-date information on nomenclature, phylogenetic relationships, and
geographical distributions. The essential information presented in this work
will be useful in comparisons of global and regional patterns of moss species
richness, especially for the northern hemisphere where the Chinese inventory
complements ongoing or nearly complete surveys for North America, Europe, and
(old) Soviet Union. Authoritative taxonomic information will be used worldwide
by researchers in evolutionary and ecological studies, in biodiversity and
biogeographical investigations, as well as by those working in conservation and
land management. A complete account of Chinese mosses with illustrations,
distribution maps, and glossary to bryological terminology will be made
available on the web, including a fully searchable interactive database of all
species. Scholars from leading Chinese institutions studying mosses and related
plants will visit the U.S. and work with colleagues and students at the Missouri
Botanical Garden; in turn, they will facilitate targeted field collecting in
China for materials related to completion of the flora and for DNA samples for
molecular systematists analyzing phylogenetic relationships of mosses. The NSF
Office of International Science and Engineering is contributing support to the
project, for completion of the moss flora of China. &lt;br/&gt;