* 0455189
* U.S-Mexico Workshop:  New Trends in Cooperative Game Theory;  Guanajuato, Mexico;  January 2005
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2005,07/31/2005
* Herve Moulin, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2005
* USD 14,000.00

0455189&lt;br/&gt;Moulin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico award will
support a research workshop in the field of mathematical economics and game
theory. Organized by Prof. Herve Moulin of Rice University with Prof. David
Cantala, Centro de Estudios Economicos, El Colegio de Mexico in Mexico City, and
Prof. Francisco Sanchez, Departamento de Matematicas Basicas, Centro de
Investigacion en Matematicas, Guanajuato, the researchers intend to develop
scientific collaborations between several academic institutions in Mexico, where
strong research in the area is on the rise, with colleagues in the US as well as
South America and Europe whose research is complementary to that of the Mexican
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over four days, the meeting will bring
together around 30 scholars, divided in three approximately equal contingents
from Mexico, North and South America, and Europe. In addition, up to ten
graduate students mostly from Mexico but also from the U.S. will be involved.
The meeting will focus on recent research on the formation of coalitions and
networks, cost and surplus sharing, assignment, matching and other allocation
mechanisms. In particular, new applications of the classic techniques of
cooperative game theory, e.g., to fair division, matching and cost sharing, and
on new modeling approaches to the perennial question of coalition formation,
e.g., networks, hedonic coalitions and incomplete information, will be
discussed. It is expected that the meeting will reinforce academic ties between
U.S. universities and the best institutions for economic research in Mexico.
This will facilitate the movement of graduate students and junior researchers on
both sides of the
border.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0455189&lt;br/&gt;Moulin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
U.S.-Mexico award will support a research workshop in the field of mathematical
economics and game theory. Organized by Prof. Herve Moulin of Rice University
with Prof. David Cantala, Centro de Estudios Economicos, El Colegio de Mexico in
Mexico City, and Prof. Francisco Sanchez, Departamento de Matematicas Basicas,
Centro de Investigacion en Matematicas, Guanajuato, the researchers intend to
develop scientific collaborations between several academic institutions in
Mexico, where strong research in the area is on the rise, with colleagues in the
US as well as South America and Europe whose research is complementary to that
of the Mexican participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 4 days, the meeting will
bring together around 30 scholars, divided in three approximately equal
contingents from Mexico, North and South America, and Europe. In addition, up to
ten graduate students mostly from Mexico but also from the U.S. will be
involved. The meeting will focus on recent research on the formation of
coalitions and networks, cost and surplus sharing, assignment, matching and
other allocation mechanisms. In particular, new applications of the classic
techniques of cooperative game theory, e.g., to fair division, matching and cost
sharing, and on new modeling approaches to the perennial question of coalition
formation, e.g., networks, hedonic coalitions and incomplete information, will
be discussed. It is expected that the meeting will reinforce academic ties
between U.S. universities and the best institutions for economic research in
Mexico. This will facilitate the movement of graduate students and junior
researchers on both sides of the border.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;