* 0455995
* Robust Technologies for Automated Ingestion and Long-Term Preservation of Digital Information
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2007
* Joseph Ja'Ja', University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 06/30/2007
* USD 490,157.00

Thisi project will develop novel tools and technologies for automated ingestion
and management of preservation processes, and demonstrate their use on
scientific, historical, and educational collections covering widely different
technical requirements. The technologies will be built on a novel robust,
reliable, and secure layered architecture - ADAPT (Approach to Digital Archiving
and Preservation Technology) - developed by the research group using open
standards and web technologies. This architecture will evolve gracefully as the
underlying technologies change and will interoperate with digital library and
grid technologies. Specifically, The team will develop a distributed persistent
archive that provides producers, site administrators, and preservation managers
key functionalities for the long-term access and preservation of digital assets.
A novel architecture for a deep archive, with provably high reliability and high
resiliency against security attacks and system failures, will also be
demonstrated. The tools and technologies will be tested and validated on four
very distinct and rich collections: (i) an archive of videotaped oral histories
provided by the Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation; (ii)
children's books in their original languages (current over 500 books in 30
languages) available through the University of Maryland International Children.s
Digital Library (ICDL); (iii) a rich historical collection of photographs,
drawings, maps, charts and textual documents available through the National
Archives' Electronic Access Project (EAP); and (iv) a wide variety of unique
earth science data available through the University of Maryland Global Land
Cover Facility (GLCF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. A large portion
of the scientific, business, cultural, and government digital information being
created today needs to be maintained and preserved for future use of periods
ranging from a few years to decades and sometimes centuries. This project
introduces a novel framework for planning, managing, and executing ingestion and
preservation processes. Novel features include: (i) an automated distributed
ingestion architecture that enables secure and verifiable ingestion of digital
objects; (ii) a policy driven management of preservation processes with the
ability to constantly audit secure replication, refreshing, and migration, and
track media degradation, file corruption, and format obsolescence; (iii) a peer-
to-peer architecture for a deep archive, which guarantees with high probability
the integrity and survivability of every object in&lt;br/&gt;the deep archive
against failures and malicious corruption; and (iv) an evaluation strategy to
assess various strategies developed under this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Many communities are interested in long
term preservation of their data, and are seeking technology approaches to deal
with this challenging problem. This project will address issues of direct
interest to all these communities. The research team will introduce technologies
and tools to these communities through presentations at major related meetings.
Moreover, this project involves collaborations with the National Archives and
Records Administration (NARA), NASA at Goddard, and the Survivors of the Shoah
Visual History Foundation. An impact on these three organizations will in fact
have a much broader impact on many other communities. Strong letters of support
from these three organizations are appended to this proposal. Various tools will
be developed and released as well-documented open source software.