* 0455997
* Shared Infrastructure Preservation Models
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2007
* Michael Nelson, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 04/30/2007
* USD 111,300.00

Many proposed digital preservation models require personal sacrifice for public
good.For example, some proposed long-term storage systems require the
contribution of X megabytes of storage today for the promise of Y megabytes of
persistent storage (X&lt;&lt;Y). Examples of such systems include the
Intermemory, Freenet, Free Haven, and PAST. Despite having many theoretically
attractive features, these systems have not found&lt;br/&gt;widespread
acceptance. While some systems require an ever-increasing user growth and
participation that is more like a Ponzi ("pyramid") scheme than a sustainable
model for preservation, the main reason is there is little immediate incentive
for users to incur a personal, short-term cost for a group, long-term benefit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal fits
somewhere between refreshing (copying the bits to different systems) and
migration (transferring data to newer system environments). The research team
will look at ways to refresh the data at new locations, but since no
assumptionsare made about the target environment, the approaches to be
investigated could be used for migration as well. A number of digital
preservation models that rely on shared, existing infrastructure will be
assessed. The premise is that if archiving can be accomplished within a widely
deployed infrastructure whose operational burden is shared among many partners,
the resulting system will have only an incremental cost and be tolerant of
dynamic participation. The project will consider:&lt;br/&gt;- network news
transfer protocol (NNTP or "Usenet news")&lt;br/&gt;- reliable IP
multicast&lt;br/&gt;- simple mail transfer protocol (SMTP or
"email")&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through shared infrastructure, the individual cost
for participation is kept low and aggregate system functionality is not greatly
impacted by participants joining and leaving. The models primarily focus on
creatively utilizing existing Internet protocols and systems in order to
decrease the deployment and maintenance burden for participating organizations
and will not "automatically" preserve data, but rather&lt;br/&gt;should make it
easy for those who wish to do so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lowering the barrier for participation in
preservation activities is a direct result of using shared infrastructure.
Decoupling preparation and transmission from reception, storage and refreshing
allows the participation of various partners, including geographically
distributed, underrepresented groups and late arriving participants.
Preservation can more easily be incorporated in classroom educational activities
because participants can join and leave without explicit registration or direct
impact on the system. Current preservation systems, such as LOCKSS, can be
discussed in the classroom, but they do not lend themselves to pedagogical
participation in the "live" system. Similarly, organizations can now view
preservation opportunities (and associated costs) as a continuum and not a
binary choice of "doing" or "not doing" preservation.