* 0455807
* International Conference on Complementarity, Duality, and Global Optimization; August 15-17, 2005; Virginia Tech - Blacksburg, VA
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2006
* David Gao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 02/28/2006
* USD 30,000.00

The International Conference on Complementarity, Duality, and Global
Optimization (CDGO-05) will be held at Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, August 15-17,
2005. A primary goal of this conference is to bring together mathematicians,
engineers, and scientists from a variety of scientific disciplines who are
working on complementarity, duality, and global optimization in nonlinear
systems, engineering mechanics, and computational methods, with an emphasis on
applications in science and engineering. The purpose of this award is to apply
for a grant from NSF to partially cover the travel expenses for four invited
plenary speakers, three tutorial speakers, several invited special symposium
speakers/organizers, and several graduate students/post-doctors, and young
researchers from both universities and industries within the United States.
Intellectual merit: Complementarity and Duality are fundamental concepts that
play an important role in global optimization, large-scale computation, and
multi-disciplinary research in engineering and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fascinating conference will provide an
exciting forum for the exchange of ideas in this highly fertile and ever-
expanding area. Broader impacts: The conference proceedings will be published in
two hardbound volumes by Kluwer book series of Nonconvex Optimization and
Advances in Mechanics and Mathematics. It is expected that this conference will
open new trends in optimization and engineering science. Furthermore, it will
stimulate young faculty and students to venture into this rich domain of
research.