* 0455864
* Conference on Future Directions in 3-Dimensional Topology;  May 6-9, 2005;  Ann Arbor, MI
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Joel Hass, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2006
* USD 20,000.00

We are proposing a conference centered on the theme of evaluating
future&lt;br/&gt;directions in the development of 3-dimensional geometry and
topology.&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the conference is to review significant
recent developments&lt;br/&gt;in the theory of 3-manifolds and to discuss how
they will affect the course&lt;br/&gt;of future research. The conference will be
held at the University of&lt;br/&gt;Michigan at Ann Arbor. The planned dates for
the conference are May 6 &lt;br/&gt;to May 9, 2005.&lt;br/&gt;We expect 50 to 80
participants, about one third of whom will be &lt;br/&gt;graduate students.Some
talks will be tailored specifically for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several important recent developments that are
likely to influence the&lt;br/&gt;future of 3-dimensional geometry and
topology.&lt;br/&gt;1. The work of Grisha Pereleman on the evolution of a metric
on a &lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional manifold under the Ricci flow is still being
absorbed and reviewed by the mathematical community. It is clear however that it
has the potential to radically &lt;br/&gt;change the directions and techniques
used in the study of 3-dimensional topology and related fields. The aim for this
conference is not to focus on the details of Pereleman's methods but rather on
their implications. What other problems are amenable to study by Ricci flow
techniques? Which &lt;br/&gt;of the traditional theorems and results of
3-manifold theory become subsumed in &lt;br/&gt;geometrization? What questions
become important if Pereleman's geometrization results hold &lt;br/&gt;up. What
are the implications to related areas such as geometric group theory and the
&lt;br/&gt;differential geometry of surfaces in 3-manifolds? Will the entire
field of 3-manifolds &lt;br/&gt;become less important with this major problem
solved, or will go on to have even greater importance?&lt;br/&gt;2. What are the
likely future developments in Geometric Group Theory, and
in&lt;br/&gt;Topological Methods in Group Theory, areas largely based on ideas
from 3-manifold&lt;br/&gt;theory. Stallings first, and more recently Rips and
Sela have shown that 3-manifolds&lt;br/&gt;are prototypes in many ways for
general finitely presented groups.&lt;br/&gt;3. Ozsvath and Szabo have developed
a theory of holomorphic curves associated&lt;br/&gt;to Heegaard decompositions
of closed 3-manifolds, leading to what they call&lt;br/&gt;"Heegaard Floer
homology". What impact will this have in understanding 3-manifolds&lt;br/&gt;and
to other areas? Related to this is the work of Khovanov and Rasmussen
defining&lt;br/&gt;and applying a Jones polynomial homology.&lt;br/&gt;4. Four
dimensional techniques such as gauge theory and related topics have
had&lt;br/&gt;some applications to problems in 3-manifolds. Thus Kronheimer and
Mrowka&lt;br/&gt;give a proof of Property P (also implied by geometrization).
What further&lt;br/&gt;impact on 3-manifold theory are such techniques likely to
have?&lt;br/&gt;5. Many invariants of knots and 3-manifolds have been developed
over &lt;br/&gt;the last two decades, including knot polynomials, finite type
invariants etc. How useful &lt;br/&gt;are these in understanding 3-manifolds?
What ties do they have to geometric properties of &lt;br/&gt;manifolds such as
hyperbolic volume?&lt;br/&gt;6. Are there significant emerging opportunities to
apply the methods of 3-manifold&lt;br/&gt;theory to areas such as Computational
Geometry and Cosmology as well as fields&lt;br/&gt;such as Computer Aided Design
and Computational Complexity. What ties are developing between the theory of
3-manifolds and such disciplines?