* 0455329
* SGER:  The Role of Lipid Bodies in Peroxisomal Biogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2005,07/31/2007
* Joel Goodman, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 07/31/2007
* USD 199,999.00

Peroxisomes are found in virtually all eukaryotic cells. They are essential
organelles for many metabolic pathways in plants, fungi, and animals. The origin
of peroxisomes has been hotly debated for decades. It is clear now that
peroxisomes can form by fission from pre-existing peroxisomes. However, there is
ample evidence for a de novo pathway of peroxisomal assembly. The endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) has been implicated in this pathway, although its precise role
has not been established. There have also been reports of close associations
between lipid bodies (which form from the ER) and peroxisomes, although the
significance of these observations is not known. This project will test the
hypothesis that lipid bodies are essential for the de novo assembly of
peroxisomes in yeast. As a first step, the extent to which peroxisomal proteins
reside in the lipid body-associated structures will be determined. The direct
test for the hypothesis will be accomplished by looking for a precursor-product
relationship between these structures and mature peroxisomes. Further
confirmation will be accomplished by examining the extent of peroxisomal
biogenesis in a mutant that cannot generate lipid bodies nor undergo fission of
preexisting organelles. This project thus tests a completely new model for the
origin of peroxisomes. The de novo origin of peroxisomes has been a murky and
controversial subject to date, and our hypothesis is consistent with several
observations in the literature and could solve this controversy. If the
hypothesis is correct, it would overturn current thinking of organelle
biogenesis, indicating that the lipid body is capable of this activity.

The project will also provide hands-on research experience for high school
(underprivileged), undergraduate, and graduate students. Results will be widely
disseminated through talks at national meetings and submission to first-tier
science journals.