* 0455994
* Nanostructured Electrode Materials for Electrochemical Supercapacitors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2008
* Guozhong Cao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 288,883.00

This grant provides funding for the manufacturing and characterization of
several nanostructured electrodes for electrochemical supercapacitors that
exceed currently achieved energy storage capacity and display high
charge/discharge rates. These electrodes are based on transition metal oxides
and consist of four different nanostructures: (1) uniformly sized and
unidirectionally aligned oxide nanorod arrays (perpendicularly standing on
conductive substrate), (2) oxide nanotube arrays, (3) metal - oxide core-shell
nanocable arrays, and (4) carbon cryogel - oxide nanocomposites. This research
will take vanadium pentoxide as a model system to systematically study the
influences of crystallinity, nanostructure and doping on intercalation capacity
and charge/discharge kinetics. Core-shell nanocable arrays and carbon cryogel-
oxide nanocomposites have both double layer supercapacitor and electrochemical
pseudocapacitor characteristics, and thus promise significantly enhanced
performance. The carbon cryogel-oxide nanocomposite is characterized by three-
dimensional energy storage and release processes, while conventional
electrochemical capacitors are inherently two dimensional systems. The energy
stored in a three-dimensional electrode structure is larger than that in
conventional capacitors. Other transition metal oxides including complex oxides,
doped oxides, and amorphous oxides will also be explored for further enhancement
of supercapacitor performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will lead to the development of nanostructured electrodes with high
energy storage capacity and fast charge/discharge rate with improved cyclic
resistance. Additionally new manufacturing methods will be developed for the
enhancement of material properties by careful design of nanostructures or
microstructures and by precise control of composition. The study will result in
a better fundamental understanding of the relationships between manufacturing,
structure, composition, properties, and performance. The research will also
broaden the application of nanostructures and nanomaterials by simply
capitalizing the huge surface area and improved transport kinetics in
nanostructures and nanomaterials without altering the physical properties
associated with bulk materials. The benefit of this work also includes educating
graduate and undergraduate students and attracting them into the field of energy
related materials development and nanomanufacturing technology, and thus helping
our nation stay in a leading position in this strategic field not only today but
also in the future.&lt;br/&gt;