* 0455586
* Science Education for New Civic Engagements and Responsibilities
* EHR,DUE
* 09/10/2004,12/31/2006
* William David Burns, HARRISBURG UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, THE
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,968,110.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;The Association of American Colleges and
Universities (AAC&amp;U) developed the framework for this project, Science
Education for New Civic Engagements and Responsibilities (SENCER), during
1999-2000 with partial support from the NSF. The framework is the product of two
workshops and advice from hundreds of college faculty and academic leaders. To
date, teams from more than 250 institutions of higher education have asked to be
included in SENCER's work. SENCER is helping faculty and administrators achieve
three important goals: (1) improve science education for non-majors, (2) connect
science education reform to improved general education, and (3) stimulate civic
engagement. The SENCER approach is to connect science education with civic
engagement by teaching science through the study of complex public issues.
SENCER models are teaching, for example, biology through the study of HIV
disease or the Human Genome Project; physics through the study of the challenges
of nuclear disarmament or hypotheses about the origins of the universe;
chemistry through the study of air pollution, water quality, or crime; and
mathematics by examining the reliability of statistics, studying risk/benefit
analysis, or decision-making. The outcome for students is connected learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SENCER seeks to promote large-scale reform in
undergraduate SMET education through intensive faculty professional development,
a strong focus on local systemic change, and the use of improved assessment
practices. SENCER faculty are learning to use an assessment instrument developed
with partial support from several NSF initiatives to improve undergraduate
education. This instrument is known as Student Assessment of Their Learning
Gains (SALG) and is freely available for public use at
WWW.WCER.WISC.edu/NISE/CL1. There are four key pieces of the SENCER project.
SENCER Institutes are the core activity. These are team-based residential
institutes for faculty, administrators, and advanced graduate students planning
to initiate SENCER approaches. SENCER Clusters are both disciplinary and issue-
oriented groups of faculty and administrators that operate to provide ongoing
support and sustain reform efforts arising from participation in the Institutes.
The SENCER Virtual Community links innovators together and supports
dissemination of resources to support reform. The SENCER Leadership Initiatives
are focusing national attention and recognition on exemplary initiatives in
order to build additional support for this approach. &lt;br/&gt;