* 0455333
* Archaeological Fieldwork in the Casma Valley, Peru:  Analysis, Interpretation, and Dissemination of Results
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Thomas Pozorski, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2009
* USD 98,225.00

Sechin Alto site in the Casma Valley on the north coast of Peru contained the
largest building in the New World during its heyday about 2100-1400 B.C. An
international research team of Peruvian and U.S. scientists, faculty, and
students headed by Drs. Shelia Pozorski and Thomas Pozorski has been
investigating the Sechin Alto polity since the late 1990s. With National Science
Foundation support they will spend three additional field seasons analyzing,
documenting, and interpreting data from this site. The intellectual merit of
this effort centers on two crucial issues (1) how the Sechin Alto polity's
complexity and effective management developed so quickly and persisted for some
500 years and (2) how the response of subsequent local cultures reflects Sechin
Alto's political legacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fieldwork by the Pozorskis at
earlier Cotton Preceramic (2500-1800 B.C.) sites in the Casma Valley area and
published results of recent fieldwork in the Supe-Pativilca-Fortaleza area south
of Casma have documented prepottery precedents for the monumental Initial Period
architecture within the Casma Valley. Essential architectural elements such as
bilateral symmetry and balance, mound building, and specific mound/plaza
structure types at these prepottery sites presage late Initial Period
developments. Nevertheless, these preceramic antecedents are dwarfed by their
early ceramic successors, especially the Sechin Alto polity within the Casma
Valley. Furthermore, this transition was very quick, begging the questions of
how and why this occurred. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Also critical to the study of
complex society is how and why polities end. The decline of Sechin Alto appears
to have resulted from internal conflict followed soon after by a severe El Nino
event. Three substantial reoccupations of the main Sechin Alto mound over about
1100 years reveal strong responses to the Sechin Alto polity even long after its
decline. These responses, manifested on the main mound, took the form
respectively of intrusive administrative structures, then respectful squatter
use, and finally desecration. Clearly, to be truly powerful in the Casma Valley
between about 1350 and 250 B.C., it was necessary to "make a mark" on the
defunct Sechin Alto polity's greatest remaining tangible monument, the central
mound.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fortuitous discovery of substantial refuse deposits
spanning the entire Initial Period (2100-1000 B.C.) prompted the investigators
to greatly expand excavations at Sechin Alto site in order to better sample this
fragile archaeological resource that is threatened by agricultural expansion.
Similarly, as the principal investigators worked to define chronology, access
patterns, and room function on the mound surface, they realized the site had two
major components. The Initial Period occupation involved construction and use of
the main mound by a select elite whereas the subsequent Early Horizon (1000-200
B.C.) reoccupation resulted in massive reworking of the 75,000 m2 mound top to
create a sizeable village on its summit. By taking advantage of the opportunity
to explore both of these unanticipated sources of vital data, the principal
investigators collected unusually large amounts of cultural material-especially
ceramics and food remains. To address critical research issues and better define
Sechin Alto society, the project will analyze, document, and interpret this
wealth of new archaeological material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
from the proposed activity will include collaboration with Peruvian and U.S.
colleagues, archaeologists, and ethnobiologists and concurrent training of
students during the analysis and interpretation phase. The new insights gained
will likely provoke a reexamination of how prehistoric states are defined in the
New World and inspire other scholars to explore how polity legacies may be
defined by the responses of subsequent cultural developments. Project results
will be disseminated to interested local citizens, Andean scholars, and the
global archaeological community. This will serve to inform the scholarly
community and to empower the local community by instilling regional pride and
boosting archaeological tourism.&lt;br/&gt;