* 0455861
* Workshop in Support of Broadening Participation, October 20-21, 2004, Rosslyn, VA
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2006
* Andrew Bernat, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 09/30/2006
* USD 75,265.00

PI: Andrew Bernat&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Computing Research Association
(CRA)&lt;br/&gt;Title: Workshop in Support of Broadening
Participation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing Research Association (CRA) has been
awarded a Special Projects grant to organize a workshop to bring together a wide
range of individuals with experience in working with groups traditionally under-
represented in computing: women, African-Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans,
Pacific Islanders, Alaskan Natives and persons with disabilities. The workshop
participants will take a careful look at prior activities designed to encourage
increased participation by individuals from these groups and will formulate
suggestions for new activities that would further encourage
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies
in its potential for adding to the knowledge in the field of what has worked and
not worked in activities designed to increase the participation and success of
underrepresented groups in computing, and its potential for providing insights
into new and different avenues for further increasing such participation and
success. The broader impacts of the project lie with its potential for
contributing ideas and concrete suggestions for increasing the numbers and
success of women, underrepresented minorities and the disabled in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;