* 0455318
* Metabolomic Profiling of Lipids and Their Compositional Dynamics in Plant Stress Responses
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Xuemin Wang, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Burnap
* 08/31/2009
* USD 863,231.00

This project assembles researchers with complementary expertise to develop the
metabolomic capacity to quantitatively profile lipid molecular species and their
changes in plants. The long-term goal of this project is to understand how
cellular lipids and their metabolites interact to produce and maintain complex
cell membranes and to regulate cell functions. The goal of this project is two-
fold: One is to develop a comprehensive capacity to fully profile cellular lipid
species, using a mass spectrometry-based, common platform. The other is to use
the profiling capability to determine the metabolic function of enigmatic,
patatin-like acyl hydrolases and several putative lipases involved in plant
stress responses. The specific objectives of this application are to: (1)
profile and quantify regulatory lipids: free fatty acids, selected fatty acid
derivatives, lysolipid species, and phosphoinositides; (2) profile and quantify
neutral glycerides: diacylglycerol and triacylglycerol; (3) profile and quantify
sphingolipid molecular species; (4) discover new lipid species and metabolites;
(5) use the profiling capability to determine the metabolic functions of
putative lipolytic enzymes: the patatin-like proteins, RL-PLA, AAM10310,
AtSABP2, PRLIP1, PAD4, and EDS1. Sensitive and efficient lipid profiling by
electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) has the potential
to achieve full characterization of cellular lipids. The development of this
capability will contribute greatly to the emerging, comprehensive research
strategy, and metabolomics. Lipid profiling will provide a powerful strategy to
address biological questions that involve the function of lipids. The functional
studies will produce insights into in vivo substrates and products of
Arabidopsis lipid-hydrolyzing enzymes, the conditions under which the enzymes
are activated, and the spatial distribution of the
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have broader impacts. In
addition to training graduate students through research activities, this project
will bring current knowledge of metabolic profiling and functional genomics to
the classroom. It will also provide an opportunity to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in the plant sciences. The capability and service
provided by the Kansas Lipidomics Research Center will be important to many
researchers. The project will identify important metabolic and regulatory steps
mediating plant growth and stress responses. Manipulation of these steps may
lead to production of crop plants with enhanced stress tolerance and increased
product quality and/or productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;