* 0455117
* Structure and Dynamics in Large Polymer Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Wayne Mattice, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2009
* USD 345,000.00

Stereochemical composition exerts strong and sometimes surprising effects on the
&lt;br/&gt;dynamic and static properties of polymers, as illustrated by the
dependence of the miscibility of a &lt;br/&gt;polypropylene melt on the
stereochemical composition of the chains. This subtle effect has been
&lt;br/&gt;captured and explained by the PI in prior simulations performed with
support from NSF. The PI &lt;br/&gt;and Co-PI will now address the influence of
stereochemical composition in two other important &lt;br/&gt;areas: The
nanoscale objects spontaneously formed by dendronized polymers with a backbone
&lt;br/&gt;that raises tacticity as an issue, and the detailed analysis of melt
dynamics when the molecular &lt;br/&gt;weight and monomer unit are held
constant, and stereochemical composition is the only variable. &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed simulations of dendronized polymers, using a new bridging method
developed by &lt;br/&gt;the PI, will identify procedures that control the
stabilities of nanoscale objects, search for new &lt;br/&gt;objects not yet
realized (but potentially realizable) in the laboratory, and determine the
approach &lt;br/&gt;that should be taken if bends are required at specific
positions in nanoscale rods. In the dynamic &lt;br/&gt;study, the Co-PI will
examine polypropylene melts by various nmr techniques that provide the
&lt;br/&gt;translational diffusion coefficient and also characterize the local
mobility. This information will &lt;br/&gt;be used by the PI for a critical test
of the fundamental basis for the dynamic Monte Carlo method &lt;br/&gt;in the
study of polymer dynamics. This critical test avoids using the molecular weight
as a &lt;br/&gt;variable, and instead focuses on the changes in mobility with
alterations in the stereochemical &lt;br/&gt;composition of polypropylene
chains. This part of the project will benefit from collaboration &lt;br/&gt;with
Prof. Theodorou (National Technical University, Athens), who will provide
mobility data &lt;br/&gt;from classical Molecular Dynamics simulations of the
same systems that are studied by dynamic &lt;br/&gt;Monte Carlo methods by the
PI and nmr by the Co-PI. The intellectual merit of this research is
&lt;br/&gt;the development of new methods for understanding and predicting the
structures of sophisticated &lt;br/&gt;dendronized polymers that promise to be
important in newly emerging nanotechnologies, and &lt;br/&gt;providing a
critical assessment for a popular simulation technique, dynamic Monte Carlo,
that is &lt;br/&gt;somewhat controversial because it purports to provide dynamic
information without explicitly &lt;br/&gt;taking account of the momenta of the
components of the system. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project has several broader
impacts. It contributes to fundamental knowledge by a &lt;br/&gt;critical
assessment of the basis for the dynamic Monte Carlo method and by creating a new
&lt;br/&gt;approach to the development and control of nanoscale objects based on
polymers. The insights &lt;br/&gt;gained from the project are used by the PI and
Co-PI in their formal and informal instruction of &lt;br/&gt;young scientists
(undergraduates, graduate students, postdocs, visiting scientists) in the
&lt;br/&gt;classroom and in their research groups. The PI also uses this
knowledge in continuing education &lt;br/&gt;of professionals in industry,
through his direction of the ACS short course on Molecular &lt;br/&gt;Modeling
of Polymers. His students and postdocs assist in this short course, thereby
gaining &lt;br/&gt;valuable insights from the industrial participants, and
assisting in the education of the &lt;br/&gt;participants by sharing their
learning experience in the use of simulations to understand and
&lt;br/&gt;predict the properties of polymers. The PI will endeavor to expand on
his successful record of &lt;br/&gt;assisting in the placement of
underrepresented groups in the professorial ranks by employing
&lt;br/&gt;outstanding young scientists from such groups in the project.