* 0455819
* Investigating the Meaningfulness of Preservice Programs Across the Continuum of Teaching (IMPPACT) in Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2012
* Scott Samson, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 06/30/2012
* USD 2,480,891.00

Increasing national attention has been placed on the role that teacher education
programs play in addressing the changing needs of teachers throughout their
professional lives. The IMPPACT Project is a multi-university, collaborative
research study targeted at investigating the longitudinal impact of science
teacher education programs on middle and secondary science teachers and their
students across critical developmental stages of the teacher professional
continuum. The goal of the project is to study the formal and informal learning
experiences of cohorts of science teachers at four critical points in their
professional careers: 1) upon entry into science teacher education; 2) during
the candidacy stage of science teacher education programs including the
associated field experiences; 3) during the early induction years as a new
science teacher (years 1-4); and 4) during the post-induction stage of science
teaching (years 5+). Three major research universities (Syracuse University, the
University of Iowa and North Carolina State University) are collaborating to
empirically investigate the role that science teacher preparation plays in
helping recruit, prepare and support 7-12 grade science teachers. The research
generates information on how individuals develop pedagogical and content
knowledge in science throughout their preservice program and professional
careers, and how their needs evolve. The study is identifying the linkages
between science teachers' beliefs and practices over time and how they impact
student achievement scores in 7-12 grade science classrooms. The results are
expected to have direct implications for how exemplary, evidence-based science
teacher education programs can be created to better support science teacher
development and student learning across the entire teacher continuum.
&lt;br/&gt;