* 0455285
* Descriptive Set Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2005,10/31/2010
* Alexander Kechris, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2010
* USD 336,520.00

The general aim of this project is the development of the theory of
&lt;br/&gt;definable actions of Polish groups, the structure and classification
of &lt;br/&gt;their orbit spaces, and the closely related study of definable
equivalence &lt;br/&gt;relations. This work is motivated by basic foundational
questions, like &lt;br/&gt;understanding the nature of complete classification
of mathematical objects, &lt;br/&gt;up to some notion of equivalence, by
invariants, and creating a mathematical &lt;br/&gt;framework for measuring the
complexity of such classification problems. This &lt;br/&gt;theory is developed
within the context of descriptive set theory, which &lt;br/&gt;provides the
basic underlying concepts and methods. On the other hand, in &lt;br/&gt;view of
its broad scope, it has natural interactions with many other areas &lt;br/&gt;of
mathematics, such as model theory, recursion theory, the theory of
&lt;br/&gt;topological groups and their representations, topological dynamics,
ergodic &lt;br/&gt;theory, operator algebras, and combinatorics. Within this
general program it &lt;br/&gt;is proposed to study: (i) problems arising in the
theory of countable Borel &lt;br/&gt;equivalence relations, particularly
concerning hyperfiniteness and &lt;br/&gt;treeability, including descriptive
aspects of free actions of free groups; &lt;br/&gt;(ii) newly developed
connections between the topological dynamics of &lt;br/&gt;automorphism groups
of countable structures and finite Ramsey theory as well &lt;br/&gt;as a related
semigroup framework for such connections with infinite Ramsey &lt;br/&gt;theory;
(iii) the concepts of genericity and ample genericity in Polish
&lt;br/&gt;groups and their relation to other structural properties of groups
such as &lt;br/&gt;the small index property, uncountable cofinality, the Bergman
finite &lt;br/&gt;generation property, fixed point properties for actions on
trees and &lt;br/&gt;automatic continuity; (iv) complexity of classification
problems concerning &lt;br/&gt;the isometric or topological classification of
various kinds of metric, &lt;br/&gt;topological or Banach
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
question that arises in many fields of mathematics is that of
&lt;br/&gt;classifying a given collection of objects under study. This amounts
to &lt;br/&gt;providing a "catalog" or "listing" of these objects, in principle
not unlike &lt;br/&gt;that of cataloging species in biology or stars and
galaxies in astronomy. If &lt;br/&gt;such a classification is possible, one has
a "complete" understanding of the &lt;br/&gt;mathematical structures involved.
Otherwise a more or less "chaotic" &lt;br/&gt;behavior is expected. It is thus
very important to understand under what &lt;br/&gt;circumstances a
classification is possible. This difficult foundational &lt;br/&gt;question is
further complicated by the fact that what constitutes an &lt;br/&gt;acceptable
classification is very much dependent on the particular field of
&lt;br/&gt;mathematics studied, so the criteria for a "good" classification in
one area &lt;br/&gt;might not be appropriate in another. At its basic level,
this project aims &lt;br/&gt;to develop a general quantitative theory, which in
many situations can &lt;br/&gt;precisely measure the complexity of a
classification problem and thus &lt;br/&gt;provide objective means by which one
can decide, in any given field, whether &lt;br/&gt;a satisfactory classification
of the objects in question is possible. This &lt;br/&gt;is achieved by
associating with each collection of objects to be classified &lt;br/&gt;an
appropriate concept of "magnitude" or "size", which in a precise sense
&lt;br/&gt;measures the difficulty of its classification problem. This new
theory of &lt;br/&gt;"magnitude" as well as problems in different directions
that arise in the &lt;br/&gt;course of the development of this theory are
investigated in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;