* 0455312
* Group Travel Grant to 2005 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2006
* Maja MatariÄ‡, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2006
* USD 46,000.00

This is funding to support attendance by approximately 40 participants from the
United States in the 2005 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA'05), which will be held in Barcelona, Spain, on April 18-22,
2005. This annual IEEE event, sponsored by the IEEE Robotics and Automation
Society, has become the largest annual conference in robotics and automation
worldwide, and serves as the premier forum for gathering international
researchers together for the exchange of ideas on technical problems and their
solutions, and on emerging technologies. NSF funds will help ensure a high U.S.
presence at ICRA'05, by providing partial airfare reimbursement to selected U.S.
researchers who have had papers accepted but who due to financial hardship would
otherwise be unable to attend the conference to present their work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PI has established a 4-member
Selection Committee to choose the beneficiaries from the NSF funds. The
committee will pay special attention to enabling participation by student
(co)authors and by members of traditionally under-represented groups and
institutions. This funding will expose participants to the latest research
results while also enabling them to build and/or enhance their social network of
peers and mentors within the research community, which will in the future
benefit them and the country as a whole.