* 0455621
* Glass Transitions, Polyamorphic Transitions, and Chemical Order Freezing Transitions, in Liquids and Other Complex Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* C. Austen Angell, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 02/28/2009
* USD 375,000.00

This project aims to study glasses that are formed on extremely short time
scales by "hyperquenching." Developed over decades to vitrify "bad"
glassformers, hyperquenching has never been systematically applied to explore
the high temperature structure and properties of common glassformers. The
possibility of examining features of glassforming liquids in the absence of
smearing by vibrational excitation is a central goal for this study. Some key
results were obtained in the previous grant period supporting the concept of
topological defects as elementary excitations in glasses, and experiments needed
to properly develop this idea will be performed. Hyperquenching of glassformers
like zink chloride (ZnCl2) containing site sensitive probes like cyanide ion CN-
will be performed. Hyperquenching of complex ion containing glassformers will
permit the definition of the second fictive temperature described in a recent
paper. Initiated in 2004 are new glasses obtained by (i) "pressure-tuning" and
(ii) mechanical damage. Pressure-quenched and damage-formed glasses will be
examined as analogs of hyperquenched glasses. In addition, it is shown how, in
systems with additional complexity over the usual glassformer, hyperquenching
can open the door to detailed study of the complex process. This may be (i) a
liquid-liquid phase change that can be quenched-in before it happens, and then
studied at leisure during reheating, or (ii) a molecular structure change, such
as the folding of a protein, or the progress of some chemical ordering process.
In each case the preliminary proof of principle is given. using papers published
during the present grant period. In this proposal some new points of departure
for the experimental study of glassformers are outlined and resources to bring
them to fruition are requested. Previous work in this group was focussed on
liquids in metastable equilibrium, or on the transition from liquid to glass and
back to liquid using similar time scales for cooling and heating. The new
approach was originally designed to permit greater overlap with computer
simulation, but has now been recognized as a strategy for exploring supercooled
liquid states, and glassy state dynamics, in its own right. It is also motivated
by the information on the nature of traps on the energy landscape (both their
energetics and vibrational dynamics) that can be obtained by interrogation of
the hyperquenched
glass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under NSF
support this author has just contributed an article on fundamental aspects of
the glassy state to a book on Pharmaceuticals "Freeze Drying of Pharmaceuticals"
because many of today's drugs are now being preserved in the glassy state by the
freeze drying process. One of the reasons for this choice is that vitreous
materials dissolve much more rapidly (in the stomach for instance) than do their
crystalline analogs. This work on the thermodynamics and dynamic properties of
glasses is of fundamental importance to the development of drug processing. This
project on separating physical from chemical effects of hyperquenching will
provide valuable training to both graduate and undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;