* 0455124
* Offender Registration: Examination of Intended and Unintended Effects on Juvenile Offenders
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2005,05/31/2006
* Elizabeth Letourneau, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 05/31/2006
* USD 32,256.00

While there is wide consensus on the need for improved community safety from sex
offenders, substantial debate exists regarding the effectiveness of registration
and notification procedures and potentially negative impact of such practices,
particularly as applied to juveniles. This study will examine whether stringent
registration laws have had the intended effect of reducing rates of sexual
offending among juveniles via a deterrence effect, an incapacitation effect, or
both. This study will also examine whether these same laws have had an
unintended effect of reducing the probability that youths who commit serious
sexual offenses will be prosecuted or adjudicated for such offenses because the
policies are viewed by those who implement them as too harsh. In collaboration
with two departments in the state of South Carolina, data from three time
periods will be obtained: four years prior to registration, four years following
registration but prior to on-line Internet availability, and four years
following on-line Internet availability. Data will include arrest, prosecution,
and adjudication information for serious sexual offenses, serious non-sexual
offenses (i.e., assault and robbery) and victim reports of sexual assault. Data
on potentially important covariates will also be collected, including annual
number of police officers, annual appropriations for juvenile justice and annual
workforce within juvenile justice. ARIMA models will be developed to examine
whether trends in general sexual offending simply mirror the trends seen in
other serious crimes or are due to registration and notification policies.
Survival analyses will be conducted to examine whether registration and
notification policies are associated with lower recidivism rates among
registered (vs. non-registered) youth. ARIMA models and sequential probability
models will be developed to address whether official responses to juvenile sex
offending changed following implementation of harsh registration and
notification policies. Study results should place policy makers in a much better
position to determine the relative costs and benefits of maintaining
comprehensive registration and notification policies.