* 0455027
* Ultrashort Pulsed Laser Light for the Manipulation of Neurons and Vasculature
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2008
* David Kleinfeld, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 07/31/2008
* USD 692,217.00

The advent of ultrashort laser light pulses as a laboratory tool has provided
the opportunity to probe and manipulate structure and function in biological
systems. This award supports development of an instrument that will use
nonlinear absorption to create micrometer-sized ablations in nervous tissue,
with minimal collateral damage. The instrument can be integrated with existing
nonlinear imaging devices, principally the multi-photon microscope. Prior work
has shown that ultrashort laser pulses can be used for an all-optical approach
to histology in which anatomical structure with micrometer resolution is
obtained without the use of mechanical sectioning devices. Pilot data has also
demonstrated that such pulses can block flow in specific, targeted blood
vessels, thus enabling studies of the biofluid mechanics of the vessels. The
proposed instrument development program will design and realize ultrashort
pulsed laser technology capable of a mixture of optical ablation and nonlinear
optical imaging. The effort will result in a near turn-key system that uses
commercially available laser oscillators and regenerative amplifiers, together
with a mixture of commercial and custom opto-mechanical and electronic
components and software. The expected applications include the automatic
anatomical mapping of neuronal and non-neuronal nuclei, vasculature, and
subcellular structures within the rodent brain, and the optical induction of
axonomy in which axons in the leech ganglion are cut to study circuit dynamics
in the swim command network. Additional potential applications include
submicrometer surgery to ablate organelles, and transient disruption of the
blood-brain barrier. The design and realization of the instrument will expose
students to use of state-of the art optical instrumentation for the pursuit of
biological questions. The proposed work will specifically train two postdoctoral
researchers in instrumentation and experimentation at the optics/biology
interface.