* 0455575
* New Biologically Relevant Sulfur Radical Cation Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2008
* Richard Glass, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2008
* USD 369,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports Professor Richard S.
Glass at the University of Arizona who proposes to examine the chemical basis
for the hypothesis that the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease involves
oxidation. It is proposed that Met-35 of beta-amyloid peptides was responsible
for initiating this oxidation by reducing metal ions, i.e. Fe(III) or Cu(II),
which then participate in Fenton-type reactions to generate the potent oxidant
OH radical. The proximity of an amide or phenyl ring to the Met sulfur was
invoked to lower the oxidation potential of the sulfur by promoting electron-
transfer generating a sulfur radical cation.&lt;br/&gt;Professor Glass will
examine neighboring group participation by amide and aromatic rings on electron
transfer from thioethers specifically assessing the nature of bonding in these
unique systems. To accomplish these goals a combination of methods will be used:
(1) design and synthesis of conformationally constrained molecules, (2)
electrochemical studies, (3) pulse radiolysis studies, (4) electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) spectroscopic studies, (5) photoelectron spectroscopy (PES)
studies and (6) computational studies (theoretical calculations). The use of
such diverse methodologies will require the collaboration of several
laboratories. In addition to uncovering novel chemistry, the proposed studies
should provide insight and tools for evaluating the basis for Alzheimer's
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
supports Professor Richard S. Glass whose proposed studies will involve
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students as well as collaborations with
the University of Kansas, Notre Dame University and Arizona State University.
Indeed a unique multi-institutional consortium will be empowered to address
fundamental chemical questions with a wide array of potent methods and
expertise. The proposed work may lead to an understanding of the chemical basis
of Alzheimer's disease. Such an understanding may result in improved diagnosis
or treatment for this devastating disease, which is a major health problem
currently in the U.S. and increasing with the aging population.&lt;br/&gt;