* 0455610
* Ensuring Quality Mathematics Instruction for GED Students:  A Professional Development Model
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2010
* Mary Jane Schmitt, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* John S. Bradley
* 07/31/2010
* USD 1,272,375.00

This is a four-year project submitted under category B (Resources for
Professional Development) of the Teacher Professional Continuum solicitation. It
will develop, pilot and field test an approach to standards-based mathematics
in-service professional development, using recently developed standards and
curriculum for the Adult Basic Education system. The model will be piloted and
field tested with mathematics teachers in seven states, whose students are in
adult education and functioning approximately on a 4th to 8th grade level. The
model uses teacher inquiry and reflective learning to engage teachers in
designing and implementing effective mathematics instructional approaches for
algebra and data analysis.

The project goals are to (1) enhance teacher content knowledge and instructional
skills; 2) document teacher learning; and 3) produce a professional development
model that can be replicated nationally. The project will build on the
development team's prior work in the areas of adult learning and teacher
professional development.

An external evaluator (University of Tennessee's Institute for Assessment and
Evaluation) will conduct formative and summative evaluations, examining
materials to be produced, teacher learning and effects on student learning.
Dissemination will proceed through websites and national data bases, as well as
reports at national conferences.