* 0455276
* Ecology of a Distinct Bdellovibrio Genotype in the Chesapeake Bay and other estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Henry Williams, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2008
* USD 399,647.00

In a previous NSF project (OCE 0084265) the investigators discovered a distinct
(d) halophilic (H) Bdellovibrionaceae (Bd) genotype that appears to be exclusive
to the Chesapeake Bay estuary. This is the first time a distinct population of
Bd that appears to be restricted to a particular ecosystem has been reported.
Although some ocean isolates were found in the Bay, it appears that the unique
Bay genotype is a distinct strain that has adapted to the estuarine environment.
The current project will follow-up on this finding by addressing the following
questions: 1) are the unique genotypes recovered from the Chesapeake Bay
exclusive to that body or are they common to other estuaries along the Atlantic
coast; 2) do Bay genotypes occur primarily in the Bay proper or in the smaller
more protected sub estuaries of the Bay; 3) do the bacteria in the Chesapeake
Bay and its sub estuaries and other estuaries select for the unique Bd
genotypes; 4) can other distinct genotypes of Bd be detected in the Bay using
non-culture methods? The investigators will address these questions by
conducting a spatial and temporal sampling program, examining predation patterns
by Bd on bacteria, and using molecular methods to examine genotypes of Bd forms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this activity are that it will
integrate the research into education and, in particular, will seek to broaden
the participation of underrepresented groups. During the three years of the
project the investigators expect to train no less than 15 students and teachers.
Based on previous experience more than half will be members of underrepresented
groups. The research project will involve the use of basic microbiology and
state of the art molecular techniques sequencing, cloning, amplification using
PCR and quantification using real time PCR and will provide valuable training in
modern microbial techniques to participating students and teachers. These
activities will expose and encourage more individuals to pursue careers in
sciences and thereby contribute to meeting the nations need for a highly trained
technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;