* 0455365
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative DIC Microscope for Measuring 3-Dimensional Cell Attributes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2005,02/28/2007
* Chrysanthe Preza, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 02/28/2007
* USD 140,771.00

This award supports a collaborative effort between the PI and investigators at
the University of Colorado to develop and evaluate an enhanced differential
interference contrast (DIC) microscope that will permit the visualization and
measurement of dynamic processes in living cells. A wealth of potentially useful
information can be provided by subtle variations in the concentrations of the
molecular components of living cells. The microscope will detect and record
minute changes in light phase resulting from the effect of the variation on the
optical path length of light passing through the specimen. The information will
be visualized as precisely altered image intensities. The microscope will be
able to separate changes in intensity due to altered phase properties from those
due to absorption, which existing DIC instruments are unable to do. The new
instrument is based on phase-shifting interferometry principles that require
careful modeling of the DIC image formation process in order to design
appropriate digital image reconstruction routines. The result will be a fully
automated combination of optical and digital processing technologies that
include novel extended-depth-of-field imaging capabilities recently developed
for fluorescence microscopy. Biologists will be able to view, within a single
image, three-dimensional features that would otherwise appear out of focus.
Potential applications of the new quantitative DIC microscope are plentiful in
live-cell biology. Thus, initial tests of the instrument will determine
sensitivity for detecting very subtle stages of the cell cycle (e.g. what stage
of S phase, or whether in early onset of mitosis) simply by measuring refractive
index. Other applications that will be used to develop and refine the instrument
include comparison of pre- and post-synaptic neurons and measurement of the rate
of change due to protein localization. The new system will be implemented within
standard commercial DIC microscopes using a novel liquid crystal device design,
making the instrument fully automated and easily accessible to biologists. The
microscope is expected to minimize or eliminate the need for fluorescent probes,
which can alter normal cell function. The investigators' relation with local
companies is expected to facilitate transfer of new technology to commercial
development. The project will provide training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, and the investigators will incorporate knowledge gained
in the project into graduate and undergraduate courses and a public website.