* 0455402
* Research to Acquire 0.4-4.8 Micron Spectroscopy of Classical Novae for Analysis and in Support of SIRTF Observations
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Richard Puetter, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 08/31/2007
* USD 39,304.00

AST 0455402&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Puetter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectra from
classical novae form under highly diverse conditions, i.e., from extremely high
to low densities and optical depths, and from violent outflows to more quiescent
gas. In addition, novae spectra often show molecular emission and lines from
unusual atomic species. Hence observations of classical novae are not only
relevant to the study of novae themselves, but provide useful constraints on
such diverse topics as line formation in active galaxies and emission line
stars. The program here is unique in its ability to measure novae spectra. The
novel aspect is the use of a combined optical-IR spectrophotometer that
simultaneously measures the entire 0.4-4.8 micron spectrum through the same
slit, obviating the need for coordinated observations at separate facilities and
eliminating the uncertainties inherent in comparing separate wavelength regions
observed at different epochs under different conditions. This provides a unified
set of line ratios for those chemical species, whose emission lines appear, over
a wide wavelength range. Follow-up measurements of current novae by other
observers are spurred by making preliminary results available immediately
through IAU circulars and posting quick-look spectra on a website. The
spectrometer development and detailed data analysis are provided free to this
program. This effort expands on a successful program at Lick Observatory that
has provided a significant fraction of the near-infrared nova spectra reported
in the refereed astronomical literature during the past decade.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The investigations of emission line
formation processes in novae will benefit studies of other astronomical sources
with emission lines. In addition, classical novae are the prime source of
certain isotopes in the interstellar medium and are probably very similar in
nature to the precursors of type Ia supernovae. Results are published in a
timely manner in the astronomical literature. This work fosters collaborations
between industrial (Aerospace Corporation) and academic scientists (Universities
of California and Minnesota) and involves support of a student in the study of
these important objects.&lt;br/&gt;