* 0455262
* Roles of Moist Static Energy Transport in the Changing Arctic System
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Jennifer Francis, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 02/28/2009
* USD 256,768.00

The Arctic system appears to be heading toward a new state that may be
unprecedented, and there are no apparent feedbacks within the Arctic that can
arrest the cohesive change. Can negative feedback mechanisms involving lower
latitudes offset widespread reductions in permanent ice and corresponding
changes in physical and biological components? Possible candidates are feedbacks
related to horizontally transported moist static energy. The likely
amplification of warming in the Arctic relative to lower latitudes implies that
heat transport should decrease as the poleward temperature gradient relaxes, but
how do the fluxes of moisture and potential energy respond? Can they offset the
reduced heat transport? How is advection affected by large-scale climate
features such as the El Nino Southern Oscillation and changes in tropical sea
surface temperatures? In which regions and seasons are transports most affected?
This activity will attempt to answer these questions using a new combination of
data sources. The European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecast Reanalysis
(ERA-40) will be used in regions where radiosondes and other observations are
plentiful south of 70?N. Over the Arctic, however, there is little information
for the reanalyses to assimilate, which is responsible for large uncertainties
in many parameters and observed discrepancies with independent measurements. To
ameliorate this problem, new products derived from satellite retrievals will be
merged with ERA-40 output to create a hybrid hemispheric data set. This effort
will use this resource to investigate how horizontal energy fluxes have behaved
during the past 23 years, a period during which the Arctic system underwent
widespread change. The effort contributes to a system understanding by focusing
on the primary energy source for the Arctic climate system, exploring its role
as a possible mitigator of Arctic change, and investigating its relationships
with the global climate system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives and methods
of this project are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Calculate daily mean fluxes of potential
energy from satellite-derived temperature profiles for the Arctic region.
Sensible heat and moisture fluxes have already been completed.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Calculate daily mean energy and moisture fluxes from ERA-40 fields and merge
them with satellite-derived fluxes for the region north of 70?N to create a
hybrid data set for the entire Northern Hemisphere (NH).&lt;br/&gt;3.
Investigate spatial and temporal patterns (annual and seasonal anomalies and
trends, dominant modes of variability) in fluxes and convergences at several
atmospheric levels throughout the NH using a variety of spatial statistical
techniques and time series analysis.&lt;br/&gt;4. Relate observed changes in a
variety of Arctic parameters to changes in horizontal fluxes and correlate
energy advection with large-scale circulation patterns, such as the ENSO and NAO
using multivariate correlation methods.&lt;br/&gt;