* 0455195
* Civil Society and the Environment
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Robert Brulle, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2009
* USD 133,706.00

Civil Society and the Environment: The Mobilization of the U.S. Environmental
Movement, 1900 - 2000

The voluntary associations that make up civil society play an important role in
the maintenance, legitimacy, and stability of democracy. Through their civic
associations, citizens develop and maintain their ethical life and exercise
their citizenship through the formation of social movements. This provides
society with a self-reflexive capacity to renew social institutions and adapt to
changing circumstances. One of the major areas addressed by social movements is
the human relationship with the natural environment. This project examines the
growth and change of the U.S. environmental movement throughout the 20th century
by addressing the following questions: - What are the major social and political
factors that contribute to changes in the size and actions of the environmental
movement? - How does foundation funding impact the actions and structure of the
environmental movement? - What is the nature of the interaction between the
environmental movement and the anti-environmental movement?

To examine these questions, data will be collected for the time frame from
1900-2000, including the founding and disbanding of both environmentalist and
anti-environmentalist organizations, the structure and actions of these
organizations, changes in cultural beliefs about nature, and the nature of key
political and economic influences on this movement. These data will be examined
using a combination of case study methodology, multiple regression, event
history, and network analysis. This project will address both academic
researchers interested in social movement theory and the broader philanthropic
and environmental communities. The results of the analysis will be made
available through a project website. Through the dissemination of the results of
this research seeks to foster a reflexive examination within the environmental
movement and philanthropic community regarding its actions and thereby
contribute to the creation of an environmentally sustainable society.

