* 0455299
* Collaborative Research:    Science Coordination for Summit Station, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2011
* Jack Dibb, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Renee Crain
* 07/31/2011
* USD 322,476.00

This activity will continue support for an office that assists the community of
scientist that uses an international research site on the summit of the
Greenland ice sheet. Over 20 groups from the U.S. and Europe are using the site
and others have projects pending. One key to success of this shared facility is
to closely coordinate measurements, share facility resources and exchange data
of common interest between investigators to make most efficient use of the
facility and resources. Since this coordination goes well beyond what individual
investigators can efficiently do through one-to-one interactions, NSF has
supported a Science Coordination Office (SCO) since 1999 to work with
scientists, the logistic contractor and others to plan both near and long term
activities that require strong involvement from the science community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal provides for continuation of the SCO, which
has three main objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plan and coordinating
measurements including sharing of facilities and personnel, data and requests to
funding agencies for upgrades and maintenance to facilitate science;working with
the logistics contractor and NSF to plan, develop and operate the station to
serve a growing international and multidisciplinary community while maintaining
scientific integrity of the site during the transition; and carrying out
strategic planning, working with international and national agencies who are
involved with supporting activities at Summit, facilitating communication
between investigators and reporting to funding agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;