* 0455970
* Preserving Video Objects and Context: A Demonstration Project
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Paul Jones, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 06/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digital preservation stands as one of
the grand challenges of the early 21st Century. National libraries and archives
from around the world are grappling with the preservation of digital assets.
Funding agencies worldwide recognize the preservation imperative and are funding
a wide array of research and development projects. As digital libraries and
digitization initiatives have grown over the past decade, an increasing number
of researchers, information professionals, and policy makers have addressed the
issues around creating, maintaining, and, most recently, preserving digital
objects. Although most of the preservation research to date has centered on text
and still images, video is becoming a more common medium of expression for
science and education and offers unique preservation challenges. This project
builds on earlier work with digital video files and their surrogates
(http://www.open-video.org), seeking ways in which to preserve a video work's
context and highlighting its essence, thus making it more understandable and
accessible to future generations. Long-term provision of contextualized access
that makes digital objects understandable over time is essential to longterm
preservation. This project will focus on developing a preservation framework for
digital video context that can be used by archivists to make preservation
decisions and guide the development of finding aids.The work will include a
demonstration of this framework by applying it to two important digital video
collections: the complete series of NASA broadcast educational videos and the
complete set of juried ACM SIGCHI videos presented at annual conferences from
1983 to the present. The framework and demonstrable examples using the test
collections will be made available to inform video archival decisions in the
immediate years ahead. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will have several important outcomes for
a variety of stakeholders. First, it will address the important context aspect
of digital preservation on both theoretical and practical fronts. This should
improve archival decision making and finding aid creation and suggest ways to
leverage technology further to make them more efficient and effective. Second,
this work will define preservation parameters for digital video, an increasingly
important medium that has to date received little attention. Third, this work
will have high payoff by focusing attention on two important and substantial
collections of video content. These collections are already used in analog or
broadcast forms by millions of students and teachers (NASA) and in analog or
digital local forms by thousands of human-computer interaction students and
faculty. The NASA videos in particular were created to encourage women and
minority participation in science and broader and more effective availability
will enhance this mission.. Fourth, this project will bring together diverse
communities of practice ranging from academics in multiple disciplines to
publishers to educational technologists. The synergies such crossdisciplinary
collaborations offer will not only result in a more robust framework for
preservation but will also produce better understanding of digital preservation
issues across these different communities. Finally, this project will have
substantial impact because it is tuned to the requirements of a new and
innovative funding model.