* 0455993
* Investigating Data Provenance in the Context of New Product Design and Development
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Sudha Ram, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 04/30/2008
* USD 244,404.00

Information is one of the biggest assets for most enterprises. In today's
information age, almost every enterprise decision is based on a detailed
analysis of data recorded in diverse sources ranging from structured databases
to the World Wide Web. To ensure that data retrieved from different sources is
used appropriately and within context, it is imperative that the provenance of
the data be recorded and made available to its users. Provenance refers to the
knowledge that enables a piece of data be interpreted correctly. It is the
essential&lt;br/&gt;ingredient that ensures that users of data (for whom the
data may or may not have been originally intended) understand the background of
the data. This includes elements such as, who (person) or what (process) created
the data, where it came from, how it was transformed, the assumptions made in
generating it, and the processes used to modify it. This research team will
investigate the semantics of data provenance and will develop an ontology to
represent the semantics of data provenance, including the development of ways to
automate the capture of provenance. Using new product design and development as
the real world domain, a partnership will be formed with a large defense
contracting company, viz., Raytheon Missile Systems, located in Tucson, Arizona,
to investigate these research issues. A testbed will be created to capture and
use provenance and evaluate the system's utility using a well defined set of
metrics. Raytheon has committed considerable resources in the form of personnel
and access to software as needed for this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this proposal stems from the theoretical framework for
understanding and representing the semantics of data provenance. This is
considerably different from existing work on provenance which has mainly
explored the 'where' and 'why' of provenance. This work will pave the way for
understanding the extent to which provenance can be automatically
captured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential for broader impacts
on society. Most importantly, the development of techniques to represent,
capture and deploy provenance has the potential to revolutionize the Department
of Defense product development industry and other domains as well. The ultimate
goal is to enable the development of autonomic and interoperable enterprise data
management systems.