* 0455470
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of the 41-Ka Climate Cycle: Ice Volume and Insolation Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Eli Tziperman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2009
* USD 244,876.00

This project will investigate physical mechanisms responsible for the
41,000-year (41-Ka) cycle in late Pliocene and early Pleistocene climate
records. Previously, the researchers showed that the observed 41-Ka cycle in ice
volume was forced by the equator to pole gradient in solar insolation, which
controlled the meridional atmospheric heat and moisture fluxes which ultimately
influenced the growth and decay of ice sheets. However, when investigating this
hypothesis further using a simple coupled climate-ice model, they found that the
model still fails to produce reasonable amplitude 41-Ka oscillations, and
exhibits far more precessional power than do benthic foraminifera oxygen isotope
signals or ice rafted debris (IRD) records (presumably due to the strong
influence of summer insolation on ablation). When these data were combined with
other data from other areas of the world, the analysis prompted the researchers
to consider the following science questions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;* Why is
modeled Northern hemisphere ice volume so small when glacial tillite deposits
show ice reaching as far south as 35 degrees North latitude? Do we have problems
with the models or with the interpretation of the data? &lt;br/&gt;* If there
was a large (aerially-expansive), low elevation ice sheet on North America, ice
sheet-climate models suggest it would have a large ablation zone. Why then do we
not see a stronger precession signal in benthic foraminfera oxygen isotope
records as ice sheet models suggest? &lt;br/&gt;* Could it be that the 41-Ka
oscillations are due to a mechanism internal to the climate system, rather than
exist only due to Milankovitch forcing? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To determine
whether there is a precessional component to ice sheet variation on North
America, the researchers will generate a benthic isotope stratigraphy for site
625 (Gulf of Mexico) which records meltwater pulses in planktonic foraminfera
oxygen isotope records to provide a constraint on the frequency history of North
American glaciation in the late Pliocene and early Pleistocene and, by
extension, a constraint for ice sheet modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers aim to develop a new coupled climate-ice sheet model and use it to
investigate different scenarios for the 41-Ka oscillations, and use the model
results to reanalyze the proxy records with the objective to determine if the
41-Ka oscillations exist due to Milankovitch forcing, or are internal (self-
sustained) oscillations only influenced (phase locked) by Milankovitch forcing.
The researchers also will investigate the possible contribution by the Antarctic
ice sheet to changes in global ice volume in the late Pliocene and early
Pleistocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves highly interdisciplinary
research and enlists the fields of paleoclimate, atmospheric dynamics, physical
oceanography, and climate modeling in pursuing a fundamental line of inquiry in
natural climate variability. The project will support a graduate student and
post-doctoral scholars working collaboratively across disciplinary boundaries
and with colleagues in Norway, thus fostering a scientific collaboration between
research communities in the U.S. and Norway.