* 0455359
* Project TEACH - CWU:  Targeted Science Instruction for Future Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Robert Filson, Green River Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 06/30/2009
* USD 299,853.00

Under a prior grant from NSF, Green River Community College developed an
interdisciplinary, inquiry-oriented science content course for students
intending to teach in elementary and middle schools. The current project
assesses the effectiveness of that course, as well as the community college
experience, in influencing teachers' beliefs about the nature of science and
their use of inquiry-based pedagogies in their own K-8
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is its
unique focus on community college students. This student population represents
approximately half of future teachers, but is under-represented in research on
teacher training and practice. Subjects include students who begin their
education at a community college and complete a teaching certificate through
several pathways. These students are being followed throughout four years of
preparation and into the K-8 classroom. One group of subjects comprises Green
River students enrolled in a pre-teacher preparation program who take the
inquiry-based interdisciplinary science series. A second group (control group)
comprises students whose preparation has been more traditional. Both groups then
merge into year three of a four-year program housed at Central Washington
University, where they take science methods courses. These groups of students
are being followed from the first year of college to the K-8 classroom to assess
how their beliefs about the nature of science evolve. In addition, the classroom
practice and use of instructional materials of teachers who belong to both the
experimental and control groups is being assessed. The use of a cross-sectional
design allows subjects to be assessed at various points along this teacher
preparation continuum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings on the influence of
interdisciplinary, inquiry-based science courses on teacher beliefs and
practices will be broadly applicable to community colleges and four-year
institutions. The outcomes advance our understanding of how best to prepare SMT
teachers. In addition, the role of community colleges in SMT teacher preparation
is being addressed, with the potential of expanding the model of
interdisciplinary science courses to other community colleges nation-
wide.&lt;br/&gt;