* 0455380
* The role of mate recognition in speciation: a neural network approach
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2007
* Karin Pfennig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 04/30/2007
* USD 50,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. How do new species arise? New species may arise
when males and females from different populations fail to recognize each other
as mates. When individuals in different populations no longer recognize each
other as mates, they will no longer interbreed. Consequently, the populations
may become separate species. Understanding how mating behaviors become so
distinct among populations is therefore critical to understanding when and how
new species are generated. &lt;br/&gt; Interactions with other species are one
way that populations may develop different mating behaviors. Because mating with
the wrong species can result in few or no offspring, males and females are
expected to possess mating behaviors that prevent them from mating with the
wrong species. If populations differ in the species with which they interact,
then populations may become divergent in their mating behaviors. This research
will evaluate this issue by examining whether interactions with different
heterospecific species can cause the diversification of both male and female
mating behaviors. To that end, artificial neural network models - mathematical
models that mimic neural function - will be developed that simulate the
development of female mate preferences and male mating signals in populations
that occur with different species. Moreover, the predictions of these models
will be evaluated using empirical data collected from a spadefoot toad (Spea
multiplicata) study system. In addressing these goals, this research will help
us understand the origins of biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. As the use of artificial neural networks becomes increasingly common,
it is critical to evaluate the effectiveness of this technique across different
disciplines. Because empirical data will be used to test the predictions of
these models, this project will evaluate the use of artificial neural network
models as a research tool for predicting the behavior of natural systems. This
project will also seek to increase representation of underrepresented groups in
science by providing access to research opportunities. The proposed research
will be used in presentations at historically minority universities (HMUs) to
illustrate how computational techniques can be applied to questions in animal
behavior. These presentations will be used to recruit students from the HMUs
into research projects associated with the funded proposal. Ultimately, the goal
is to convey to minority students that basic research is a viable career
path.&lt;br/&gt;