* 0455767
* Curriculum Planning for Integration and Convergence (CPIC)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2008
* Bruce Cooperstein, Life Lab Science Program Inc
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 09/30/2008
* USD 194,995.00

Curriculum Planning for Integration and Convergence (CPIC) is a two-year project
to create and pilot a new web-access database and curriculum planning tool run
by Life Lab Science Program and the University of California at Santa Cruz
professional development project. The website will offer resource materials in
curriculum planning that integrate content with English Language Development
(ELD: adaptation of the ELA standards for language learners) and support state
and national standards in mathematics, science, english language arts, ELD and
history/social sciences. The website will encourage elementary teaching that
integrates content areas and secondary teaching using convergence or integration
for more coherent student learning. The website will reinforce institute and
workshop training to link teacher goals and student assessment. During the
planning process, teachers will be pointed to linked sites that deepen their
content knowledge. The research contribution will be to examine the ability of
an innovative website offering curriculum-planning tools to improve teaching to
all students. Research will evaluate the effectiveness of the resources both
with and without face-to-face development contact. The website will be designed
to ensure that mathematics and science content is accessible to the widest
possible student population. With these supports teachers will be able to serve
differentiated classrooms, becoming especially effective in their ability to
teach rigorous content to language learners. Given the growth of English Learner
(EL) populations, this pilot has the potential to serve a need that is
increasing dramatically in national significance and
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;