* 0455998
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Institution Testbed for Scalable Digital Archiving
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* John Helly, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 05/31/2008
* USD 348,688.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term preservation of digital data
is critical in the sciences and especially so in the ocean sciences where the
cost of data acquisition is very high, typically $750K per project for ship time
alone, and re-acquiring datasets is generally not feasible. Instrumentation,
media and formats are rapidly evolving, more diverse types of sensors are being
used, and the volume of data collected is increasing exponentially. While there
have been dramatic advances in storage technology, raw storage capacity alone
will not solve the long-term data retrieval and preservation problems. Years
after data were collected, researchers seeking to re-use the data struggle to
discover information about the context of original observations. There is a
critical lack of metadata&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure, and substantial barriers
often exist between individual projects, diverse computer systems, and different
institutions. Because the requirements for long-term preservation of data and
those for independent re-use of data have a great deal in common, they can both
be met by a common approach, the publication of information in a digital library
designed for handling scientific data. This award will establish a multi-
institution, scalable digital archiving testbed, combining the efforts of the
San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC), the Scripps Institution of Oceanography
(SIO), and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI). This inter-
institutional demonstration project, will implement a fully functioning digital
library, providing a spectrum of curatorial functions including automated
ingest, metadata extraction, provenance tracking, validation, quality control,
and access control. The combined SIO/WHOI digital library will allow data from
approximately 60 new oceanogrphic research projects to be preserved each year,
augmenting data from roughly 1600 awards to dozens of institutions over the last
4 decades, over a wide range of disciplines. With the introduction of WHOI data,
the testbed will provide access to data, photographs, video images and documents
from WHOI ships, Alvin submersible and Jason ROV dives, and deep-towed vehicle
surveys. Notions of scalability will be tested, as data volumes range from 3 CDs
per cruise to 200 DVDs per cruise. An interactive digital library interface will
allow combinations of distributed collections to be browsed,
metadata&lt;br/&gt;inspected, and objects displayed or selected for download. In
addition, web services will be implemented to insure computer-to-computer
interoperability, thus helping to streamline data interchange with the NOAA's
National Data Centers, and with other major research
consortia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data and
technology from this effort will be incorporated in the second national
teachers' workshop for the grantees' ERESE (Enduring Resources for Earth Science
Education) Project, scheduled for summer, 2005 at SIO. These efforts will result
in direct access for 3000 students in the classrooms of participating teachers,
and a wider audience across the Internet as a component of NSF's National
Science Digital Library. Seafloor photos and video from Alvin have enthralled
schoolchildren around the world for generations. This effort will make these
images much more readily accessible to students, teachers and the general
public.