* 0455102
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: A SYNTHESIS OF THE LAST 2000 YEARS OF CLIMATIC VARIABILITY FROM ARCTIC LAKES
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Feng Sheng Hu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2010
* USD 184,471.00

This project contributes to understanding the Arctic system by placing 20th
century climatic change into a longer-term context of inter-decadal climatic
variability spanning the last 2000 yr. The centerpiece of the project is a
synthesis of standardized, high-resolution proxy climate records from lakes
across the North American Arctic that will advance our understanding of the role
of the Arctic within the Earth system.

Recent results have demonstrated that proxy climate records from the Arctic
preserve a signature of summer temperature that is related to both global mean
warming and the Arctic Oscillation. This conclusion was based on a synthesis
limited to just the last 600 yr. Available records that extend beyond the Little
Ice Age to previous warm intervals are currently too few to capture modes of
variability with adequate certainty. The longer-period evolution of these modes
is identifiable in decadally resolved proxy records, and should be preserved in
longer records of annual to multi-decadal resolution.

This synthesis of annual to inter-decadal climatic variability will extend
through the key warm interval of Medieval time. The certainty of the climate
reconstruction will be significantly improved by nearly tripling the number of
high-resolution, 2000-yr-long, proxy climate records currently available in the
Arctic. The project facilitates integration of results by standardizing the
methodologies and by holding workshops for vested collaborators and their
students. This tightly focused synthetic study of the Arctic system will be
integrated directly into a climate-modeling effort to explore the role of
volcanism and solar irradiance fluctuations versus internal adjustments of the
climate system and its inherent modes of variability to explain observed
patterns in the proxy climate data.

Across the Arctic, lacustrine archives contain the most accessible and widely
distributed proxy records for the past 2000 yr. This work focuses on 30 of the
PIs' highest-priority, most-promising lakes, nearly all of which have been cored
previously. The network of sites includes two regional foci (Alaska and the NW
North Atlantic) that generally encompass the nodes of the surface temperature
expression for the Arctic Oscillation, thereby facilitating the reconstruction
of this mode of variability. Half of the lakes contain laminated sediment with
potential for annually resolved records; others have high sedimentation rates
for sample resolution of 5 to 30 yr. The proxy data from most lakes can be
compared with nearby tree-ring records or instrumental data, or can be applied
to transfer functions to yield quantitative estimates of temperature or other
climatic variables. Analyses at low-resolution have already begun on most of the
cores as part of on-going research. Preliminary data from these lakes indicate
their high potential for climate reconstructions.