* 0455897
* 6th IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications -SPAWC 2005
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* Xiaodong Wang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/2006
* USD 20,000.00

The purpose of this proposal is to seek support for the Sixth IEEE Signal
Processing Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications
(SPAWC-05). This workshop is the sixth in a series of annual meetings sponsored
by the IEEE Signal Processing Society. The successful SPA\VC workshop series
started with the intent of providing a forum for scientist coming from academia
and industry and for students for presenting and discussing leading edge signal
processing methods for communications systems. SPAWC has had a good history of
sponsorship and was funded in the past from both NSF and
ARG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fertile terrain for starting the SPAWC series was
provided at the time by the rising importance of the digital front-end design in
cellular systems and stimulated by the fervid discussion about cellular
transmission standards and mobile communications in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since then, the community of signal processing researchers
devoting their attention to communications problems has steadily grown and the
wireless technology has fast forwarded towards broadband wireless local area
network applications and, more recently, towards ultra-wide band radios. New
technologies are attracting the interest of this growing pool of researchers. In
fact, wireless communications are also the natural choice in ad-hoc networks and
sensor networks, whose importance has been brought to greater attention by the
need of better addressing National Security threats and guarding critical
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networking efficiently embedded systems,
unmanned vehicles, robots and sensors can have enormous societal impact,
especially in surveillance applications. This technology is still immature and
it is posing very challenging engineering issues that are attracting the
interest of an increasing number of researchers. Advanced distributed signal
processing techniques may help overcome the limitations posed by standard
networking approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SPAWC 2005 topics (see the call
for paper included) reflect these emerging new areas of interest. From this
premise we can conclude that, while the content of the workshop is evolving, the
necessity of providing an arena to present and discuss the most recent" Signal
Processing Advances in Wireless Communications" has not diminished.&lt;br/&gt;