* 0455795
* Researching the Wireless High School:  Effects on Science Teaching and Implications for Professional Development
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2005,01/31/2011
* Brian Drayton, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 01/31/2011
* USD 1,293,349.00

This research study investigates the impact of the wireless environment on high
school science using a purposeful sampling of schools with high implementers.
Five schools will be examined and extensive data in multiple forms will be
collected on each. The project uses in-depth case studies to examine context
factors (e.g. technology implementation plans, school culture, extent and type
of teacher professional development and teacher background) and critical
interactions that may influence science instructional practice in wireless high
school science classrooms. The study will result in an evidence-based and
theoretically-grounded professional development model that will inform
professional developers, administrators, policy-makers and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will enable the PIs to develop a professional
development model to help schools make reasonable choices about initial
installation, deployment and training; and to help teachers to access digital
resources with ease, select resources that will further their teaching goals,
effectively evaluate the quality of a digital resource in terms of the
additional value that it affords to enrich science understanding and content,
develop pedagogical strategies to enable student interactivity with such
resources to enrich classroom discourse and interaction, and develop strategies
to use digital resources effectively in being able to assess student work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;