* 0455811
* Professional Development Threading Content, Pedagogy and Curriculum:  A Study of Classroom Impact
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2010
* Robert Feller, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 03/31/2010
* USD 297,453.00

The project is an exploratory research study that investigates the impact of a
professional development program on middle school science teachers' ability to
enact pedagogical strategies, learning technologies and materials that align
with the current science and technology education standards. The professional
development program has been developed based upon best practices from the
teacher education literature and has separate funding from the State of South
Carolina for summer institutes and follow-up activities with teachers. The
three-year project involves three cohorts of 36 teachers each, all of which
receive the professional development. The professional development involves
increasing the science content knowledge of the participating teachers as well
as giving them opportunities to use curricular materials that they will use with
their students. The curricular materials are all based on innovative science
materials that have been developed based upon previous research and development
activities. The research project measures a variety of teacher and student
outcomes based upon the teachers' participation in the professional development.
Areas measured include: teacher's science content understanding, the nature of
the teacher's perceptions of constructivist learning environments, observations
of the teacher's pedagogical strategies and students' science content learning.
The research design uses a pre-test/post-test design with two replications using
different cohorts of teachers.&lt;br/&gt;