* 0455186
* Research Experience for Undergraduates at the Princeton Institute for the Science and Technology of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* Jay Benziger, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 02/28/2009
* USD 346,500.00

Princeton University continues a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
Site. The REU Site has been funded since 1997. The REU Site is affiliated with
the Princeton Institute for the Science and Technology of Materials (PRISM).
Students interested in physics, chemistry, molecular biology, and engineering
participate in research projects that span the breadth of materials science and
include topics in electronic materials, biomaterials, polymers, ceramics,
materials for energy systems, imaging of materials and materials for
architectural conservation. Twenty-five undergraduate students are recruited
nationwide every year for a nine-week summer research experience. Complementing
the research experience are short courses and seminars on current topics in
materials science and engineering, and on science policy, as well as visits to
nearby research laboratories. The summer program culminates in public
presentations by students about results from their research projects. The
program also brings in three secondary school teachers to participate in
research activities tailored for the development of curricular material
appropriate to introduce materials science and engineering to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Division of
Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;