* 0455572
* The Advanced Mathematics for All Project (A-MAP): Technology-mediated Support for Teachers Throughout their Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Susan Hull, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 12/31/2010
* USD 1,492,703.00

This proposal is submitted under category B (Resources for Professional
Development) of the TPC solicitation. The Dana Center of the University of Texas
at Austin proposes to create a system of online and face-to-face support
services to strengthen the teaching and learning of Algebra II. The resources
will make use of technology, will differentiate support for teachers in various
stages of their careers and aim to serve teachers of under-achieving populations
of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support will be provided for four critical
aspects of a teacher's work: Instructional planning, instructional delivery,
instructional outcomes assessment and professional capacity development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive work plan includes pilot testing, revision
and field testing. Dissemination will begin in the fourth year of the project
with web publication of the materials. In addition, presentations will be made
at national conferences and articles prepared for publication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation, both formative and summative, will proceed
through structured surveys, interviews and site visits. Materials will be
reviewed by content experts. Teacher learning will be assessed in a novel way,
with the development of protocols for observing teachers in their analysis of
student work.&lt;br/&gt;