* 0455952
* Conference:  Travel Grant Program for the 15th International Biophysics Congress, to be held in Montpellier, France from August 27- September 1, 2005.
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2006
* Laura Sheahan, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2006
* USD 23,213.00

The U.S. National Committee for the International Union of Pure and Applied
Biophysics &lt;br/&gt;(IUPAB) and the Biophysical Society are jointly sponsoring
a travel grant program to &lt;br/&gt;support international travel for U.S.
biophysics graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and early career scientists
to participate in the scientific program of the combined meeting of the 15th
International Biophysics Congress of IUPAB and the 5th Congress of the European
Biophysical Societies' Association. The meeting will take place August
27-September 1, 2005, in Montpellier,France
&lt;http://worldbiophysics2005.sfbiophys.org/&gt;. This travel grant provides
young scientists, many of whom do not have the institutional funding for such
travel, an opportunity to present their research and learn of important new
advances in biophysics in an international forum. Organized as a combined
program of plenary sessions, invited symposia, paper discussions, and poster
sessions, it is estimated that the congress will attract over 1,000 scientists.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Travel grants will be offered to investigators in the
early stages of their careers. An &lt;br/&gt;announcement of the travel grant
program will be sent to biophysics departments and placed in society newsletters
and web pages in January 2005. The U.S. National Committee will evaluate and
rank the applications based on scientific merit of the submitted abstract, the
candidate's publication history, and plans for engaging in other research
meetings or activities in conjunction with the trip to France. Special attention
will be paid to the inclusion of grantees from traditionally underrepresented
groups. Researchers from all fields of biophysics will be considered, from the
molecular level up to integrated systems and organisms. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit International congresses provide young
investigators with a unique educational experience that can have a lasting
impact on their research careers, including possibilities for international
collaboration. The meeting provides a forum for scientists to meet foreign
colleagues working in the same and related fields, leading to working
relationships and lifelong scientific interactions. Speakers range from early
career scientists to leading researchers who have the opportunity not only to
present their research to a multinational audience, but also to expand their
international networks. Through this travel grant program, young investigators
will have the the opportunity to listen to distinguished international
scientists discuss the most current research across the breadth of biophysics
and to interact with them in an informal setting. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact International congresses also provide young scientists with diverse
perspectives on research being done internationally, including in developing
countries, and the impact of biophysics research worldwide. The interactions
that will result from this travel grant program are expected to promote
international cooperation and exchange of ideas, leading to scientific advances
that are difficult to achieve in isolation. &lt;br/&gt;