* 0455629
* Developing Teacher Instructional Leadership Capacity
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2006,08/31/2008
* Kenneth Mitchell, Bedford Central School Distrcit
* Continuing grant
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2008
* USD 0.00

This study, Developing Teacher Instructional Leadership Capacity, is designed to
advance knowledge on learning and teaching in ways that inform practice. The
Bedford Central and White Plains School Districts, in collaboration with Fordham
University, will explore how school districts can build capacity for teacher
leadership and peer mentoring to improve elementary mathematics teaching at a
critical transition point in the professional development continuum for which
there is little research. They propose to study the process in which teachers
make the transition from teacher to effective mentors to their peers in
strengthening their math content knowledge, classroom practice, and use of
constructivist curriculum.

The study will examine this critical transition point by researching two
different models of professional development for classroom teachers in grades
3-5 in six schools across the two districts. Two district schools, one in White
Plains and one in Bedford, would be randomly assigned to Treatment/ Model A.
Similarly, two district schools, one in White Plains and one in Bedford, would
be randomly assigned to Treatment/ Model B. Two schools would serve as the
control group. The study will explore which model is more effective in
developing teacher leadership capacity. At the end of five years, the study will
assess the extent to which the models have turned out effective teacher
leader/mentors, and built the capacity of teachers in the district to deliver
effective instruction and student achievement in mathematics. At the conclusion
of the fifth year, if one model were identified as more effective, teachers in
the district would receive training in that model beginning in June of 2010.
This will lay the groundwork for the districts to capture the skills of these
teacher leaders to turnkey the most promising model in the other schools in the
districts.

As a result of data warehousing, and state and federal accountability
requirements, the project team will follow student achievement information on
state assessments beyond elementary school into middle- and secondary-level
education.

