* 0455251
* AMP:  CSU Alliance for Minority Participation, Phase II
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Richard Brown, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2005
* USD 554,628.00

HRD-9802113 Ratcliffe The California State Alliance for Minority Participation
(CSU AMP) proposes to continue its successful comprehensive, state-wide effort
to increase significantly the number of minority students who receive a
baccalaureate degree in science, mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET).
By the end of the new grant period (2003-2004), the CSU AMP, through its
enhanced efforts in Phase II, will again double the number of SMET degrees
awarded to minority students, a figure that is quadruple the benchmark
established in Phase I (750). In Phase I, we successfully focused on the
critical transition points from high school-to-college and lower-division to
upper-division status. In Phase II, we will enhance our program by increasing
our attention on community colleges. Our specific objective is to dramatically
improve SMET advising at the community college level by developing CSU/Community
College advising teams and by developing and implementing strategies for
institutionalizing the advising approaches developed by these teams. Twenty-four
community colleges-with a total enrollment of more than 400,000 students-have
been identified as active participants in this activity. In addition, we will
create a large number of paid academic year research opportunities to provide
junior- and senior-year students on-campus experiences that are directly related
to their SMET goals. An important goal of Phase II is state-wide institutional
reform. The CSU will join with the University of California AMP program (CAMP),
to take a leadership role in developing intersegmental committees composed of
faculty and administrators from the University of California, California State
University, and California Community College systems. Examples of issues that
these committees will address are: SMET advising, electronic transcript transfer
from community colleges to CSUs and UCs, and mechanisms for sharing effective
teaching strategies. The CSU AMP statewide Governi ng Board is composed of key
leaders in K-12 education, higher education, and the private sector. It is
chaired by the Chancellor of the CSU and oversees general projects operation and
provides direction and assistance in broadening support for the Alliance among
academic, industrial, and governmental sectors. The Chancellor of the CSU
committed $800,000 per year in support of student stipends associated with the
summerbridge, academic year workshop, and research opportunity components of
Phase II. This commitment combined with the commitment of the 22 participating
CSU and 25 Community College of $2 million/year, represents a 3-to-1 match of
our requested support from the NSF.