* 0455434
* SGER:     Degradation of Toxaphene by Zero-Valent Iron and Modified Iron Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Clayton Clark, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2005
* USD 25,000.00

This research focuses on the examination and application of modified substrates
including zero-valent iron to degrade toxaphene contamination found in the
environment. The chemical compound toxaphene is a pesticide that has been found
to pose significant risks to both humans and the environmental ecosystem. Due to
its once widespread use and its tendency to persist in the environment, this
chlorinated organic mixture has become a contaminant of major concern for
environmental engineers and scientists. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of
this proposed study include the gathering of information regarding the
degradation rates of toxaphene in contact with the zero-valent iron and modified
iron substrates, the adsorption/partitioning coefficients of toxaphene with
relation to these solid substrates, the potential pathways of toxaphene
dechlorination, how modification of the substrates affect the dechlorination of
toxaphene, and the potential rate limiting factors for this data. The proposed
experimentation includes batch and kinetic laboratory studies and evaluation by
gas chromatographic analysis. In addition, the negligible power requirements and
the low cost of iron potentially make this technique very advantageous to the
environmental clean-up industry. The broader impact of this study is that it
would also be used to attract and broaden the diversity of those participating
in such research by providing a summer research opportunity for a high school
junior or senior from an underrepresented group to help work on the proposed
research. The data provided by this research funded by the SGER would show the
feasibility for applying this research beyond the initially explored compound,
toxaphene, and potentially beyond the laboratory-based experiments for future
field application. &lt;br/&gt;