* 0455097
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Dual Market Capitalization of Environmental Resources in a Locational General Equilibrium Model
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2006
* V. Kerry Smith, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2006
* USD 7,615.00

ABSTRACT

Prop ID: SES-0455097 P I: Smith, V. Kerry Organization: North Carolina State
University Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dual Market Capitalization of
Environmental Resources in a Locational General Equilibrium Model

This dissertation research proposes to develop and estimate a general
equilibrium model of housing and labor markets based on consumers' locational
choices. The framework recognizes the prospect that consumers' valuation of non-
market goods may be reflected in both house prices and wage rates (dual-market
capitalization). The research has three objectives: (1) to investigate the
theoretical and empirical significance of dual-market capitalization for non-
market goods such as environmental amenities; (2) to generalize existing models
of household sorting to allow an interrelated job-house choice and to allow
consumers to differ in their relative preferences for multiple public goods; (3)
to develop a model that can calculate general equilibrium welfare effects
arising from a policy which simultaneously affects labor and housing markets
through spatially differentiated environmental amenities. To meet the objectives
the principal investigators will develop a database for California's major
Metropolitan Statistical Areas that combines information on the sale prices for
residential properties and characteristics (including location) with spatially
delineated information on wages, job opportunities, commuting time, crime,
school quality, open space, and air quality. GIS software will be used to merge
the data into representative "communities," such as census tracts or school
districts. The computational model will use these data to recover estimates for
the distributions of preferences for multiple public goods (including
environmental amenities) that are consistent with maximization of utility and a
locational equilibrium involving housing and labor markets. The recovered
preference distributions will then be used to simulate the effects of public
policies on wages, land rents, and consumer welfare. Analysis of results will
focus on (1) interpreting the preference distributions and (2) analyzing the
extent to which consumer welfare from changes in public goods is revealed
through spatial variation in rents and wages.

Intellectual Merit: The theoretical model generalizes the existing theoretical
models that describe the factors influencing the capitalization of spatially
delineated public goods. This is accomplished by extending sorting models to
allow markets for both land and labor to be linked with consumers' valuation of
local public goods. To test the extent of dual-market capitalization, the
empirical model will explicitly allow consumers to differ in their relative
preferences for multiple community attributes, expanding the notion of
heterogeneity used in current revealed preference approaches. The resulting
general equilibrium model of household sorting will incorporate the labor
market, generalizing existing locational equilibrium models. The model will be
suitable for calculating benefits from an array of public policies, including
policies that affect both labor markets and environmental amenities.

Broader Impacts: This research will benefit society by providing new information
about how consumers value non-market goods and how environmental and other
policies that alter local public goods affect consumers. The scale and spatial
resolution of the empirical model will allow researchers to investigate the
environmental justice of a public policy by assessing its impacts on particular
demographic groups. The dissertation will also enhance the infrastructure for
research and education by developing a set of computational algorithms for
solving locational equilibrium models. These algorithms will be written in a
standard programming language (e.g. Matlab) and made freely available on the
internet. Research results will be disseminated through the principal
investigators' websites, academic publications, and presentations to a variety
of audiences.