* 0455121
* Tunneling and Transport in Ordered and Disordered Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Allen Goldman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 03/31/2010
* USD 580,000.00

The main focus of this program is on the superconductor-insulator (SI)
transition in ultra-thin films, an example of a quantum phase transition (QPT).
Such transitions occur at zero temperature in response to the tuning of an
external parameter of a system that alters its quantum mechanical ground state.
They are studied through measurements at nonzero temperature of properties
influenced by quantum fluctuations associated with the transition. Although many
systems exhibit QPTs, including two-dimensional electron gases, and strongly
correlated electron materials including high temperature superconductors, the SI
transition is most fundamental because of its connection with the phase-number
uncertainty relation of quantum mechanics. The nature of the physics of the SI
transition has become uncertain, as in some work evidence of an intermediate
metallic regime separating the superconducting and insulating ground states has
emerged. It is the goal of this program to resolve the nature of the underlying
physics through careful measurements of thermodynamic and electrical transport
properties of films at ultra-low temperatures. Research and education are
integrated in this program through the training of Ph.D. students, and research
experiences for undergraduates and high school students. Some of the sample
structures studied have a potential for technological significance.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of this program is on the
investigation of the superconductor-insulator (SI) transition in ultrathin films
of metals. This transition is a quantum phase transition (QPT). In contrast with
ordinary phase transitions, which are tuned by temperature, QPTs are tuned by
external parameters, such as magnetic field or charge density, and are found at
absolute zero. They are studied through measurements at nonzero, but low
temperatures, of properties influenced by proximity to the transition both in
temperature and in the value of the tuning parameter. Other systems exhibiting
QPTs include two-dimensional electron gases, and correlated electronic
materials, including high temperature superconductors. The SI transition is one
of the most fundamental of QPTs because of its connection with the uncertainty
principle of quantum physics. It is the goal of this program to resolve the
nature of the underlying physics of the SI transition through measurements of
thermodynamic and electrical transport properties at ultra-low temperatures.
Research and education are integrated in his program through the training of
Ph.D. students in physics as well as by providing research experiences for
younger students. Some of the configurations studied could be important in
electronics technology. &lt;br/&gt;