* 0455348
* Pollination Webs: Impacts of a Plant Invasion on Native Plant-Pollinator Interactions, Linkage Strength, and Native Plant Reproduction
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Rebecca Irwin, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2009
* USD 394,012.00

Human activities have dramatically altered Earth's natural systems. Chief among
these alterations is the accidental and intentional movement of plants and
animals around the world. Biological invasions, the establishment and spread of
non-native species into new environments, have substantial economic and
environmental costs and are now considered a leading component of human-induced
environmental change. Many invasive plants require pollinators for successful
reproduction and spread. If invasive plants are very successful in attracting
pollinators in their new environment, what impact might this have on the
pollination of native flowering species? The aim of this proposal is to test how
an invasive plant affects native plant communities by measuring pollinator
visitation, pollination, and native plant seed production. The work will address
this aim using the invasive plant, Linaria vulgaris, in the western United
States. Linaria vulgaris is considered a noxious invasive species in the Rocky
Mountains. The abundant, showy flowers of Linaria vulgaris are very attractive
to native pollinators; however, the effects of this invader on native plant-
pollinator interactions and native plant seed production are unknown. On a
world-wide basis, almost 90% of flowering plants rely on insects or other
animals for pollination service, and the conservation of native plant-pollinator
interactions has both ecological and economic importance. Results from this
project will contribute broadly to our understanding of the effects of invasive
species on native species, in this case through a relatively unexplored
mechanism, changes in pollination service. Overall, this project will provide
training opportunities for 18 undergraduate students, 2 graduate students, and
one research technician. Studies combining pollination biology and species
invasions offer an excellent opportunity to train students in experimental
methods and natural history, and this proposal provides for human resource
development at multiple academic levels.