* 0455322
* Seeing and Understanding: Gordon Conference, Workshops, and Mini-Grants to Guide Visualization Research in Science and Education
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Peter Mahaffy, Beloit College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 12/31/2006
* USD 145,206.00

This 3-phase project brings together 120 leading international researchers and
science educators for: Two workshops on assessment and visualization tools; a
Gordon Conference on Visualization in Science and Education; and five
collaborative Mini-Grants for exploratory research across learning communities.
Support from NSF will leverage substantial contributions from participants and
others to set directions for visualization research in the US and globally. The
growth of a unique, sustainable multidisciplinary research and development
community will be promoted. The interaction between visualization practitioners
in chemistry, physics, and biology and researchers in cognitive and learning
science initiated in previous workshops will be extended and deepened. Physical
and biological scientists who employ visualizations in research and teaching
will continue to be exposed to the cognitive science perspective, while
cognitive and learning scientists will continue to grapple with the research
challenges posed by new forms of visual representation in the sciences. Outcomes
of Mini-Grants will guide future visualization research across learning
communities. Research collaborations in visualization will be extended to
several critically important new interdisciplinary fields. Special emphasis will
be placed on visualization in nanotechnology and 3D-navigation in genomics and
systems biology education. Practitioners in scientific research and education
will workshop with cognitive and learning researchers to tackle the issue of how
to assess the effectiveness of new forms of visualization in concrete design and
assessment contexts. This will help establish a cycle in which the cognitively-
informed design of visualizations is followed by careful evaluations of
effectiveness, which in turn lead to the further refinement of the designs. The
diverse learning communities at the conference will work together to enhance
public understanding of science through visualizations. Finally, American
researchers and educators will work with other global visualization leaders to
share best practices around the globe and learn from each other.