* 0455467
* IMR:  Acquisition of a MATE Thermo-Mechanical Testing System for Research and Education in Materials Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Carl Boehlert, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 175,000.00

This NSF Instrumentation for Materials Research (IMR) Program proposal is for
the acquisition of a MATE Thermo-Mechanical Test System, which can perform a
variety of mechanical property measurements, including tension, compression,
low- and high-cycle fatigue, thermomechanical fatigue (TMF), fatigue crack
growth (FCG), creep, fracture toughness, etc., with precise (less than 0.15%
nonlinearity and less than 0.10% hysteresis) servohydraulic control for loads up
to 100kN and temperatures up to 1200oC. The intellectual merit of this
acquisition lies in research and teaching of materials science and engineering,
and the materials to be investigated include metals, ceramics, composites,
glasses, nanomaterials, etc. This acquisition of this instrumentation will make
significant contributions to analytical and teaching capabilities. In terms of
research, the MATE Thermo-Mechanical Test System will be used to further the
understanding of the processing-microstructure-property relationships of
materials for projects sponsored by the NSF, the Department of Energy (DOE), the
Department of Defense (DOD), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the
United States Automotive Materials Partnership (USAMP), and industry. In
particular, it will be used to understand grain boundary deformation processes
and microstructure-property relationships for high-temperature structural
alloys, including nickel-based superalloys and titanium alloys, investigated
with Dr. Carl Boehlert's NSF CAREER Award (DMR-0134789). The specific goal of
this research program is to develop the untapped potential of grain boundary
engineering (GBE) for high-temperature structural alloys. The primary objective
is to understand the inter-relationship of processing, grain boundary character
distribution (GBCD), and creep behavior. Several additional research projects
will also utilize this instrumentation. For example, it will be used for
fatigue, fracture toughness, and FCG experiments to understand microstructure-
property relationships of biomedical Ti alloys being developed as implant
materials. It will also be used to investigate the mechanical behavior of Mg
alloys, Si3N4, polymers, glasses, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
Instrumentation for Materials Research (IMR) Program proposal is for the
acquisition of a MATE Thermo-Mechanical Test System, which can perform a variety
of mechanical property measurements, including tension, compression, low- and
high-cycle fatigue, thermomechanical fatigue (TMF), fatigue crack growth (FCG),
creep, fracture toughness, etc. The intellectual merit of this acquisition lies
in research and teaching of materials science and engineering, and the materials
to be investigated include metals, ceramics, composites, glasses, nanomaterials,
etc. This instrumentation will significantly benefit both undergraduate and
graduate teaching, will encourage interdisciplinary studies, and will establish
new research capabilities for performing research and research-related
education. Overall, the acquisition of this instrumentation will benefit
research and teaching by making a state-of-the-art mechanical testing system
available to both undergraduate and graduate students as part of their
curriculum and research activities. The broader impacts of this acquisition
include the generation of material-property information not provided with
existing equipment, and it will stimulate investigations of materials into new
areas within the community. Many ongoing and planned research projects within
the various university departments, highlighting multidisciplinary research
areas and a variety of material systems, will benefit from the enhanced
capabilities that the acquisition of the MATE Thermomechanical Test System will
bring.