* 0455227
* Analysis Conference on the Interplay of Complex Variables, Probability and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2006
* Guido Weiss, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Wing Suet Li
* 02/28/2006
* USD 25,000.00

The Washington University Department of mathematics will host an international
conference on the Interplay of Complex Variables, Probability and Partial
Differential Equations from May 11 to May 14, 2005. The last afternoon session
will be devoted to a celebrattion of the achievements of Albert Baernstein II on
the occasion of his sixty-fifth birthday. The main theme of the conference is to
discuss the deep connection between Analysis, Probability and Partial
Differential Equations, including recent advances in the well-known conjecture
on the L^p norm of the Beurling-Ahlfors transform, symmetrization in partial
differential equations, and extensions of classical ideas of function theory to
higher dimensions. In addition to six plenary lectures and thirteen invited
talks, a panel on future research directions, a panel on graduate studies in
Analysis and a workshop for graduate students will be convened. More details are
available at http://www.math.wustl.edu/ac.

Many important discoveries in Mathematics are rooted in the interplay between
apparently different areas. This conference is centered on the mutual
relationships between Complex Analysis, Probability and Partial differential
equations. The main point is that deterministic phenomena can be analyzed by
random techniques and vice versa. The method of simulated annealing in
optimization and the Black-Sholes equation in mathematical finance are two
important examples with many practical applications. This conference will
provide an opportunity to present ideas from these different areas to graduate
students and young investigators. A workshop will provide the necessary
background for this group. In addition, researchers from Europe and the United
States who would not otherwise have the opportunity to collaborate will find one
by this meeting. One of the conference's main goals is to serve as a platform to
attract more women and under-represented minorities to Analysis.