* 0455906
* FRG:  Asymptotic and probabilistic methods in geometric group theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Efim Zelmanov, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2008
* USD 204,875.00

The main theme of this project is amenability and related
concepts&lt;br/&gt;(Kazhdan property T, property tau, unitarizability, etc.) and
its&lt;br/&gt;applications in different areas of mathematics from number theory
to&lt;br/&gt;topology and functional analysis. In particular, the PIs
will&lt;br/&gt;concentrate on the following problems:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; *
Classification of amenable groups and associative algebras,&lt;br/&gt; *
Amenability of Golod-Shafarevich groups and related problems
in&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional topology and number theory,&lt;br/&gt; * Expander
graphs, property tau for lattices in SL(2,C),&lt;br/&gt;probabilistic methods in
group theory,&lt;br/&gt; * The Dixmier Unitarizability problem,&lt;br/&gt; *
Constructing new examples of finitely presented groups with&lt;br/&gt;property
T,&lt;br/&gt; * Linearity of discrete and pro-p-groups,&lt;br/&gt; * Asymptotic
properties of discrete groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are going to
organize several conferences and workshops on different&lt;br/&gt;aspects of the
projects. The NSF grant will support several graduate&lt;br/&gt;students and
postdoctoral fellows working under&lt;br/&gt;their
supervision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Group theory was born as the theory of
symmetry. The work of Gauss,Abel, Galois, Lie and others showed that groups of
symmetries carry essential information about solvability of algebraic
and&lt;br/&gt;differential equations. Group theory plays crucial role in many
areas of mathematics and physics. Moreover, recent advances in group theory
showed that many areas of mathematics are closely related. In turn, group theory
has benefited tremendously from its connections with other areas. About 80 years
ago, von Neumann, Banach and Tarski introduced the concept of amenabile group
and connected it with basic questions like "Can one assign a weight to any set
of points in our space so that the weight is invariant under all symmetries of
the space?". The PIs will explore various aspects of amenability of groups and
algebras, and deep connections between amenabile groups, number theory and
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;