* 0455905
* Multiphoton Laser Scanning Microscope for Fast Three-dimensional Functional Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Peter Saggau, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 08/31/2008
* USD 802,364.00

This award supports development of a novel microscope that overcomes present
limitations of temporal resolution during fast functional imaging of living
tissues. The instrument will employ an inertia-free three dimensional scanning
scheme, recently invented in the principal investigator's lab, that builds on
two established techniques - Fast Acousto-Optic Laser Scanning and Multiphoton
Microscopy. Critical to this has been the PI's development of a strategy to
compensate for the dispersion of ultra-fast laser pulses when steered with
acousto-optic deflectors. The instrument will allow researchers to interactively
select sites-of-interest to perform multi-site functional imaging at frame rates
of more than 1,000 per second. The microscope is expected to make possible the
study of sensory information at cellular and subcellular level in intact brain
and in excitable, non-neuronal tissue, such as heart, smooth and skeletal
muscle, and imaging of other light-scattering biological preparations. The
project will provide research training for number of graduate and undergraduate
students in Engineering and Biology who will participate in design and
construction of the instrument. In addition, portions of the theoretical work
that provides the basis for the instrument will be incorporated in an imaging
course taught by the investigator.