* 0455785
* Investigating the Needs of Elementary School Teachers of Mathematics at Different Points During Sustained Professional Development
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2012
* Randolph Philipp, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 05/31/2012
* USD 2,595,127.00

This five-year Teacher Professional Continuum Research project seeks to map a
trajectory for the evolution of elementary school mathematics teachers engaged
in sustained professional development. Bringing together expertise from the
School of Education and the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, the
project is housed at the Center for Research in Mathematics and Science
Education (CRMSE) at San Diego State University. The goal of the project is to
identify and understand the evolution of elementary school mathematics teachers'
changing perspectives and needs as they participate in professional development.
Drawing from a pool of more than 500 elementary school teachers, the sample
includes 120 elementary school mathematics teachers engaged in sustained
professional development for different lengths of time. Four teacher cohorts of
30 teachers each are represented in the study as initial participants, advancing
participants, teacher leaders and preservice. Initial participants are in the
beginning stage of sustained professional development. Advancing participants
have completed at least two years, and teacher leaders at least four years of
sustained professional development. The preservice cohort provides a critical
anchor for the beginning teachers' evolutionary trajectory and insights into
groups at later trajectory points. Three diverse school districts in San Diego
County participate in the study.

The study investigates the central research question of what are the
similarities and differences among elementary school teachers at three points
during sustained professional development in terms of their knowledge, beliefs
and practices. Project participants have been involved in Cognitively Guided
Instruction (CGI), an NSF-funded research and professional development effort
focused on addressing children's mathematics thinking. The study employs a
cross-sectional design to investigate teacher change and growth on distinct
points along the trajectory. Mixed methods and triangulation of data will be
utilized to analysis multiple measures of teacher growth (beliefs, knowledge and
practices). The research instrumentation will involve belief surveys, content
assessments, observation protocols for professional development and classroom
instruction and noticing instruments to assess teacher interpretation of
classroom interactions. Eight case studies provide in-depth analyses of
teachers' knowledge, beliefs and practices at four distinct points of the
teacher professional continuum within the context of sustained professional
development: prospective teachers, initial participants, advancing participants
and teacher leaders. Additionally, a longitudinal analysis of eight cases
provides important information about the changing needs of teachers as they
evolve from initial participants to advancing participants. Secondary to the
central research question is a formative assessment on the relevance and
application of the research findings to the field, specifically the community of
professional development providers. The formative assessment will examine the
usefulness of research findings to disparate models of professional development
for both prospective and practicing teachers. Professional development
facilitators and providers will participate as co-researchers in the formative
assessment component and will participate in dissemination of the research
findings.

