* 0455055
* Photochemical Formation of Oxidants and Destruction of Organic Compounds in the Snowpack at Summit, Greenland
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Cort Anastasio, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 02/28/2009
* USD 269,036.00



Recent research has shown that photochemical reactions in polar snowpacks can
significantly affect the chemistry and composition of the snowpack and the
overlying atmosphere. The photochemistry of organic molecules are important
because of their toxic effects in polar regions, their potential importance as
source markers in snowpacks and ice cores, and their contribution to the
photochemical release of volatile organic compounds to the atmosphere. Despite
this importance, little is known about the reactions of specific organic
compounds on snow or ice. There have been a few studies of the direct photolysis
of organic compounds on ice, but almost nothing is known of their indirect
reactions, i.e., with photoformed oxidants such as hydroxyl radical. This is a
major gap in our knowledge because these oxidants probably dominate the
destruction of most organics in snow. Our lack of knowledge in this area makes
it very difficult to predict the reactions or lifetimes of snowphase organics
and how these reactions affect the polar issues. The goal is to combine field
and laboratory work to determine the rates and mechanisms for the formation of
reactive oxidants, and decay of organic compounds, on snow at Summit, Greenland.
The Principal Investigator seeks to determine how important environmental
variables such as temperature and pH affect this chemistry, with a final goal of
estimating the lifetimes of a wide range of organic compounds in snowpacks.

The Principal Investigator will measure snowpack concentrations of oxidants
using wet/frozen chemistry techniques that he developed over the past two
seasons. He will measure the lifetimes and decay of a suite of model organic
compounds on Summit snow. Comparing these measured lifetimes with values
calculated based on oxidant measurements will indicate whether there are
additional, missing mechanisms for the destruction of the organics. He will then
perform a series of photochemistry experiments on manipulated Summit samples in
the laboratory to more clearly understand the mechanisms for oxidant formation
and organic compound destruction. The final component will be to combine the
field and laboratory data to estimate the lifetimes of a wide range of organic
compounds in snow at a variety of locations. Broader Impacts: Two undergraduate
students, one doctoral student, and one postgraduate fellow will be trained and
research results will be disseminated in scientific journals. There will be a
collaboration with a local middle school teacher and her 9th grade science
classes to develop a three to five day unit on global climate change and the
Arctic which will include a discussion of the Principal Investigator's
experiences and research at Summit. For each class, one of the students that
traveled to Summit will assist in the preparation and delivery of the material.
Finally, he will integrate results from this research project into an
undergraduate class on air quality to expose the students to important issues
facing polar regions.

