* 0455072
* Volatilizable Solid and Liquid Phase Supports for Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Richard Houghten, Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2007
* USD 460,267.00

The overall objectives of this proposal are to develop solid and liquid phase
silica based synthesis supports, as well as a range of linkers, that can be
completely and cleanly removed by "volatilization," leaving only the desired
synthetic product(s) in the reaction vessel following the complete decomposition
of the support to volatile materials. Elimination of the final separation step
required following cleavage of the desired product from traditional solid
supports during the combinatorial synthesis of hundreds to thousands of
individual compounds will greatly decrease the time required for the extraction
of such samples following their cleavage and will increase the yield and purity
of the desired products (especially when preparing small amounts of very large
numbers of individual compounds). Furthermore, this approach will enable 96 or
384 well plates utilized in automated combinatorial array synthesizers to be
used for both synthesis and "mother" plate storage. The initial materials to be
studied as potential volatilizable supports will be functionalized silica gels
and polysiloxane oils, removable through complete decomposition to volatile
materials through the action of aqueous and/or anhydrous hydrogen fluoride
during the final cleavage step. Silica gel is completely and cleanly transformed
into tetrafluorosilane (SiF4, boiling point = -86 C), while polysiloxane oils
are decomposed into difluorodimethyl- and fluorotrimethylsilane. Such volatile
decomposition products can be readily removed through their decomposition and/or
neutralization to harmless materials by in-line CaO/Ca(OH)2 traps.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Richard A. Houghten, of the Department of Chemistry at
the Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular Studies. Professor Houghten is
developing novel methods for the synthesis of organic compounds, wherein
chemical reactions of molecules attached to solid or liquid "supports" are
followed by complete removal of the support through its chemical conversion to
volatile products. These methods allow one to exploit the versatility of "solid-
phase" syntheses while eliminating many of the undesirable processing features
of such reactions, potentially greatly decreasing the time required and
increasing the yield and purity of the desired products, especially when
preparing small amounts of very large numbers of individual compounds.
Additionally, this approach will enable the ready and cost effective solid phase
synthesis of semi-preparative and preparative scale quantities of compounds
(grams to potentially multiple kilograms) in academic and industrial
laboratories, addressing a long standing limitation of existing solid phase
synthesis supports.