* 0455678
* Quantum Phase Transitions in Condensed Matter and Atomic Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2005,07/31/2005
* Subir Sachdev, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2005
* USD 140,000.00

This grant supports theoretical research on fundamental condensed matter physics
based on the study of quantum phase transitions. Also included are studies of
the connections between atomic physics and condensed matter physics; in
particular studies of systems of trapped ultracold
atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum phase transitions are changes in state of
matter at the absolute zero of temperature, driven by changes in a tuning
parameter such as carrier concentration, magnetic field strength, or pressure.
Studies of materials at low temperatures in the vicinity of quantum critical
points between conventional phases have proven to be fertile ground for finding
new quantum phases with novel physical properties. A number of studies will be
undertaken of intermetallic compounds and trapped atomic gases analyzing some of
the many quantum phases and transitions that have become accessible by recent
advances in experimental technologies. For the cuprate superconductors,
extensions of the PI's recent theory for the superfluid-insulator transition in
the vicinity of 1/8 carrier doping will be made, to allow specific predictions
for high precision scanning tunneling microscopy and neutron scattering
experiments. A central ingredient of the theory is the novel role played by the
vortices of the superconductor, which behave like quantum particles moving in a
magnetic field. Also to be studied is the interplay between the density wave
order of the proximate Mott insulator and the nodal quasiparticles with the aim
of obtaining predictions for thermal transport experiments. Also to be studied
are magnetic phase transitions in the intermetallic heavy fermion compounds,
exploring the emergence of deconfined fractionalized excitations at the quantum
critical point. For the trapped ultracold atomic systems, new quantum critical
points have been described that can be explored experimentally on optical
lattices and near a Feshbach resonance. Detailed theories of these experiments
will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has written a seminal and widely
used textbook, Quantum Phase Transitions, that is in its second printing as a
paperback. The PI is working on a second edition that will incorporate ideas
from this research, and adding sections to enable wider accessibility. The PI
has also presented lectures and written articles on this research for a wide
variety of audiences. This will continue. Students at all levels will be
involved with this research.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This project involves
theoretical studies of condensed matter physics and its connections to atomic
physics. The project is based on quantum phase transitions. These are phase
transitions (think of water turning to ice) that occur at absolute zero of
temperature where quantum effects dominate. These phase transitions often lead
to new and novel states of matter. These studies are part of the fundamental
core area of modern condensed matter physics, and yet may someday find
technological applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The PI has written a seminal
and widely used textbook, Quantum Phase Transitions, that is in its second
printing as a paperback. The PI is working on a second edition that will
incorporate ideas from this research, and adding sections to enable wider
accessibility. The PI has also presented lectures and written articles on this
research for a wide variety of audiences. This will continue. Students at all
levels will be involved with this research.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;