* 0455965
* Design of Nanostructured Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Catalysts for Biorenewable Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Brent Shanks, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2009
* USD 304,710.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Brent Shanks and Bert D. Chandler
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Iowa State University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0455965&lt;br/&gt;Title: Design of Nanostructured Organic-Inorganic Hybrid
Catalysts for Biorenewable Conversion &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research&lt;br/&gt;A
significant challenge in the application of chemical catalysts to biorenewables
is the need for selective conversion of these highly functionalized molecules.
While this specificity has been demonstrated with biocatalysts, the control of
the reaction environment around the active site has been more elusive for
chemical catalysts. However, the recent advancements in materials synthesis,
which has led to the construction of nanostructured organic-inorganic hybrid
catalysts, hold promising potential for biorenewable conversion. In the proposed
work this potential will be explored in the industrially-relevant
oligosaccharide hydrolysis reaction to fermentable sugars. Oligosaccharide
hydrolysis can be catalyzed by mineral acids, but the catalyst also causes yield
loss by significant degradation of the resulting monosaccharides. While
hydrolytic enzymes can selectively hydrolyze oligosaccharides, they typically
can only operate at relatively mild conditions. To create well-defined and
robust reaction domains, organic-inorganic hybrid catalysts will be synthesized
and tested for hydrolysis activity and selectivity. &lt;br/&gt;This research
project will have two primary components. The first will focus on the synthesis,
characterization, and testing of acidic organic-inorganic hybrid mesoporous
catalysts for the hydrolysis of cellobiose. For this portion of the project, the
mono-functionalized mesoporous silica will provide the surface area and porosity
for the reaction of cellobiose over the organic acid sites. Materials having a
range of acid values will be synthesized to determine the relationship between
acid strength and the rates of hydrolysis and degradation. In the second portion
of the project, the organic-inorganic hybrid mesoporous silicas will be multi-
functionalized to create a specific reaction environment within the pores.
Multi-functionalization techniques will be used to prepare acid/base catalysts
that mimic the catalytic action of hydrolytic
enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The use of biorenewable
feedstocks has an important role in the future of a sustainable chemical
industry. However, the effective utilization of biorenewables will require
development of new catalyst technologies in which both chemical catalysts and
biocatalysts will likely play a role. Chemical catalysts will contribute to
biorenewables when the catalytic materials are specifically tailored to the
unique challenges presented by biological-based molecules. While the project
will examine nanostructured organic-inorgainic hybrid nanostructured catalysts
designed particularly for oligosaccharide hydrolysis, the synthesis strategies
and the concept of well-defined reaction domains has broader applicability as a
general approach to biorenewable reactions. Even the specific catalysts, which
provide cooperative acid-base pairs, in the project have applicability in a
range of catalytic rea&lt;br/&gt;