* 0455240
* Cohomology of Arithmetic Groups and Galois Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Avner Ash, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2008
* USD 101,143.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator (PI), with various collaborators, studies
an&lt;br/&gt;area of number theory concerned with representations of Galois
groups over&lt;br/&gt;the rationals and cohomology of finite-index subgroups of
GL(n,Z). The&lt;br/&gt;link between these is given by the action of Hecke
operators on the&lt;br/&gt;cohomology and the image of Frobenius elements in the
Galois&lt;br/&gt;representation. The PI explores the "ADPS" conjecture, where
the&lt;br/&gt;cohomology and Galois representation are both mod-p valued. He
outlines&lt;br/&gt;an approach for proving this conjecture in certain
3-dimensional cases,&lt;br/&gt;testing it in certain 4-dimensional cases, and
independently verifying&lt;br/&gt;some of its consequences for Diophantine
problems. The PI states a new&lt;br/&gt;conjecture that links the mod-p objects
with automorphic representations&lt;br/&gt;and suggests an approach for proving
this conjecture in the 3-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;case. Finally, the PI and a
colleague continue their study of p-adic&lt;br/&gt;families of automorphic
cohomology. On the one hand, for certain classes,&lt;br/&gt;e.g those on GL(3)
not lifted from GL(2), they consider questions of&lt;br/&gt;p-adic rigidity. On
the other hand, for deformable classes, they&lt;br/&gt;investigate 2-variable
p-adic L-functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to solve systems of
algebraic equations has been central to&lt;br/&gt;modern science and
engineering. It has also always been one of the main&lt;br/&gt;topics in
mathematics, driven both by these applications and by its&lt;br/&gt;intrinsic
aesthetic appeal. When the equations have whole-number&lt;br/&gt;coefficients,
their study becomes part of number theory. The theory of&lt;br/&gt;prime numbers
(numbers without smaller divisors except 1, such as 2,3,5&lt;br/&gt;and 7) is
central here. In the last 50 years, applications of these&lt;br/&gt;theories
have become crucial to cryptography and communications theory.&lt;br/&gt;The
Principal Investigator studies delicate questions concerning the
fine&lt;br/&gt;structure of sets of solutions to systems of polynomial
equations, the&lt;br/&gt;symmetries they exhibit, and their (often surprising)
relationship to&lt;br/&gt;various interesting geometric and topological objects.
These&lt;br/&gt;relationships are mediated by how the equations behave with
respect to the&lt;br/&gt;various prime numbers. There are a number of
conjectural explanations of&lt;br/&gt;these relationships, and the PI studies
them, proving them in certain&lt;br/&gt;"easy" cases and verifying them by
computer in more complicated cases. He&lt;br/&gt;also investigates phenomena
which compare whole families of these&lt;br/&gt;structures with respect to a
fixed prime number.&lt;br/&gt;