* 0455696
* Applications of Fourier analysis to convex geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Alexander Koldobsky, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 142,075.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to study the geometry of convex
bodies using&lt;br/&gt;methods of harmonic and functional analysis. One
direction&lt;br/&gt;is to express different properties of convex bodies in
terms&lt;br/&gt;of the Fourier transform and then use methods of
Fourier&lt;br/&gt;analysis to solve geometric problems. This approach will
lead&lt;br/&gt;to new results on sections and projections of convex
bodies,&lt;br/&gt;characterizations of different classes of bodies, new
results&lt;br/&gt;of the Busemann-Petty type. Another direction of research
is&lt;br/&gt;related to a new connection between convex geometry and
the&lt;br/&gt;theory of L_p-spaces, which has recently been found by the
PI&lt;br/&gt;and allows to get new geometric results by extending
different&lt;br/&gt;facts about L_p-spaces to negative values of p.
Particularly&lt;br/&gt;interesting is the question of whether intersection and
polar&lt;br/&gt;projection bodies are isomorphically equivalent. A solution
to&lt;br/&gt;this problem will represent a big step in understanding
the&lt;br/&gt;duality between sections and projections, which remains
one&lt;br/&gt;of the most intriguing mysteries of convex geometry. The
PI&lt;br/&gt;also plans to apply these methods to several open problems
of&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic geometric analysis, including the central
limit&lt;br/&gt;problem for convex bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of
geometric properties of convex bodies based on&lt;br/&gt;information about
sections and projections of these bodies has&lt;br/&gt;important applications to
many areas of mathematics and science,&lt;br/&gt;from the classical theory of
x-rays and geometric tomography to&lt;br/&gt;different problems of engineering
and medicine. A new approach to&lt;br/&gt;sections and projections of convex
bodies, based on methods of&lt;br/&gt;Fourier analysis, has recently been
developed by the PI. This&lt;br/&gt;approach has already led to several results,
including a Fourier&lt;br/&gt;analytic solution of the Busemann-Petty problem on
sections of&lt;br/&gt;convex bodies asking whether bodies with uniformly smaller
central&lt;br/&gt;sections necessarily have smaller volume. The proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;will lead to better understanding of the geometry of convex
bodies&lt;br/&gt;and will further relate methods and results of convex geometry
to&lt;br/&gt;harmonic analysis, functional analysis and probability. New
techniques&lt;br/&gt;for computing the Fourier transform, developed in this
project, will&lt;br/&gt;have independent value and can be applied to signal
processing and&lt;br/&gt;statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;