* 0455828
* Using Practice as a Site to Learning Mathematics for Teaching:  Developing Materials, Approaches and Professional Community
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2005,10/31/2012
* Kara Suzuka, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 10/31/2012
* USD 1,499,210.00

This five-year project is submitted under category B (full development projects)
of the TPC program solicitation. It is designed to build resources for helping
teachers learn mathematical content in ways usable for the work of teaching. Two
practice-centered packags will be developed for use in the professional
education of K-8 teachers of mathematics. The packages will be usable by the
existing range of teacher developers. Each package will comprise selections of
records of practice and resources for their use with
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teacher educators are a diverse audience, but
with enough in common that the materials will address the needs of each segment
of this audience. The work will be an extension of work done by the project team
over the last decade. An eight-step work plan includes in-house piloting and two
rounds of field testing, each followed by revision. Evaluation will include
examinations of the material from both pedagogical and mathematical points of
view, in both formative and summative
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination will be closely linked to
technology. Material will be posted on the web, with liberal access for
legitimate use. Other higher-quality formats will be utilized and materials
disseminated using the resources of the Universities of Michigan and of Georgia.
In addition, dissemination will be announced through connections with NSF-
sponsored CLTand LSC programs, professional organizations and national digital
databases.