* 0455145
* Late Pleistocene Coastal Settlement of Central Portugal
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2005,10/31/2006
* Jonathan Haws, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2006
* USD 57,520.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Jonathan Haws and a team of
archaeologists, geologists and geographers will survey the coastal zone near
Nazare, Portugal where the appropriate conditions exist to find evidence for
coastal settlement during the Late Pleistocene. Currently, archaeologists
working on the Iberian Peninsula employ an explanatory framework known as the
'Broad Spectrum Revolution' to explain the 'sudden' Late Pleistocene/ Early
Holocene appearance of coastal economies. The timing of these coastal economies
is probably an artifact of postglacial sea level rise that destroyed earlier
evidence. Since the evidence is largely destroyed or submerged under 100ft or
more of water, archaeologists must search areas that would not have been
impacted by sea level rise. These areas are almost always located in coastal
zones where the continental shelf is narrow and steep. &lt;br/&gt;The Nazare
area of central Portugal is adjacent to a deep submarine canyon. During the last
ice age, sea level decrease would not have exposed much land surface area. If
people were living near the coast at the time those sites should still exist. In
central Portugal, sites with organic preservation are found in limestone
caves/rockshelters and sand dunes. These two geologic settings characterize much
of the area near Nazare. Furthermore, the coast of Portugal experiences a summer
upwelling that creates a rich marine ecosystem. Paleoclimatic and geologic
research shows that the coastal upwelling system off the coast of Portugal was
several times more intense during the Last Glacial Maximum, approximately 20,000
years ago. This probably made the coast even more attractive to people than
today. &lt;br/&gt;The project will help answer important questions regarding
Late Pleistocene coastal adaptations in central Portugal through archaeological
survey and testing. The interior uplands of Estremadura have been the focus of
several recent and current NSF-funded projects to investigate the Paleolithic of
Portugal. Most of the sites in this area with organic preservation contain
marine fish and shellfish indicating regular visits to the coast. However, no
systematic investigation of the adjacent coastal area has taken place despite
the fact that it has the appropriate geological setting for Paleolithic sites
with faunal preservation. The survey will focus on coastal dunes and limestone
outcrops to locate and test sites with preserved faunal remains in order to
determine the nature of Late Pleistocene coastal resource
exploitation.&lt;br/&gt;The fieldwork will occur between June and August of
2005. Survey and testing will be done by a 10-person crew during the first two
field seasons, each lasting eight weeks. Sites will be dated by radiocarbon when
possible. In addition to field work, a GIS will be created to map archaeological
materials, site and landscape characteristics in order to understand site
distribution and prehistoric settlement patterns. &lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal
is to collect data that can be used to test general theoretical models about
human subsistence decision-making and changes through time. Tantalizing evidence
suggests the coastal zone was of key importance to human subsistence during the
Late Pleistocene and the survey targets the optimal area to find sites dated to
this period. This multidisciplinary project will also provide opportunities for
Portuguese and American students to learn archaeological and geological research
methods and how these are used to answer important questions about past human
behavior. Undergraduates from the United States will be given the opportunity to
travel abroad and interact with other students and researchers from in a
different country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;