* 0455327
* 2005 Polymers (East) Gordon Research Conference, June 19-24, 2005, South Hadley, MA
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2006
* USD 4,000.00

A proposal submitted to National Science Foundation to support the 2005 Polymers
(East) Gordon Research Conference: From Precise Polymer Synthesis to Advanced
Polymeric Materials; to be held at Mount Holyoke College, June 19-24, 2005
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Chairman: Professor Kris Matyjaszewski, Carnegie Mellon
University &lt;br/&gt;Vice Chair: Professor Karen Wooley, Washington University
in St. Louis &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in polymer synthesis open
new avenues for the preparation of &lt;br/&gt;advanced polymeric materials
controlled at the nanoscopic level. The new well-defined &lt;br/&gt;polymeric
materials can find applications in a range of advanced technologies. From
&lt;br/&gt;smart surfaces, sensors, drug delivery systems, catalysts, agents for
chemical warfare &lt;br/&gt;detection and destruction, to biodegradable tissue
replacements, polymeric materials are &lt;br/&gt;the critical component and
enabling technology for the successful implementation of &lt;br/&gt;these
applications. This conference will focus upon recent developments in the design
&lt;br/&gt;and precise macromolecular synthesis of polymeric materials,
biodegradability, &lt;br/&gt;supramolecular chemistry and polymer physics as
well as potential applications in &lt;br/&gt;biomedical areas, surface sciences
and in optoelectronics. Such an exchange of &lt;br/&gt;knowledge in these
critical areas by world experts will provide new stimuli for future
&lt;br/&gt;developments and will encourage young scientists to focus on polymer
science and &lt;br/&gt;engineering.