* 0455107
* Migration, Policy and Household Strategies in China, 1985-2004
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2005,06/30/2010
* C. Cindy Fan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 06/30/2010
* USD 339,940.00

Increase of human mobility is both a driver and an outcome of the structural
changes that many formerly socialist economies have experienced over the past
two decades. Conventional thinking on migration, based primarily on capitalist
economies, cannot fully explain the recent dramatic surge in migration in
transitional economies such as China. Policy adjustments, a hallmark of China's
economic reforms, and household-level strategies, are central to explaining
rural-urban migration in China. This project will document the major changes in
the volume, direction, and composition of migration in China in the past two
decades and identify the determinants of the patterns of migration and how these
determinants have changed. The investigator will examine how policy changes,
especially those related to the household registration (hukou) reforms, have
affected the decision-making and process of migration. The project will focus on
household strategies that led to the decisions to not migrate, migrate, or
return, and how these strategies have been shaped by policy, gender relations
and ideology, life-cycle events, and other household considerations. By
comparing and analyzing data from China's 1990 and 2000 censuses, the
investigator will pinpoint how migration and its determinants have changed. The
investigator will conduct a survey of 7,000 rural households in two major origin
provinces of migrants (Sichuan and Anhui), which aims at documenting possible
multiple episodes of migration, circular migration, and return migration. Data
from this survey will facilitate analysis using event-history techniques, thus
enabling investigations of the effects of policy change and household
considerations on migration decision-making. The investigator will also conduct
in-depth interviews of 300 rural households that were previously interviewed 10
years ago. These interviews will likewise provide longitudinal information as
well as qualitative material that will enrich the understanding of social and
power relations within households, their relations with national and local-level
policies, and their impacts on household strategies related to migration.

This project will provide insights for understanding not only the sizable
"floating population" in China but rural-urban migrants in developing and
transitional countries. These migrants are the key to the social and economic
trajectories of the cities and the countryside in these economies. Findings from
this project will inform researchers and policy-makers as they debate policies
and issues on migration, urbanization, labor, employment, and political and
social instability. The project will advance research collaboration between US
and Chinese scholars, provide research opportunities for international students,
help identify methodological and conceptual improvements in undergraduate and
graduate teaching, and enable the life stories and experiences of rural Chinese
to be accessible to broad audiences.