* 0455232
* Preparing a Culturally Diverse and Culturally Responsive Generation of Evaluators: A Workshop to Design a Proposal for Advanced Training
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Stafford Hood, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 09/30/2006
* USD 99,993.00

This project builds on an established need for greater accountability,
oversight, and management of public resources and specifically the need for
substantive evaluation in educational programs funded by federal agencies in the
Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematic (STEM) education disciplines. A
particular locus of need for evauluation capacity builing that the project
addresses is the need for more culturally diverse and sensitive pool of
evaluators. However, the difficulty in building such a pool rests in part of the
dearth of graduate training programs in general and of faculty in evaluation
from traditionally underrepresented groups in particular. An additional obstacle
to such capacity building is the lack of highly dveloped frameworks for
curricula, classroom experiences, and internship experiences that are grounded
in culturally responsive evaluation. The project proposes to take development of
such a framework to higher levels and to produce a model that has potential fo
major innovations in how we train and levels and recruit evaluators in graduate
degreee and non-degree programs to work effectiveley in cultural settings. The
mechanism for this development is a two-phase plan of which the current project
is phase one. The first activity in phase on is a two-day workshop to discuss
issues, challenges, and strategies for including relevant recruitment and
training in culturally responsive evaluation. Participants in the workshop will
be representatives from graduate degree and certificate programs who have been
successful in their recruitment of and training for culturally repsonsive
evaluation. The second activity in the first place is the production of
synthesis of information from the activity and a propsal for submission to the
National Science Foundation for implementing (and presumably conducting research
on) advanced training utilizing the framework. This activity in the new funding
would constitute the second phase.