* 0455446
* Northwest Center for Sustainable Resources (NCSR)
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2009
* Jonathan Yoder, Chemeketa Community College
* Continuing grant
* David B. Campbell
* 09/30/2009
* USD 599,289.00

Environmental Science and National Resources

The Northwest Center for Sustainable Resources (NCSR) operates as an ATE
National Resource Center for ecosystem-oriented natural resource and
environmental science education. The Center's foci are: (1) natural resource and
environmental science educational materials development; (2) dissemination,
adaptation, and implementation of these materials by educators; and (3)
development and implementation of professional development institutes.

NCSR has an established record of producing cutting-edge curriculum products
that have been successfully adapted by natural resource programs across the
nation. On-going evaluation of the NCSR program clearly demonstrates the
positive long-term impact on faculty and their students of both the curriculum
products and associated professional development. Materials being developed and
disseminated include college-level courses, educator guides, laboratory and
field teaching modules, and high school-level educational guides and
instructional modules. Professional development activities focus on contemporary
environmental science and natural resource topics and procedures germane to life
sciences and advanced technical education for college faculty and secondary
school educators. NCSR provides a comprehensive information and reference guide
for natural resource educators on current concepts and practices in ecosystem
management including Native American perspectives.

The intellectual merit of this project is its emphasis on addressing major
challenges in sustaining natural resource environments while supporting the
economic needs of a growing population. Natural resource professionals must
understand ecological systems. Technicians who support production and
stewardship need knowledge of the evolving complexities of ecosystem science and
management techniques that can ensure sustainability of these critical
resources.

The broader impacts of the project are the continued production of and increased
skills and knowledge of advanced technicians nationwide. They bring to the
workforce an understanding of the science and technical processes needed to
rebuild and sustain our natural environment while providing economic benefit.
NCSR's approach to ecosystem-based natural resource education is to: (1)
emphasize seamless education from K-12 through the university; (2) work closely
with employers in curriculum development; (3) develop core instructional
materials that prepare students to obtain advanced knowledge and skills; (4)
promote the successful use of these materials and approaches through
professional development of college and secondary school faculty; and (5)
produce skilled technicians who work for industry, agencies, and organizations
involved with aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. This approach has proven to be
effective both in creating widely adaptable curriculum products with emphasis on
developing student understanding and in the use of inquiry-based science through
rigorous laboratory and field-based instruction.