* 0455606
* MO:  The Alpine Microbial Observatory-- Changes in Microbial Diversity and Function Across Extreme Environmental Gradients
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2013
* Jason Neff, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,750,000.00

About 35% of Earth's land surface is covered with snow for varying lengths of
time each year. It is often assumed that biological activity mostly ceases in
the winter, however recent research at the Alpine Microbial Observatory (AMO)
shows that novel soil microorganisms are active under snow where they contribute
significantly to greenhouse gas fluxes to the atmosphere. Work at the AMO is
focused on identifying never-before cultured microbes and discovering ways to
grow them in the laboratory so that they can be studied using modern
physiological and genomic methods. Such studies will help the researchers at the
AMO discover new forms of life and to understand how they perform important
biological functions (e.g. nutrient cycling and gas production) under extremely
cold conditions. In addition, an interactive, Internet database will be further
developed to explore the evolutionary relationships, distribution and
functioning of novel microbes in alpine environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will help researchers to understand how colder regions of the earth
function as part of the biosphere and how they will respond to future climate
change. Such work can only be accomplished via interdisciplinary research,
involving researchers with expertise in microbiology, biogeochemistry,
evolutionary biology, and bioinformatics. In addition, the research could lead
to the discovery of useful products such as antibiotics and industrial enzymes
that function at cold temperatures. The development of a web-based public access
system expands the educational and out-reach value of the research and will
allow scientists and the public to use the knowledge generated at the AMO. This
research also will promote training through its support of two undergraduate
students, two graduate students and two post-doctoral fellows. PI Schmidt will
participate in the Summer Multicultural Access to Research Training program at
CU Boulder and co-PI Martin will work with the Boulder School District mentoring
program to provide AMO research projects for secondary school students.