* 0455904
* Regulation of Ureotely in Batrachoidid Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Patrick Walsh, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 01/31/2010
* USD 496,392.00

Regulation of Ureotely in Batrachoidid Fishes &lt;br/&gt;Patrick J. Walsh, M.
Danielle McDonald &lt;br/&gt;University of
Miami&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until recently, it has been commonly
accepted knowledge that fish and other aquatic species excrete ammonia as their
main waste product following a meal. Ammonia is ultimately toxic, primarily to
the brain, so fish and other aquatic species rid their bodies of ammonia as soon
as it is produced, and its harmful effects are immediately diluted by the
"infinite" volume of the surrounding water. However, when animals evolved to
live on land, and did not have the diluting effects of a surrounding water
environment, they needed to adopt alternate means of ridding their bodies of
this toxin. So, terrestrial animals make (from ammonia) and excrete alternative
waste products (urea and uric acid), which they can store in their bodies at
higher concentrations without harmful effect until they are able to consume
enough water with which to excrete them in their urine; the process of making
and excreting urea is known as "ureotely". Surprisingly, in recent years, Walsh
and colleagues have discovered that a common marine fish living in the bays and
estuaries of the Southeastern US, the gulf toadfish (Opsanus beta), is an
exception to this rule, opting to excrete urea instead of ammonia under certain
stressful circumstances. Even more unusual, the toadfish excretes all of its
urea in a single pulse lasting only a few hours across the gills. Thus the goals
of this research project are to understand how this fish species is able to make
and excrete urea, and to understand the ecological and evolutionary reasons for
why it does so, and why it pulses its urea excretion. The ability to make urea
requires a great deal of energy, which would otherwise be spent on predator
avoidance, reproduction, etc., so it is reasonable to assume that the ability to
make and excrete urea is somehow favored by natural selection, and contributes
to the fish's ability to survive stressful conditions and
propagate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals will be approached with several
different methods. In one portion of the study biochemical and molecular biology
techniques will be used to understand how the fish shifts from making ammonia to
making urea during stress, focusing on enzymes of urea production in the liver.
In a second part of the study, physiological studies on how urea is excreted at
the gill will be performed. In the third part of the study, field experiments
will be used to test the hypotheses that urea production is important to the
survival of the fish because the fish lives in an environment with high ammonia
concentration, and/or that the pulses of urea excretion help it to be better at
chemically camouflaging itself from predators. Lastly, studies will be conducted
at the level of DNA to see how closely related species are within this family of
fishes, and then compare members of the family that either do or do not adopt
this mode of coping with stress. Through these "family tree" studies the PIs
intend to determine where in the evolution of these species this trait has
appeared or not, giving additional clues as to why the toadfish makes and
excretes urea. The overall broader importance of the research is that it will
help to understand how rapidly aquatic organisms are able to adapt to changing
stressful environments on both an individual and generational time scale, and
this work may eventually serve as a case study in the evolution of a complex
physiological trait. This type of information becomes more and more valuable as
our environment changes due to human influence. Furthermore, since ammonia is
one of the most important waste byproducts in aquaculture that must be removed
by expensive means to keep fish healthy, these studies may potentially suggest
more efficient ways to culture fish and other aquatic species. This research
will take place with significant international collaboration (with scientists
from 5 other countries). Furthermore, since the University of Miami is a
Minority Serving Institution, the PI will be able to recruit student researchers
from minorities/underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;