* 0455136
* A History of Women Scientists in the U.S., 1972-2000
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Margaret Rossiter, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/29/2008
* USD 80,605.00

Project Summary The PI plans to write a one-volume history of women scientists
in the United States from 1972 to 2000. This is a challenging project both
because this was a complex period when an organized women's movement in science
emerged and when a great deal of unprecedented things happened on many fronts,
including especially science education, employment, and recognition. Few
historians of science have as yet worked this period. Yet for many people,
especially students, the 1970s and 1980s are already ancient history, and what
happened then is minimized and misunderstood. The PI has already used 39
archival collections, which contain vast quantities of correspondence,
clippings, notes, and reports, of individuals and associations. The PI plans to
write a draft of the book during her current sabbatical year, while also
utilizing additional archival sources that have become available. Intellectual
Merits The project will yield important new insights into our understanding of
the recent history of women scientists in the United States. While there have
been a number of studies of women scientists in those years, there has been no
sustained, scholarly historical examination of the topic. While there are
numerous histories of the civil rights and women's rights movements, this will
be the first major study to examine how those and other developments influenced
efforts to promote greater opportunities for women scientists. The PI's work
will yield new perspectives on the role of minority women in science, as well as
the problems that women scientists in general confronted in universities,
federal government employment, and industry. In light of the efforts made to
expand opportunities for women scientists in those years, the project will make
a major contribution to understanding the changing dynamic of science in late
twentieth- century America. Broader Impacts Besides adding to the history of
science, this project is very likely to increase interest in the participation
of women and minority groups in science and engineering, as indeed the PI's
earlier volumes on the years prior to 1972 already have. Documenting and writing
about the efforts and experiences of the women who went before has a way of
encouraging and expanding horizons for current students. Once such material is
readily available it can be taken up by magazine writers, program developers,
textbook writers, policy makers, school counselors and others positioned to
influence young people and their parents. Indeed a broad project like this,
which will provide specifics as to what has happened since 1972, is an essential
starting place to such future efforts