* 0456473
* Experiments on Time-Resolved Transport and Imaging of Moving Vortex Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Eva Andrei, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2009
* USD 379,939.00

This individual investigator award will support time-resolved transport and
imaging studies in superconductors in order to elucidate the mechanisms that
govern their response to applied fields and currents. The emphasis will be on
the onset of motion in vortex lattices in type II superconductors, the vortex
lattice's evolution and reorganization from a static structure into a moving
steady state and how these properties depend on driving force, quenched
disorder, temperature and boundaries. In addition experiments are proposed to
identify characteristic signatures predicted for the moving phases including the
transverse critical current, and the generation of a narrow band noise. The
measurements will be carried out with a novel microscope, constructed in the
PI's laboratory, which incorporates time-resolved transport, STM and Hall probe
capabilities. The impact of this research is expected to extend to the physics
of other moving structures including charge density wave systems, magnetic
bubbles, and Wigner crystals. Work on this project will be carried out with the
active participation of students at the graduate and undergraduate level and of
post doctoral fellows. These young scientists will receive training in cutting
edge research and in the use of state of the art equipment that will prepare
them for filling demanding technical and research positions in industry and
academia. &lt;br/&gt;%%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vortices in superconductors are
tiny whirlpools of current swirling around microscopic threads containing a
quantum of magnetic flux. It is because of vortices that superconductors are
able to preserve their remarkable properties when carrying large amounts of
current and it is thanks to vortices that superconductors hold the promise of
revolutionizing many aspects of our daily lives including transportation,
communications, medical diagnosis, energy storage and transmission lines. As
long as vortices are pinned in place superconductivity is maintained, but once
they start moving the superconductor transforms into a rather poor metal. The
primary object of this research is to elucidate the mechanisms that lead to the
onset of vortex motion and to study the patterns and dynamic phases that emerge
once the motion is established. This research project will employ a variety of
novel techniques developed in the PI's laboratory to probe the onset of motion
of vortices in superconductors, their evolution and reorganization from a static
structure into a moving state. The impact of this research is expected to extend
to the physics of other moving structures including charge density wave systems,
magnetic bubbles, and electron crystals. Work on this project will be carried
out with the active participation of students at the graduate and undergraduate
level and of post doctoral fellows. These young scientists will receive training
in cutting edge research and in the use of state of the art equipment that will
prepare them for filling demanding technical and research positions in industry
and academia. &lt;br/&gt;