* 0456928
* Design and Development of Compact High-Energy Femtosecond Oscillators
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2005,11/30/2008
* James Fujimoto, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 11/30/2008
* USD 23,799.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0456928&lt;br/&gt;Fujimoto&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is for international cooperative research between investigators at the
Massachusetts Institute &lt;br/&gt;of Technology and the Koc University in
Istanbul, Turkey. This proposal is for travel expenses for
&lt;br/&gt;investigators from Koc University in Turkey to visit M.I.T. in order
to perform collaborative research. &lt;br/&gt;The proposal follows the format of
the Scientific and Technical Research National Science Council of
&lt;br/&gt;Turkey (TUBITAK). The proposal is also submitted to Tubitak in Turkey
for support of research &lt;br/&gt;expenses of our collaborator in Turkey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-energy femtosecond oscillators based on solid-state
media, such as Ti3 :Al2O3 and &lt;br/&gt;Cr4+:forsterite have numerous
applications in ultrafast phenomena and nonlinear optics, including such diverse
applications as nonlinear frequency generation, pump probe measurement,
micromachining and &lt;br/&gt;biomedical imaging. Recently it was proposed that
the pulse energies of laser systems can be scaled up &lt;br/&gt;by using
extended laser resonators. For a given average power, extending the laser cavity
length lowers &lt;br/&gt;the pulse repetition rate and, therefore, increases the
pulse energy; thus, generating high-energy pulses without the need for more
complex and expensive methods such as cavity dumping or amplification. In a
practical system, it is also important to maintain compactness as cavity length
is increased. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of this proposal is femtosecond
laser development. It involves the design and experimental
&lt;br/&gt;investigation of laser oscillators that are compact and can produce
high-energy pulses. The femtosecond &lt;br/&gt;lasers to be investigated are
based on the tunable, solid-state Ti 3+ :Al2O3 and Cr 4+ :forsterite systems
that &lt;br/&gt;operate in the near infrared range between 700 and 1400 nm. The
broad gain bandwidths of these &lt;br/&gt;materials enables the generation of
femtosecond pulses. Kerr-lens mode-locking (KLM) will be &lt;br/&gt;employed,
along with intracavity dispersion compensation using double-chirped mirrors to
achieve broad &lt;br/&gt;tunability or very short pulse, broadband operation.
Multi-pass laser cavities (MPCs) will be designed &lt;br/&gt;which can
dramatically reduce laser repetition rate and increase pulse energies while
maintaining a &lt;br/&gt;compact laser design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope
of the proposed project is the design, development, and application of compact,
high-&lt;br/&gt;energy femtosecond lasers. The objectives include: &lt;br/&gt;1)
Design multi-pass cavity (MPC) lasers using Cr4+:forsterite for generation of
femtosecond pulses in &lt;br/&gt;the 1.1 to 1.4 um range, &lt;br/&gt;2)
Experimentally investigate the femtosecond MPC lasers using Cr4+:forsterite in
the 1.1 -1.4 um &lt;br/&gt;range, and Ti3+:Al2O3 in the 700 -1000 nm range,
&lt;br/&gt;3) Explore the fundamental limits of pulse energy that can be
generated with MPC laser designs, &lt;br/&gt;4) Perform second-harmonic
generation studies with the MPC Cr4+:forsterite laser to obtain high pulse
&lt;br/&gt;energies at visible wavelengths, and &lt;br/&gt;5) Demonstrate
selected applications of the MPC Cr4+:forsterite and Ti3+:Al2O3 lasers for
biomedical &lt;br/&gt;imaging and ultrafast pump-probe studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will enable the development
of a new class of femtosecond lasers that &lt;br/&gt;achieve pulse energies
significantly higher than what is currently possible with current femtosecond
laser &lt;br/&gt;oscillators. This will enable a wide range of new applications
without the need for femtosecond laser &lt;br/&gt;amplifiers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This program is an international
collaboration. It will develop new laser technology &lt;br/&gt;in both
laboratories in the U.S. and in Turkey that can be used for future applications,
such as biomedical &lt;br/&gt;imaging, pump-probe measurements, and
micromachining. It will train graduate students at the master's &lt;br/&gt;and
doctoral levels who will be specialized in lasers and ultrafast phenomena. Both
countries will gain &lt;br/&gt;expertise in fundamental and applied research in
the field of ultrafast lasers and measurement. These fields are important to
future advances in areas including high-speed photonics and communications,
semiconductor physics, biology, and photochemistry. The development of new
technologies in optics and photonics can enhance high-technology and industrial
development, leading to economic growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;