* 0456421
* U.S.-Turkey Workshop on Nanophotonics and Nanobiotechnology
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* M. Selim Unlu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2006
* USD 34,980.00

0456421&lt;br/&gt;Unlu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This proposal is to
support participation by US scientists in a US-Turkey Workshop on Nanophotonics
and Nanobiotechnology, to be held at the campus of Koc University in Istanbul.
The U.S. organizer is Dr. Selim Unlu, Department of Electrical and Biomedical
Engineering at Boston University (BU). The Turkish organizers will be Dr. Irsadi
Aksun, Dean of Engineering and Dr. Hakan Urey, Department of Electrical
Engineering, Koc University, Istanbul. While the workshop will cover fundamental
topics in nanoscience, it will focus on two particular areas: Nanophotonics and
Nanobiotechnology. The proposed Workshop will bring active researchers from US
and European institutions and immerse junior academic faculty, postdocs, and
graduate students in a significant learning environment. The format of the
workshop will be as a "summer school" that provides both fundamental learning
and an environment for informal scientific discussions. There are commitments
from a number of highly regarded European scientists including: Atac Imamoglu
and Vahid Sandoghdar from the Swiss Federal Institute, ETH Zurich, Khaled Karra
from Ludwig Maximillan University, Munich, Fritz Keilmann from Max-Planck-
Institut fur Biochemie, Stuttgart, Germany, Niek van Hulst from University of
Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, and Dieter Pohl University of Basel,
Switzerland. All of these scientists as well as US participants will be in
residence at the workshop for a minimum of 4 days, give one or more 90 minute
seminars, hold "office hours" and participate in panel discussions related to
their expertise area. U.S. graduate students will also be in residence for the
10 days of the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader Impacts: The
importance of advancement in nanotechnology has rapidly become a global
phenomenon with many countries investing significant research funds and starting
new initiatives. It is recognized that most successful scientists and engineers
of tomorrow will be those with strong international collaborations. This
workshop will include training and create opportunities for US junior faculty
and graduate students, including women and minorities. U.S. participants will
come from Boston University, University of Illinois and University of Rochester
as well as from other institutions. The commitment from the Center for
Nanoscience and Nanobiotechnology at BU will support the travel of 2 additional
students. Priority will be given to women and minorities and students in their
2nd and 3rd year of PhD studies. It is expected that the workshop will have a
significant impact on starting new US-Europe and US-Turkey Collaboration
activities. Bringing senior researchers and junior faculty with common interests
together with graduate students in an informal scientific environment will
strengthen existing ties and initiate new programs including student exchange
and international research cooperation. Workshop presentations and reports on
panel discussions will be disseminated to the scientific community via a
dedicated web site and by mailing CD-ROMs and printed reports. The workshop will
enable U.S. researchers and educators to advance their work through
international collaboration, and help ensure that future generations of U.S.
scientists and engineers gain professional experience beyond this nation's
borders early in their careers in the field of nanoscience and technology. Koc
University will provide substantial support for the workshop. This project is
being supported by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the
Division of Electrical and Communications Systems.&lt;br/&gt;