* 0456635
* Research in High Energy Physics:  Theory and Phenomenology of Supersymmetry
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Stephen Martin, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Cooper
* 08/31/2008
* USD 90,000.00

One of the main goals of the proposed research is to develop precise
calculations and tools that will aid in the interpretation and understanding of
a future discovery of supersymmetry. The PI will produce more accurate formulas
relating the masses of the new particles to the parameters of the underlying
theory. He will also study the precise manner in which these new particles might
be detected, and then studied, in present and future experiments. A related goal
of this research is to understand supersymmetry breaking; in other words, the
mechanism which causes the new particles predicted by supersymmetry to be very
heavy. This is the central theoretical problem of supersymmetry, and answering
it will inevitably have a profound effect both on hypotheses for physics at very
high energies and on strategies for experimental searches. More generally, the
PI proposes to work on aspects of physics beyond the Standard Model that may
appear in future experiments. They have a good chance of shedding light on the
mechanism of the breakdown of electroweak symmetry within a few years. The PI
recognizes the possibility that this may or may not involve supersymmetry, and
proposes to follow the experimental data closely wherever it may lead in an
effort to interpret it in terms of new fundamental theories of nature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;