* 0456433
* CSEDI:  Fine Structure of the Lower Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2005,01/31/2008
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2008
* USD 228,246.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Seismologists have known for many years that the
lowermost mantle is complex.&lt;br/&gt;Attempts at modeling seismic waveforms
sampling this region produced ultra-low velocity zones, sharp horizontal
discontinuities, strong zones of anisotropy (SH&gt;SV), and in some cases near
vertical walls. It now appears that this myriad of fine structure is beginning
to be understood in terms of mineral physics with dense melts from hot
perovskite and a new post-perovskite structure. These new discoveries can
explain many of the above features. In particular, the investigators earlier
dynamic 2D model of slabs folding at the CMB generates a strong positive
velocity gradient, which in turn produces synthetic seismograms containing a
small triplication, if a 1% velocity jump is allowed. Assuming that this jump
results from a phase-change with a positive Clapeyron slope, and transforming
tomographic images through such a hybrid global model, generates some of the
geographic behavior of the observed S-wave triplication: where the post-
perovskite layer is thickest beneath fast regions and disappears beneath slow
regions. The team's latest 3D dynamic models explain the locations of the
fastest regions based on the history of plate subduction. Results from 3D
dynamics are significantly different from those in 2D, and may help us explain
more of the variability in seismic waveform data sampling the lower mantle when
seismic and dynamic models are merged. In order to make accelerated progress
toward understanding the lower mantle and D" propose research to resolve the 3D
nature of these structures. They will address the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;o How compatible are 3D dynamic predictions of slab
histories with lower mantle&lt;br/&gt;structure? &lt;br/&gt;o Can we separate
velocity gradient effects caused by subduction from the phase-boundary effects
and update a global map?&lt;br/&gt;o How different is the mid-Pacific lower
mantle structure compared to the African&lt;br/&gt;structure and what does this
imply in terms of the stability of upwelling?&lt;br/&gt;o What dynamic models of
thermo-chemical boundary layers are consistent with the proposed post-perovskite
structure and seismic data?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Answers to the above questions will be of great use to the
entire Earth Science community, especially mineral physicists who need
fundamental seismic information about the global properties of the newly
discovered phase boundary. Making the direct connection between the detailed
fast structures in the lower mantle with respect to the history of subduction
will answer a key question in plate tectonic dynamics. These multi-disciplinary
efforts should help the involved students become leaders in future CSEDI
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;