* 0456298
* FRG: Collaborative Research:  Automorphic Forms, Galois Representations, and Special Values of L-functions.
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Eric Jean-Paul Urban, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2011
* USD 235,000.00

Number theory has seen many significant advances in the past few years. Results
from arithmetic geometry and the theories of modular forms and Galois
representations have yielded a proof Fermat's Last Theorem and fundamental
advances towards the $p$-adic Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture (BSD), to name
two. The research proposed in this project aims to continue this progress. The
PI's propose to investigate many aspects of the connections between automorphic
forms, Galois representations, and values of their $L$-functions, with the
particular aim of making advances towards BSD, Bloch-Kato conjectures, and the
Iwasawa Theory of automorphic Galois representations, as well as answering
fundamental questions about the Galois representations associated to automorphic
forms. Their project focuses on $p$-adic methods in the theory of automorphic
forms and Galois representations. By combining their various expertise, they
propose to consider a number of specific problems that fall under the following
headings: $p$-adic Eisenstein measures and their specializations, Iwasawa's
$\mu$-invariants, Non-vanishing modulo $p$ of $L$-values, Eisenstein ideals for
unitary groups, Geometric construction of $p$-adic automorphic forms, $p$-adic
construction of Euler systems, Endoscopic congruences, Galois representations
and Shimura varieties.

This project will enhance our knowledge of the deep links between automorphic
forms, Galois representations, and their $L$-functions - a central focus of
number theory - as well as have significant consequences for our understanding
of mathematics in general. Two workshops, a final conference, and graduate and
post-doctoral advising will have an important impact on the formation of new
researchers in the field and on the promotion of new collaborations.