* 0456918
* US-PRC Protocol for Cooperative Research in Earthquake Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2012
* George Lee, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 139,009.00

Abstract for: US-PRC Protocol for Cooperative Research in Earthquake
Engineering, CMS 0456918

PI: George Lee, SUNY Buffalo

The US-PRC earthquake protocol was established as one of the original
government-to- government Science and Technology agreements between USA and
China. The National Science Foundation (NSF) has been responsible, in
counterpart with the Ministry of Construction (MOC) of China, for development
and implementation of Annex III of the protocol, covering mutually beneficial
research and educational activities in earthquake engineering and hazard
mitigation.

This formal US-PRC cooperative effort has a successful history of 23 years. This
project is to continue the planning process and the development of US-PRC
cooperative research and educational exchange activities in earthquake
engineering; and to assist NSF in organizing its annual Protocol Coordination
Meeting between US and Chinese representatives for the next three years (October
2004 . September 2007).

Major research themes to be emphasized during the next three years include: (1)
Development of smart systems and sensing materials for disaster resistant
construction, (2) infrastructure design for ground motions in urban areas, and
(3) advanced disaster response management systems. These are intellectually
challenging research frontier areas in earthquake engineering and disaster
mitigation for which fundamental knowledge is lacking. Cooperative efforts will
greatly enhance the new knowledge base for hazard mitigation and emergency
response applications. In addition, cooperative educational and scholarly
exchange activities will be emphasized, particularly through existing
relationships among earthquake engineering research centers in both countries.
These Center-to-center cooperations will provide a formal channel for US
students and young researchers to become more globally engaged earthquake
engineers, both scientifically and culturally.

