* 0456683
* Summer Institute on Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2004,05/31/2006
* James Maxwell, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2006
* USD 135,000.00

Algebraic Geometry Summer Institute (Proposal
DMS-0456683.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large scale summer institute in algebraic
geometry, three weeks in&lt;br/&gt;duration, will be held during July-August
2005 at the University of&lt;br/&gt;Washington, Seattle. Organizational support
will be provided by the&lt;br/&gt;American Mathematical Society and the Clay
Mathematics Institute. Each&lt;br/&gt;week will have a general topic as a focus
and at the same time will&lt;br/&gt;include a component of core "classical"
algebraic geometry. The foci &lt;br/&gt;will be: Mathematical Physics in
Algebraic Geometry; Combinatorics, &lt;br/&gt;Commutative Algebra and Classical
Algebraic Geometry; and Arithmetic Algebraic&lt;br/&gt;Geometry. Three plenary
morning lecture series will be held in each &lt;br/&gt;week, lecturers having
been selected as leading researchers who are at the &lt;br/&gt;same time
exemplary expositors. In addition, leading specialists will be&lt;br/&gt;invited
to serve as seminar leaders, and will select high impact &lt;br/&gt;lectures
given by the best lecturers for afternoon seminars. Additional
&lt;br/&gt;activities will include the CMI distinguished lectures and an evening
graduate&lt;br/&gt;program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry, the study
of geometric shapes defined by polynomial&lt;br/&gt;equations, is a vast
generalization of the high-school topic "analytic&lt;br/&gt;geometry". It has
enjoyed much cross-fertilization in past decades with&lt;br/&gt;areas in pure
mathematics, applied mathematics, computing and &lt;br/&gt;theoretical physics.
One way American algebraic geometers have maintained the &lt;br/&gt;vibrancy of
the field is by holding a large scale, NSF-funded summer
institute&lt;br/&gt;about every decade, an institute which aims to bring
participants up to&lt;br/&gt;the forefront of research in the salient direction
the field has taken &lt;br/&gt;in the previous years, and to project directions
which the field is &lt;br/&gt;expected to take in the following years. These
institutes have had a crucial&lt;br/&gt;formative role on the subject, with
enormous impact especially on the&lt;br/&gt;emerging careers of young
researchers. This summer institute project &lt;br/&gt;aims to follow in their
footsteps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;