* 0456352
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Investigating the Relationship Between Plume Dynamics and ULVZ Geometry
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Michael Manga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2008
* USD 86,510.00

The ultra-low velocity zone (ULVZ) is a thin ( ~10 km) layer in some regions of
the lower-most mantle immediately above the boundary with the outer core that is
characterized by a dramatic reduction in seismic wave speeds. The cause of this
reduction in wave speed is uncertain, but likely possibilities include a small
degree of mantle melting and chemical heterogeneity created by reactions between
silicate minerals in the mantle with iron in the core. Previous, lower
resolution studies that characterized the geographic extent of the ULVZ have
hinted at large regional patches, however, recent, higher resolution
observations made by members of this group have revealed a potentially smaller-
scale structure than originally thought. A small, isolated pocket of more-dense
ULVZ material was discovered in a region that was previously thought to contain
a much larger, continuous ULVZ layer. Work proposed here involves a
collaboration of seismologists and both numerical and laboratory geodynamicists
at Arizona State University and the University of California Berkeley. The
ultimate goal of this work is to determine how upwelling mantle plumes
originating from the core-mantle boundary affect the local geometry of the ULVZ,
and one exciting possibility to examine is whether seismically detectable
pockets of ULVZ can be used as markers to determine the source region for nearly
seismically-invisible mantle plumes. On the seismology front, the ULVZ will be
studied at much higher resolution than before with the goal of determining
whether previously-thought-continuous ULVZ regions are instead composed of
isolated pockets of more-dense regions. Geodynamically, numerical and laboratory
experiments will be used to determine whether observed isolated pockets of ULVZ
material are related to mantle plumes, and if so, what is the relationship
between the morphology of ULVZ material and the flow patterns associated with
mantle plume source regions? Finally, proposed work will focus on determining
whether the dynamically-predicted and observational constraints can be used to
differentiate between competing hypotheses of partial melting and chemical
heterogeneity as a cause of the ULVZ.