* 0456537
* GOALI:  Development and Modeling of Highly Conductive Carbon Filled Thermoplastic Resins for Fuel Cell Bipolar Plate Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Julia King, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 04/30/2009
* USD 311,950.00

The objective of this research is to understand, model and explore new
recyclable high temperature thermoplastic based materials containing several
different carbon fillers to meet all the current and future specifications for
bipolar plates in fuel cells. Fuel cells have been proposed as a clean
alternative energy source, which can be used to power vehicles. A typical fuel
cell contains hundreds of bipolar plates, which consist of a highly thermally
and electrically conductive material. The following approach will be used.
First, the synergistic effects (using statistical experimental design) of
different carbon-based conductive fillers (carbon fiber, carbon black, synthetic
and natural flake graphite) and filler-matrix adhesion on electrical and thermal
conductivity of highly filled (up to 80 wt% filler) conductive resins will be
determined. It is likely that by combining different carbon fillers and studying
the effect of filler-matrix adhesion, a positive synergistic effect on thermal
and electrical conductivity will be obtained. Second, bipolar plates will be
fabricated and tested for a fuel cell stack at Dana Corporation (industrial
partner). Third, better electrical and thermal conductivity models will be
developed for highly filled conductive resins. Current conductivity models have
only been developed for resins containing < 40 wt% filler, which is much lower
than the 70 to 90 wt% filler used for bipolar plates.

This project will benefit society in several ways. First, accurate models for
highly filled conductive resins will enable material design without extensive
experimental work and testing. Such models will benefit society by reducing new
product development costs. Second, this proposed work will be incorporated into
the K-12 (through summer youth programs), undergraduate, and graduate
curriculum. This collaborative industrial and educational project will allow
fuel cells to become an affordable, viable, and sustainable energy alternative
for the 21st century.

