* 0456213
* Computing Configuration Manifolds for the Synthesis of Spatial Serial Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* John McCarthy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 06/30/2008
* USD 339,964.00

This project focuses on research into the solution of ultra-high degree
polynomial systems that arise in the design of configuration manifolds for
serial chains to support the conceptual design of new, complex mechanical
systems. The set of design problems that compute these manifolds can be viewed
as equivalent to the irreducible problems used in geometric constraint solvers
found in modern computer-aided design systems. Rather than relate clusters of
points and lines in the plane or space, these polynomial systems define
configuration manifolds that constrain geometry in the six-dimensional
configuration space of a rigid body. The research proposed here will yield an
efficient system for specifying and computing these configuration manifolds that
will make a fundamental contribution to the development of future computer-aided
design systems.&lt;br/&gt;Research tasks focus on creating the methodology to
support the integration of modern polynomial solution techniques into a
mechanical system design environment. It is expected that the determination of
all of the roots of high degree polynomial systems will yield thousands of
design options for complex design tasks. The resulting rapid computation would
allow the designer/inventor to vary the task requirements and immediately
observe changes in the spectrum of design solutions, providing a powerful
interactive design tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact resulting from
this proposed activity include an expanded ability to invent products that
provide controlled spatial movement. Future computer-aided design systems will
provide the ability for designers to create mechanical movement as easily as
they currently generate spatial shapes. This requires the ability to apply
geometric constraint solvers to the six-dimensional configuration space of
spatial movement. This new capability depends on the efficient computation of
the configuration manifolds for serial chains. Leveraging the potential of this
research with the efforts of others through an "open source" software coalition
that is designed to integrate software solutions for various aspects of
mechanical design will also be coordinated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;