* 0456022
* Incentives for Data Producers to Create Archive-Ready Data Sets
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2008
* Myron Gutmann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 07/31/2008
* USD 499,872.00

This demonstration project will identify barriers and develop alternative
incentive mechanisms for data producers to deposit archive-ready data sets in an
archive. Archive-ready means data sets that meet an archive's deposit
requirements and submission guidelines. Archives rely heavily on data producers
to provide complete and accurate documentation when they deposit data and to
comply with other requirements, such as file structures and formats, transfer
media, and requirements for protection of privacy and confidentiality. The
entire enterprise of digital archiving assumes some degree of cooperation
between producers of digital information and archives. When data producers do
not comply with submission guidelines, archives incur additional costs in
preparing the data for preservation and dissemination, experience delays between
ingest and release, and assume risks if data that do not meet quality assurance
standards are released. The research literature and years of experience with
data deposits at the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research (ICPSR) indicate that, as a rule, current incentives are insufficient
to overcome the obstacles that data producers report. This multi-disciplinary
team of experts in digital archiving, social science research, and experimental
economics and ICPSR will investigate ways to increase cooperation between
producers and archives. With a government partner, the National Institute of
Justice, the team will use multiple methods (surveys and experiments) to
identify barriers to compliance, revise guidelines
and&lt;br/&gt;responsibilities, and develop and test alternative incentive
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will examine legal, social and economic impediments to archiving by
analyzing problems that producers encounter when preparing data for deposit and
by developing and field testing alternative incentive mechanisms. The project
will enhance understanding of curatorial processes and work flow, especially
when work is distributed between the data creator and the archive. It will
develop metrics for the contributions expected of data producers. Contributions
will also be made to our understanding of incentive mechanisms for public
goods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
research with social scientists will produce better models for sharing
responsibility for archiving between data producers and archives. The models and
incentive mechanisms will have broad applicability to other types of data
producers who are mandated to deposit data by funding agencies or as a condition
of publication. Ultimately, more cooperation between data producers and archives
will reduce the costs of archiving, accelerate the release of data, and improve
its quality. The research will also inform development of standards and
guidelines for producer-archive relationships.