* 0456447
* Many-stage Stochastic Programming
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Lisa Korf, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 76,945.00

&lt;br/&gt;0204206&lt;br/&gt;Korf&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
addresses modeling, duality, approximation, &lt;br/&gt;implementation and
application of stochastic programming problems with &lt;br/&gt;many time stages.
The typical so-called multi-stage stochastic program &lt;br/&gt;tends to be
modeled as an extension of a two-stage problem (often referred &lt;br/&gt;to as
a stochastic program with recourse). This misses some important
&lt;br/&gt;features of a problem with many time stages, including a description
of the &lt;br/&gt;dynamics inherent to the problem, the structure of
information, and the &lt;br/&gt;degree to which one may respond to that
information at a given time stage. &lt;br/&gt;A typical problem from
mathematical finance will be framed in a many-&lt;br/&gt;stage stochastic
programming setting, allowing for a description of the &lt;br/&gt;dynamics. The
classical pricing results of mathematical finance and &lt;br/&gt;extensions to
more complicated problems will be obtained using the new &lt;br/&gt;model. This
model will be generalized to be applicable to a much broader &lt;br/&gt;range of
many-stage stochastic optimization problems, highlighting &lt;br/&gt;duality
results and their significance. In conjunction with this will be an
&lt;br/&gt;investigation into problems that could be modeled in a continuous
time &lt;br/&gt;framework, and problems with infinitely many time stages. New
&lt;br/&gt;stochastic programming models, and approximation techniques using the
&lt;br/&gt;tools of variational analysis, will be developed for these respective
&lt;br/&gt;problems. Finally, an investigation into the structure of many-stage
&lt;br/&gt;problems that include a description of system dynamics will be
&lt;br/&gt;undertaken, leading ultimately to the development and implementation
of &lt;br/&gt;algorithms for solving them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decision making
under uncertainty and the theory and techniques of &lt;br/&gt;mathematical
programming merged in the 1950's to create the field now &lt;br/&gt;known as
stochastic programming. A stochastic program is a &lt;br/&gt;mathematical
program (e.g. a linear program) that includes in its &lt;br/&gt;formulation a
probability distribution to describe uncertain parameters. &lt;br/&gt;Research
consists largely of understanding problem structure, deriving &lt;br/&gt;duality
results and optimality conditions, developing approximation
&lt;br/&gt;techniques, and exploiting the structure and theory in the
development of &lt;br/&gt;solution schemes. The field's development began with a
two-stage &lt;br/&gt;recourse model, where the cost of a decision made now (e.g.
production) &lt;br/&gt;is affected by an uncertain outcome in the future (e.g.
demand), and the &lt;br/&gt;possibility of taking recourse action once the
future is revealed (e.g. &lt;br/&gt;overtime). A typical problem is to determine
the present decision that &lt;br/&gt;minimizes expected cost. While much
knowledge has been gained from &lt;br/&gt;the investigation of two-stage models,
a limited view of many-stage &lt;br/&gt;stochastic programming has resulted in
which multistage problems are &lt;br/&gt;considered as simple extensions of the
two-stage case. This fails to &lt;br/&gt;address the inherently dynamic nature
of problems with many time stages. &lt;br/&gt;Additionally, two-stage
applications tend to come largely from areas such &lt;br/&gt;as production and
manufacturing, whereas the bulk of problems with &lt;br/&gt;many time stages
arise from financial, economic, and environmental &lt;br/&gt;planning
applications and other problems where dynamics are driving a &lt;br/&gt;system.
Thus, much of the new many-stage theory should be geared &lt;br/&gt;toward these
sorts of applications. The proposed research will explore the
&lt;br/&gt;additional dynamic structures, theory (duality, approximation), and
&lt;br/&gt;questions regarding implementation, of stochastic optimization
problems &lt;br/&gt;involving many (possibly even infinitely many, or a
continuum of) stages. &lt;br/&gt;This will be motivated primarily by financial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;