* 0456900
* Joint US-Japan Workshop on Nanophotonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2005
* Axel Scherer, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 10/31/2005
* USD 42,948.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds for the US-Japan Workshop on
"Nanophotonics". This workshop is the fourth in a series of workshops that are
being held biannually between the United States and Japan under a mutual
agreement between the National Science Foundation and MEXT. &lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of this workshop is to bring a sharp focus on the scientific
and technological possibilities for Nanophotonics. The workshop addresses the
interdisciplinary needs of Nanophotonics and new optical integration
technologies through a dialog of the leading practitioners of related research.
In this workshop, the scientists from the US and Japan will explore areas of
significant emphasis of research in nanophotonics and will provide an
opportunity for discussion of the advances in science, engineering and
technology at the nanoscale and of the related disciplinary aspects related to
the fundamental aspects with practical applications. The program includes 11
speakers from United States and 13 speakers from the Japan.&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will be held in Yokohama. The presentations and discussions will be on
October 25-27, 2004 (see attached schedule). The proceedings of the workshop and
the list of recommendations will be available to all the participants of the
workshop, NSF, and MEXT. The workshop will start with a special lecture on the
subject of "Nanophotonics: Beyond the limit of optical
technology".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a very timely workshop and it will
bring experts in nanophotonics for discussion of their current research and
future requirement and will be a forum for discussion of mutual areas of
interest between the US and Japan with special focus on applications in optical
systems. This type of activity is an essential part of the process of bringing
the benefits of nanotechnology to society. &lt;br/&gt;