* 0456120
* A Green Fieldable Analyzer for Arsenic
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2005,12/31/2006
* Purnendu Dasgupta, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2006
* USD 353,000.00

Professor Purnendu Dasgupta of Texas Tech University is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry program to develop a new environmentally
friendly tool for the analysis of various arsenic species in groundwater samples
and drinking water sources. Most fieldable arsenic detectors involve the use of
the toxic chemicals lead and mercury. Further, most test kits are not suitable
for analyzing arsenic below 10 microgram/L (the current acceptable level set by
WHO), and the method developed in this work will improve this sensitivity. The
instrument is based on sequential injection (for speciation), zone fluidics (for
hydride generation), and gas phase chemiluminescence (for detection). The
integrated arsenic analyzer includes concentration and separation of arsenic
species with ion exchange cartridges, electrooxidation of As(III) to As(V),
electroreduction of As(V) to arsine with an electrolytic arsine generator,
membrane-based electrodialytic salt splitter, and enhanced ozone generation by
electrical discharge and oxygen feed. It only requires the use of NaCl and
electricity to enable analysis of arsenic at the sub-microgram/L levels. With a
preliminary setup, the PI achieved detection limits of around 0.1 ppb using only
a 2 mL sample. By adjusting acidity, he can distinguish between arsenic(III) and
arsenic(V), and he can detect organic arsenic species. The project includes
undergraduates who work on semester-long research
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Millions of wells around the world may contain
high levels of arsenic. However, many of these wells have not been tested.
Besides its acute toxicity, it is a known carcinogen, especially arsenic(III).
Hence, it is important to monitor the arsenic species, both in groundwater and
drinking water treatment facilities. The method being developed here would be
applicable to field work, even in rural areas of India and Bangladesh devastated
by arsenic poisoning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;