* 0456137
* A U.S. Deep Underground Science & Engineering Laboratory: Scientific Opportunities and Technical Requirements
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2005,08/31/2008
* Bernard Sadoulet, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan R. Kotcher
* 08/31/2008
* USD 480,000.00

If a U.S. Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory, DUSEL, is built,
it will allow scientists to answer fundamental physics questions as to the
nature of dark matter, the properties of the neutrinos, the evolution of stars,
and the stability of matter. It will provide a unique observatory to explore the
microbial processes and evolution under our planet's surface, as well as the
complex connection between tectonics, rock properties, and multifaceted reaction
and transport phenomena. It will enable dramatic opportunities for engineers to
study underground construction, resource extraction, and environmental
remediation. DUSEL will also provide unique opportunities for cross-disciplinary
education and outreach, and for involvement of minority-serving institutions and
local communities.

This proposal represents the community-wide response to NSF Solicitation
NSF-04-595, for proposals to support the meetings and study necessary to develop
the site-independent case for the research opportunities afforded by a DUSEL,
for establishment of the technical requirements for the various experiments, and
for grouping of the experiments into modules with common infrastructural
requirements. The proposal involves members of all eight of the possible sites
for a DUSEL that were identified at the time this proposal was written. The
deliverable of this proposal will be a 40-50 page document describing the
science and engineering research that a DUSEL would enable, so as to establish
the benchmarks against which the capabilities of subsequent site dependent
proposals for a DUSEL, in response to subsequent NSF Solicitations, can be
measured.

The six PIs of this proposal represent astrophysics, nuclear and particle
physics, geology-engineering, geomicrobiology and microbial biology. The bulk of
the work will be performed in fourteen working groups. Three planned workshops
will gather the community to synthesize the conclusions of individual working
groups. The proposal requests support for the various endeavors of the
scientists and engineers who will ultimately produce the 40-50 page document
that will be the end result of their efforts.