* 0456957
* Northeast Student Workshop On Nonlinear and Hybrid Control. The  workshop will be held at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute on April 1-2, 2005.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2005,08/31/2007
* Murat Arcak, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2007
* USD 10,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to support the inaugural
Northeast&lt;br/&gt;Student Workshop on Nonlinear and Hybrid Control, to be held
at the&lt;br/&gt;Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute from Friday, April 1,
through&lt;br/&gt;Saturday, April 2, 2005. The goal of the workshop is to
offer&lt;br/&gt;educational opportunities to graduate students and
junior&lt;br/&gt;researchers to learn about the latest developments in
control&lt;br/&gt;systems research, particularly in emerging application areas;
to&lt;br/&gt;present their research results; and to share and discuss ideas
with&lt;br/&gt;their peers, as well as with faculty members from
other&lt;br/&gt;universities. The proximity of the universities in the
Northeast&lt;br/&gt;provides an excellent opportunity to realize this goal with
minimal&lt;br/&gt;travel cost. Upon a successful initiation with the help of
NSF&lt;br/&gt;funds, these workshops will be continued biannually.
The&lt;br/&gt;intellectual merit of the proposed activity is that it will
provide&lt;br/&gt;a stimulus for sustained research in control systems theory,
as well&lt;br/&gt;as increased number of applications in other fields of science
and&lt;br/&gt;engineering. The broad impact resulting from the proposed
workshop&lt;br/&gt;will be the encouragement of a broader and more diverse group
of&lt;br/&gt;students (than those who are already able to attend
major&lt;br/&gt;conferences in the field) to pursue research careers.