* 0456534
* Plasma and HVOF Spray of Colloidal Solutions to Create Nano-Scale Features in Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Rodney Trice, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2009
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a novel injection technology that
will allow quick and inexpensive fabrication of coatings comprised of nanoscale
features. Virtually any material that can be dispersed in a solvent and that
melts can be manufactured using this process. The approach is to disperse
nanosized powders in a solvent to form a colloidal slurry, then spray the slurry
into a plasma or a high velocity oxygen fuel (HVOF) generated plume to evaporate
the solvent and melt the powder. The forward motion of the powders in the flame
causes them to strike the substrate and flatten, forming nanosized "lamellae,"
which quickly solidify. The processing variables that control lamellae
morphology and grain size, include slurry characteristics (powder size and
powder loading in the solvent), injection nozzle style, plume type, and
substrate temperature and type will be investigated. The resulting
microstructure will be studied using X-ray diffraction, transmission electron
microscopy, atomic force microscopy, and scanning electron microscopy. Modeling
of the impact and solidification behavior of these nanoscale droplets will be
performed to compliment the experimental work.

Thermal barrier coatings (TBCs), which protect the metallic structure in a gas
turbine engine from temperature extremes, play an important role in the
transportation (commercial aircraft) and energy (electricity generation) sectors
of the U.S. economy. The use of TBCs allows gas turbines to be operated at
higher, more fuel-efficient temperatures. By using the novel injection
technology to prepare TBCs with nanocrystalline features it will be demonstrated
that thermal conductivity can be significantly reduced as grain sizes approach
phonon wavelengths. This will further increase the effectiveness of TBCs to
protect the metallic structure of gas turbines. In conjunction with a special
undergraduate research program established at the university, this proposal will
provide engaging research opportunities for undergraduates.