* 0456694
* Distributed Model Predictive Control of Large-scale, Networked Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* James Rawlings, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2009
* USD 550,335.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: James Rawlings &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Wisconsin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0456694&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Distributed model predictive control of large-scale networked
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The control of large complex networked systems may
be accomplished by applying local modeling and control techniques to its
smaller, more manageable constituent subsystems. Because there is little
cooperation between the local controllers, they can interact in unexpected ways,
not considered in the design phase. As a result, the full system may display
fragility and even instability in the face of unmodeled disturbances. An
excellent illustration of this phenomenon was the failure of the North American
power system in August 2003.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to develop new
methods for the control and optimization of large, complex, networked systems.
They will design these methods to be more robust than existing methods in the
presence of large disturbances and component or subsystem failure, with
performance approaching that of a fully centralized methodology. At the same
time, these methods will be implementable in practical settings, by taking
advantage of the currently deployed subsystem models and controllers, and
avoiding the onerous modeling requirements and organizational/institutional
obstacles associated with a centralized control methodology. The key to the
approaches will be communication of information between subsystems, and
cooperation between their controllers. The forecasts produced by model
predictive control techniques provide rich information about future behavior of
each subsystem. In some situations, sharing of this information between
subsystems is itself sufficient to achieve almost all of the potential benefits
of centralized control. In more tightly coupled systems, more extensive
cooperation is required. One form of cooperation is to give the subsystem
controllers a common objective-a straightforward modification if the subsystems
already use model predictive control. If the subsystems currently use PID or
some other low-level control scheme, it is not difficult to first replace these
controllers with model predictive controllers before applying the techniques
developed in this research. Cooperation can also involve sharing of information
between subsystems, possibly more than once within a single sample period, with
local reoptimizations performed after each exchange of information. A crucial
component of the project will be the design of robust and rapidly converging
optimization schemes that perform most of their computations locally within each
subsystem and exchange limited information between
subsystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure industrial relevance and impact, the
PIs have established collaborations with six industrial partners to demonstrate
these new approaches on two economically significant application classes:
electric power networks and large-scale, integrated chemical plants exchanging
raw materials and products. They plan to collaborate with the industrial
partners to test and refine the proposed methods, to demonstrate the benefits
with actual industrial operating data, and to transfer the technology into
practice. Testing and implementation of the proposed methods will provide a
vital educational experience for the graduate students supported by the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact lies in the opportunity to
demonstrate methods that increase the reliability of critical infrastructures
that are composed of many highly interacting subsystems. Infrastructure of this
type is already becoming pervasive in highly technological societies, and the
need for improving the reliability of this infrastructure is increasingly
urgent.&lt;br/&gt;