* 0456911
* Dirhodium Catalyst Development and Appliations
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2005,10/31/2008
* Michael Doyle, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 10/31/2008
* USD 377,000.00

With this renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
continues its support of the work of Professor Michael Doyle, of the Chemistry
Department at the University of Maryland, College Park, MD. The research will
extend the PI's studies of the development and appliations of dirhodium
catalysts. Experiments directed toward gaining an understanding of the factors
that control the efficiency of these catalysts will be carried out. Since many
of these catalytic reactions involve a Lewis acid-base association, catalyst
efficiency as a function of acidity will be evaluated. The potential application
of dirhodium compounds as redox catalysts for the oxidation of hydrocarbons will
be explored. In addition, the unique ability of dirhodium catalysts to promote
multicomponent transformations will be examined in detail. The mechanistic
insights derived from an intrinsic understanding of the properties of dirhodium
catalysts are expected to guide the applications of these important
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to achieving important advances in
catalyst science, a major goal of this project is the education and training of
students. Particular attention will paid to the involvement of undergraduate
students in the research. Students engaged in this research are guided on their
carrier paths to be knowledgeable and efficient in their scientific undertakings
and proficient in their ability to write and communicate. &lt;br/&gt;