* 0456548
* Collaborative Research:   Fabrication and Self-Assembly of Smart Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2007
* Sergiy Minko, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 07/31/2007
* USD 72,000.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clarkson University Clemson
University&lt;br/&gt;0456548
0456550&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: FABRICATION AND
SELF-ASSEMBLY OF&lt;br/&gt;SMART NANOPARTICLES&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose
a new approach to the fabrication of smart colloidal systems based on a
combination of nanoparticles and spherical mixed polymer brushes. Mixed polymer
brushes refer to monolayers of two unlikely polymers grafted to the same solid
substrate. The mixed brushes grafted onto a plane of solid substrates were
successfully used by the PIs to design smart and responsive surfaces which
change the surface composition, interfacial energy, adhesion, adsorption,
wetting behavior, etc upon external signals (solvent, pH, temperature). The
mechanism of the switching/responsive behavior was shown to originate from the
microphase segregation of unlikely polymers where outside conditions may
strongly affect the phase segregation. In this proposal, we suggest the
translation of the developed approaches into a new challenging system -
spherical mixed brushes. Two unlikely polymers will be end-grafted to the same
spherical nanoparticle. The spherical geometry brings new aspects to the phase
segregation of the mixed brushes. Upon external stimuli, the phase separation in
the spherical mixed brushes results in several characteristic morphologies:
core-shell, inverse core-shell (polymers are segregated in the radial direction)
and Janus-like morphology (two unlikely polymers occupy different sides of the
particles). The mechanism is strongly affected by the ratio between the
nanoparticles' radius and brush thickness. This new aspect will allow us to add
a new parameter (particle radius) for the regulation of the response. This
research will focus on the systematic study of the phase segregation mechanism
in the spherical brushes in a controlled outside environment. The regulated
response of the brushes will be used to regulate self-assembly of the smart
particles in colloidal systems (colloidal solutions and suspensions). Formation
of supra micelles upon external signal is the second target of the project. Two
collaborating teams from Clarkson University and Clemson University will
concentrate their expertise on the synthesis and study of the hierarchical self-
assembly of spherical mixed brushes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The smart nanoparticles will allow for the
modification of bulk properties as well as the&lt;br/&gt;modification of surface
properties of materials. Development of this approach will
be&lt;br/&gt;important to transform recent advances in nanoscience to industrial
technologies with broad&lt;br/&gt;applications from nanocomposites to drug
delivery systems. Another priority of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;project is the
involvement of the brightest high school, undergraduate and graduate students in
the modern surface and nanotechnology research. The project will result in the
training of the students in the area of surface modification and
characterization of nanostructured systems. Students will also greatly benefit
from the collaboration between Clemson and Clarkson Universities. Moreover, they
will be actively involved in the international research collaboration that is
also planned in this project. Significant effort will be directed to
increase&lt;br/&gt;the numbers of students, especially minorities and women, who
pursue advanced degrees in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;