* 0456015
* Property Rights, Inheritance, and Female Education in Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Carolyn Lesorogol, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

This project studies institutional change in two contexts among Kenyan
pastoralists: the shift from communal to private property and the advent of
formal education of girls. The research analyzes the transition from communal to
private land ownership and shows the consequences of this shift for economic
well being and social relations; in addition the project illustrates the effects
of female education on social norms related to property rights and intra-
household bargaining. The study will employs a mix of qualitative and
quantitative methods including participant observation, semi-structured
interviews, life history interviews of women, and structured questionnaire
surveys. The intellectual merit of this project is that it provides an actual
case of institutional change which will provide a stronger basis for improving
theories of how such change occurs; in addition the project shows how
individuals and groups behave strategically over time to enhance their
bargaining positions in order to work for institutional arrangements that they
perceive to be in their interests; as well the work contributes to a more
nuanced understanding of the theory of institutional change. This study will
also provide longitudinal data regarding the economic outcomes of privatizing
communal land among African pastoralists. Scholars often assume that
privatization results in negative outcomes for pastoralists, but empirical data
necessary to assess this assumption-especially longitudinal data-are missing. In
addition, this detailed ethnographic investigation of formal education of female
pastoralists will enhance understanding of both the process and outcomes of
female education among a very marginal group, and will contribute to theories
regarding how educated women influence the course of institutional
change.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. This study will contribute to policy debates
over property rights and female education in Kenya and Africa, both of which are
currently hotly contested, particularly due to the ongoing Kenyan Constitutional
review in which fundamental laws regarding property and women's rights are being
decided. The new knowledge created through this study will be highly relevant to
scholars in the fields of women's and gender studies as well as development
practitioners concerned with land rights, pastoralism, and education design.
&lt;br/&gt;