* 0456990
* Topological Invariants and Singularities in Birational Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,09/30/2005
* Tommaso de Fernex, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 09/30/2005
* USD 86,035.00

The proposed research is in the general field of algebraic geometry, and
primarily focuses on the problem of extension of topological invariants from
manifolds to singular varieties and on problems in birational geometry of higher
dimensional varieties. The principal techniques involved in this research are
those coming from the theories of motivic integration and singularities of
pairs. First, de Fernex proposes to further develop the theory of motivic
integration, and to extend the results of a recent article on stringy Chern
classes of singular varieties that he coauthored with Lupercio, Nevins and
Uribe. Portion of this project stems from a nice interpretation of this results
in the context of Deligne-Mumford stacks. Another portion of this project
addresses the formulation of a theory of motivic integration involving derived
categories and perverse sheaves; one of the aims in mind is the unification of
the theories of stringy Chern classes and elliptic genera of singular varieties.
A second collection of projects addresses the study of the birational geometry
of Fano varieties and Mori fiber spaces, and particular attention is devoted to
questions regarding nonrationality and birational rigidity of these varieties.
Two more projects are proposed by de Fernex. One of these deals with a
characterization of ampleness of line bundles via asymptotic cohomological
vanishings, and is joint work with K\"uronya and Lazarsfeld. The other project
addresses the question of extendibility, to a given ambient variety, of rational
fibrations defined on subvarieties with ample normal bundle; this is in
collaboration with Beltrametti and Lanteri.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first main
project proposed here is based on a fundamental theorem in algebraic geometry,
Hironaka's ``resolution of singularities'', which in its simplest form states
that every&lt;br/&gt;singular complex algebraic variety can be modified into a
manifold without altering the locus where it is already nonsingular. The fact
that associated to any singular variety there exists a&lt;br/&gt;nonsingular one
which looks ``almost the same'' suggests the idea that one should be able to
extend topological invariants from manifolds to singular varieties by just
looking at the varieties after resolving their singularities. However the
resolution of singularities is typically not unique, so one needs to proceed
cautiously; it is at this point that motivic integration comes into play:
essentially, it is the technical tool used here to ensure that things, if
defined suitably, do not depend on the&lt;br/&gt;chosen resolution. Hironaka's
theorem is also crucial in the study of the birational properties of algebraic
varieties and, in particular, it is used in the part of the proposed research
dealing with questions concerning their nonrationality and birational rigidity.
Modern techniques, based on a delicate analysis of singularities through their
resolutions and accurate quantitative estimates of their nastiness, are here
employed to address these questions, some of which are in fact quite classical
and still open.&lt;br/&gt;