* 0456435
* Workshop Proposal: A Science Vision for the Toolik Field Station, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2005,03/31/2007
* Brian Barnes, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Simon Stephenson
* 03/31/2007
* USD 98,370.00

Toolik Field Station (TFS) is one of the major research platforms for U.S.
arctic research, and has been in increasing demand in recent years. Planning for
long-term development at TFS has been guided by a long-range plan produced by
the user community in 1995. The need for a current vision for the direction of
research requirements for infrastructure, services, and function was a prime
recommendation of the December 2003 TFS Steering Committee meeting. Over the
last few years, TFS management has heard requests from science users for TFS to
move away from the model where acquisition, repair, and maintenance of
scientific equipment and the provision of core technical services are done by
individual scientific projects to a new model wherein more core services are
provided and supported centrally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To best respond to the
issues of whether and how to develop more multi-use core facilities and
scientific services, and to establish priorities for implementing them requires
input from the scientific user community. Input is also needed to address the
need for strategies for protecting the long-term research investment, and for a
plan to further develop the science education component of TFS. We propose to
convene a focused and relatively small (20-25 invited guests) workshop of arctic
researchers working at TFS and other scientists with experience in the
development of field research facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
workshop include the following. 1) Address whether and to what extent
&lt;br/&gt;TFS should develop multi-use core lab facilities and scientific
services, and if so, prioritize what &lt;br/&gt;those facilities should be. 2)
Address what changes in data management and connectivity would &lt;br/&gt;be
necessary to enable the science at TFS to achieve a new level of sophistication.
3) Set &lt;br/&gt;priorities for the preservation of long-term control areas
around the station. 4) Discuss possible &lt;br/&gt;expansion of the education
program at TFS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary product of this workshop will
be a white paper summarizing the recommendations of the workshop, and a
prioritized plan for implementing multi-use core facilities at TFS. We envision
that this document may be used for planning future upgrades and scientific
services at TFS, by station management and funding
agencies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;