* 0456724
* Heavy Flavor Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Will Johns, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 03/31/2006
* USD 180,000.00

The study of heavy quark flavors has yielded significant insight into the
fundamental interactions and symmetries of matter. It provides a unique and
powerful tool to search for new physics not described by the Standard Model of
particles and interactions. Eventually, it may lead to answers, or at least
provide important hints, to some of the most fundamental questions in science
such as the source of the matter anti-matter asymmetry in the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research group has found that the superb
vertex resolution and particle identification of FOCUS are crucial for heavy
quark studies. The BTeV experiment at Fermilab will have these capabilities, and
will allow them to continue their physics objectives in the forward region at
the Tevatron where B mesons and baryons are copiously
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the period covered by this proposal, the
group will finish its analyses of charm data from the Fermilab photoproduction
experiment FOCUS. In the period covered by this proposal, the group will pursue
its ongoing interests in using charm decays to search for new physics, using
semileptonic charm decay as a window into the mysteries of the strong force,
mapping out excited charm meson spectroscopy, and understanding charm
photoproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vanderbilt is playing a leading role on
BTeV, the second generation B-factory at Fermilab. BTeV is designed to make
precision measurements of charm and beauty decays in order to challenge the
Standard Model explanation of CP violation, mixing, and rare decays. They are
also leading the development of a Grid computing infrastructure and off-line
computing resources for BTeV, and heading up a research group that is developing
a fault adaptive framework for the BTeV trigger and data acquisition
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Vanderbilt's collaborative efforts
with computer scientists are breaking new ground in the development of fault
adaptive frameworks for real-time embedded systems such as the BTeV trigger,
which is at a unique scale and complexity. The results of this work will be
useful in any area that requires large scale, reliable, real-time systems.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In the past, Vanderbilt has benefited greatly from the
participation of undergraduates in our program. During the period covered by the
past grant, nine undergraduates made significant contributions to our program.
This level of activity will continue during the period covered by this grant.
Finally, the group is contributing significantly to the activities of its local
QuarkNet center, which involves several high school teachers in high energy
physics research and assists them with the development of curriculum and
experiments for their classes.&lt;br/&gt;