* 0456449
* Asymmetric Hydrogenations of Unfunctionalized Alkenes Mediated by Ir-N-Heterocyclic Carbene Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Kevin Burgess, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2009
* USD 440,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research will be to use a semi-rational approach to
catalyst design. Heterocyclic derivatives of amino acids would be used to
prepare large libraries of ligands by combining smaller libraries of building
blocks. Second, hydrogenations of several key alkenes would be examined
including novel substrates (cyclopropenes, cyclobutenes, a tetrasubstituted
alkene) will be examined to illustrate the generality of the method and to
provide products that are not easy to prepare via other methods. Also, a chiron
for a common steroidal side-chain containing a useful 1,1-disubstituted alkene
will be prepared, but the emphasis of the work would be toward developing
reactions that lead to 1,3-di- and 1,3,5-trimethylated chirons. These are
important structures in natural product syntheses, and the proposed
hydrogenation route is potentially superior to the asymmetric alkylation
strategies that are currently in use. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With this award,
the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of
Dr. Kevin Burgess in the Department of Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University.
Professor Burgess will focus his work on the development of methodology for the
asymmetric hydrogenation of unfunctionalized alkenes. Economical, diversity-
oriented ligand syntheses will be developed so that libraries of complexes
become readily accessible for screening with different substrates. Also, a great
range of substrates will be studied, focused on those that lead to genuinely
useful chirons. The work has potential for broader impact in the pharmaceutical
industry and the project serves as an excellent venue for the training of
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctorals. &lt;br/&gt;