* 0456280
* Exploring Unusual Organic Molecules and Unconventional Reactivity at Low Temperatures
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Robert Sheridan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2008
* USD 395,000.00

With this renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
continues its support of the work of Professor Robert Sheridan of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Nevada, Reno, NV. The research will extend the
PI's studies of highly reactive organic molecules trapped on very low
temperature inert gas matrices. Experiments designed to generate and investigate
molecules that probe the limits of organic stability and reactivity will be
carried out. The structure of these matrix-isolated species will be probed with
IR and UV/visible spectroscopy. These investigations will be complemented by
solution product studies, as well as collaborative time-resolved kinetic
investigations. Modern computational chemistry will play a major role, both in
aiding the spectroscopic characterization of these systems, and in probing their
electronic and structural complexities. Quantum mechanical tunneling in the
reactions of these species will be investigated with modern theoretical methods
in collaborative efforts. These studies will test the predictive powers of
modern theoretical methods in reactions dominated by tunneling from lowest
quantum levels.

These investigations of high-energy organic reactive intermediates are expected
provide important fundamental information that will impact upon interstellar
chemistry, photoaffinity labeling of biological systems, combustion, soot
formation, fullerene production, new anticancer/antibiotic agents,
photolithography, magnetic materials, and organic synthesis. The results of this
work will provide an important perspective on the potential for quantum
mechanical tunneling, a phenomenon that is important in a very wide variety of
systems, ranging from enzyme kinetics to interstellar reactions. The
investigations will offer especially broad training for students in organic
synthesis, sophisticated spectroscopy, physical organic techniques, and modern
theoretical methodology.