* 0456303
* U.S.-Turkey Workshop:  ICFA- Second School/Workshop at the Center for Instrumentation in Istanbul June-July 2005
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2006
* Marleigh Sheaff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2006
* USD 27,480.00

0456303

Sheaff Description: This project supports the Second School/Workshop on
Instrumentation in Elementary Particle Physics to be held at the Center for
Instrumentation at the Istanbul Technical University (ITU) in Istanbul, Turkey.
The workshop will take place from June 18-July 1, 2005. The U.S. organizers are
Dr. Marleigh Sheaff, Senior Scientist Emerita, University of Wisconsin, Madison
and member of the International Committee on Future Accelerators (ICFA) and Dr.
Muzaffer Atac of Fermilab and UCLA. The Turkish counterpart is Dr. Mahmut
Hortacsu of Istanbul Technical University, Director of the Center. Dr. Atac is
the Scientific and Technical Advisor for the Center.

Technical Merit: The Center for Instrumentation is a permanent facility where
lecture courses and lab exercises are offered on a regular basis to graduate
students mainly from Turkey but also from other nearby countries including those
in the Africa, Near East and South Asia (ANESA) region. Students from the U.S.
A. and some from the ANESA countries will be supported to participate in the
workshop. The goals are to encourage increased participation by young physicists
from developing countries in elementary particle physics (EPP) experiments, to
foster future initiatives in detector development at their home institutions and
to encourage future collaborations in experimental EPP involving the physicists
from these countries. Support for the center is provided by the ITU and by
TUBITAK, the Turkish science agency. For this Workshop, more of the laboratories
will be organized locally, as The Turkish organizers are taking on more of the
responsibility for running the schools/workshops at the Center. Several other
Turkish Universities are expected to participate in the center. This
school/workshop will have a very similar program to the ICFA Schools/Workshops
held every two years in a different location.

Broader Impacts: This project helps US graduate students to participate in
training with graduate students from several foreign countries, in important
aspects of physics that require international collaboration. The host country is
carrying a significant part of the cost of the workshop. Turkey is a suitable
host for this workshop because of its location between Europe and Asia, and the
proximity to Africa, from which it is especially desirable to attract students.
The center will provide physicists working throughout the region on physics
instrumentation, many of them in isolation, with a place they can turn to on an
ongoing basis for further training and online help with questions. The first
workshop was well received by the students, and has resulted in Turkish
physicists taking on more and more of the responsibility of running the schools
at the Center. There are sociological benefits for US students traveling to and
working with students from developing countries during this training workshop.
This activity benefits not only the student participants but also the broader
physics community. There are always a number of local physicists in addition to
the students registered for the workshop in attendance at all the lectures and
talks. Five students from the ANESA region are currently furthering their
physics education in the U. S. as the result of contacts made with the U. S.
PI's at the First School at the Istanbul Center.