* 0456270
* CAREER:  Three-Dimensional Measurements of Atmospheric Water Vapor Using Miniaturized Microwave Radiometers
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Steven Reising, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 03/31/2009
* USD 333,092.00

The intellectual merit of this CAREER program is based on the design and
realization of innovative sensors to improve measurement of the three-
dimensional distribution of water vapor in the atmosphere. Knowledge of the
temporal and spatial distribution of water vapor is fundamental for short-range
prediction of precipitation and severe weather. The paucity of current
observations of wind, temperature and humidity in pre-storm environments limits
the improvement of forecast skill for these events.

This project will address these needs through the fabrication, validation and
application of a four-sensor demonstration network of miniaturized water vapor
profiling radiometers. This novel sensor design is enabled by microwave
monolithic integrated circuit (MMIC) technology made widely available by the
wireless communications industry. Compared to conventional waveguide-based
designs, MMIC technology allows these sensors to be smaller, lighter and more
robust. New sensor technologies will enable larger networks of water vapor
radiometers to perform higher-resolution observations. The demonstration network
will be used to validate remote water vapor measurements using both radiometers
and SuomiNet GPS receivers, through comparison with in-situ observations,
including radiosondes launched by the National Weather Service. The automated
pointing of the network's sensors will enable direct comparison of GPS slant
water vapor with radiometric profiles along the same slant paths.

The educational portion of this project will introduce applications in
atmospheric science to significant numbers of undergraduate electrical
engineering students. Novel methods of instruction will be introduced to
encourage students to find the relationships between curriculum content and
"real-world" applications and to participate in peer-to-peer learning. Promising
undergraduate students will be involved in design and fabrication of remote
sensors in the laboratory.

The broader impacts of the program include the availability of miniaturized
atmospheric sensors to be deployed in larger networks, enhancing observation of
the atmospheric state in order to improve weather prediction and climate
monitoring, clearly providing benefits to society. The research program will
foster collaborations among universities, industry and government. The research
goals of this program lead naturally to collaboration with small U.S. businesses
that produce radiometers for research. Other broader impacts include the PI's
continuing mentoring of students from underrepresented groups as part of an NSF-
sponsored summer program.