* 0456064
* Collaborative Research: Impact of Legitimacy by Endorsement on Coalition Formation in Power Structures
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2005,02/29/2008
* David Willer, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/29/2008
* USD 125,784.00

SES-0456064&lt;br/&gt;David Willer&lt;br/&gt;University of South
Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0455926&lt;br/&gt;Henry
Walker&lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
integrates two major sociological theoretical research perspectives-Network
Exchange Theory and Legitimacy Theory-to study the effects of legitimacy by
endorsement on coalition formation in strong power structures. From Network
Exchange Theory (NET), experiments have been completed to show that high-power
central actors reap maximal benefits at exchange and low-power peripherals get
minimal rewards. At issue for this research is whether low power actors will act
to form coalitions and oppose the power exercised over them and, if so, with
what effectiveness. Legitimacy Theory (LT) argues that group members are more
likely to take actions that are collectively legitimized. When applied to
exchange network processes, LT implies that low power actors are more likely to
initiate coalition activity, to actually form coalitions, and to act effectively
in them when coalition formation has been legitimized. The current experiments
will study the effects of legitimacy by endorsement. In LT, endorsement refers
to the approval or support that low power actors give to various elements of
social situations including actors, positions or roles, behaviors and the rules
that link actors, roles and behaviors. In this experimental study, subjects will
complete a series of negotiations and exchanges in two-part. In Part 1, subjects
negotiate exchanges independently. No one is given the opportunity to form a
coalition. Joint application of NET and LT implies that subjects are most likely
to initiate coalition formation and to actually form coalitions in the High
Endorsement treatment and least likely to do so in the Low Endorsement condition
with the control condition falling between. Coalitions are expected to be more
stable (i.e., members are less likely to defect) and more effective in the High
Endorsement condition and least stable and least effective in the Low
Endorsement condition. A coalition's effectiveness is measured by the extent of
its success in countervailing power. The two-structure design permits
observation of size effects on coalition formation, stability and effectiveness,
and permits tests of more than 20 additional theoretical
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT&lt;br/&gt;The theory of
collective action offers a quite gloomy picture for the prospects of acting
collectively. Nevertheless, collective actions do succeed and, when they do,
often that theory is silent. Do they succeed at times because of the effects of
legitimacy? This research will answer that question. The research will enhance
sociology's infrastructure by adding its coalition designs to the Web-Lab housed
at the University of South Carolina (weblab.moore.sc.edu). Like all Web-Lab
designs, researchers at any location in the U.S. or elsewhere will be able to
access these. The USC laboratory contributes to research-based learning,
offering undergraduate and graduate classes using the Web-Lab. Designs used in
this research will importantly enhance that course work. The USC laboratory also
enhances diversity among student researchers. Currently, the majority of student
researchers are women and, in a typical year, 20% of student researchers are
African-American.&lt;br/&gt;