* 0456114
* IRES:  Research Experiences:  Brown University Mathematics and Applied Mathematics Students in Paris VI
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Stephen Lichtenbaum, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2009
* USD 105,000.00

This three-year award will provide a group of six U.S. graduate students and a
faculty advisor from Brown University with support for annual summer research
visits to the University of Paris VI (Universite Pierre et Marie Curie) and
University of Paris VII. The purpose is to introduce students to mathematical
research in analysis, partial differential equations, number theory and
scientific computing. The summer program is led by David Gottlieb of Brown
University and Yvon Maday of the University of Paris VI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
international research and education effort is to engage students in mathematics
research within the context of active research collaborations between Brown
University and French mathematicians. U.S. and French faculty members will
develop programs in scientific computing (high order accuracy methods for time
dependent problems), functional analysis, and number theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will provide research training to graduate students and advance their careers
through new connections to leading French mathematicians. Designed for second
year Ph.D. students, the summer program incorporates opportunities to engage
students in a wide variety of mathematics research. After this initial
experience in France, U.S. students become eligible to participate in a joint
Ph.D. program between Brown University and the University of Paris VI. This
component is a significant and unique aspect to summer research abroad. Students
continue their connections with France until completion of their Ph.D. with the
possibility of maintaining their collaboration with French colleagues through
their career.