* 0456074
* RUI: T2 Measurements in GaAs, AlGaAs, and InGaAs Layers and Quantum Wells Via Optically Detected Electron Spin Echo
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Vijendra Agarwal, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2009
* USD 99,074.00

Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study electron spin coherence
(T2) times in n-GaAs and related materials. Research on electron spin lifetimes
is of timely interest due to quantum computing proposals in which the spin of
electrons in semiconductors is used as a quantum bit. In order for spin-based
quantum computer schemes to work, they must be implemented in materials which
have relatively long spin coherence lifetimes. This project will measure T2
times via optically detected spin echoes. The initial experiments will involve
measuring time resolved photoluminescence polarization in a novel way where pump
and probe optical pulses are applied by modulating a diode laser with an
electron pulse sequence generator. That provides a way to measure the spin-flip
time, T1-an upper bound for T2. The second set of experiments will be to perform
magnetic resonance on the samples, by first optically polarizing the electron
spins, and then optically detecting the change in polarization while a magnetic
field is swept through resonance (as microwaves are applied at a constant
frequency). The third set of experiments will be to combine the first two
experiments in this fashion: (1) time-resolved pump and probe optical pulses are
applied as in the first experiment, and (2) the microwave frequencies and
magnetic field are held fixed at the resonant position and the microwaves are
modulated by the electronic pulse generator to get a spin echo sequence of
coherent p/4 and p/2 pulses, from which T2 can be deduced by making an optical
measurement of the final spin state as a function of microwave pulse delays.
This work will involve undergraduate students and train them in a
technologically relevant field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Spin-based quantum computing" is a proposed
method of doing numerical computations via the quantum-mechanical spin of
particles, such as electrons in semiconductors. Spin is an intrinsic property of
electrons (and other fundamental particles) like charge or mass, and behaves in
many ways similar to the angular momentum of a spinning object. The spin of an
electron has a direction associated with it, and may interact with its
environment by changing its direction. Environmental factors which may affect
spins include magnetic fields, the spin of other particles, and collective
vibrations of atoms in a solid material. In order to be useful for quantum
computing, the spins inside a material must be controllable-that is to say, the
spins must not change direction accidentally, or at least the time scale of such
accidental changes must be much larger than the time scale of the computing
operations. The "spin dephasing" or "spin coherence time" (T2) is an important
parameter to describe the rate at which a collection of spins stay pointed in
the same direction, and is an important parameter for quantum computation-T2
times at least as long as microseconds are likely necessary to make possible
spin-based quantum computing in the important semiconductor gallium arsenide
(GaAs). This project proposes to measure T2 spin coherence times in GaAs and
related materials through an optically detected spin echo experimental
technique. The proposed research is accessible to undergraduate students and the
principal investigator will train them in a technologically relevant
field.&lt;br/&gt;