* 0456419
* U.S. - Hungarian Mathematics Workshop on Large-Scale Random Graph Methods for Modeling Mesoscopic Behavior in Biological and Physical Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2007
* Bela Bollobas, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 40,000.00

This workshop will bring together a diverse group of researchers from the United
States and Hungary with expertise in probabilistic combinatorics who will
interact with students and scientists from other disciplines to identify
pressing problems of large-scale random graphs and structures. The organizers
are Robert Kozma and Bela Bollobas of the University of Memphis with Hungarian
partners Tamas Vicsek of Eotovs Lorand University and Peter Erdi and Gabor
Tusnady, from Institutes of the Hungarian Academy of Science. Their goal is to
establish a link between two major areas of large-scale graph models. One is
fundamental graph theory inspired by neurobiology called neuropercolation. The
other is based on statistical physics and involves empirical studies of large-
scale real-world networks such as small worlds and scale-free networks. The
collaboration benefits from the expertise of the U.S. group in random graphs,
percolation theory, and neurocomputing, and is complemented by Hungarian
strengths in biophysics and statistical physics of large-scale graphs. Workshop
results are expected to define new random graphs to model complex real-world
networks such as brains, biological and physical memories, computer systems, and
communications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary workshop fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in
the United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Broader
impacts include early career introduction of U.S. graduate students to leading
theorists and mathematicians in the international research community.