* 0456227
* Collaborative Research:   FRG:   Hyperbolic Geometry and Jones Polynomials
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Walter Neumann, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 01/31/2010
* USD 313,972.00

The works of Thurston and Jones revolutionized low
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology. Thurston established the ubiquity of hyperbolic
structure in&lt;br/&gt;low dimensions. Jones' work, via such physical notions as
quantum&lt;br/&gt;groups and path integrals, led to vast families of
topological&lt;br/&gt;invariants associated with diagrammatic descriptions of
topological&lt;br/&gt;objects. The investigators have striking experimental
evidence for a&lt;br/&gt;direct link between these disparate approaches.
Establishing such a&lt;br/&gt;link is of fundamental importance to low
dimensional topology. This&lt;br/&gt;proposal aims to establish this link, with
particular focus on the&lt;br/&gt;generalized volume conjecture, which relates
the most important&lt;br/&gt;geometric and quantum invariants: the hyperbolic
volume and&lt;br/&gt;Chern-Simons invariant, and the colored Jones polynomials
of a&lt;br/&gt;knot. The theory of L2-invariants provides a combinatorial
framework&lt;br/&gt;to study hyperbolic volume. Deforming this construction
along the&lt;br/&gt;curve of representations given by the A-polynomial involves
the&lt;br/&gt;twisted Alexander polynomial and the colored Jones polynomials.
Tree&lt;br/&gt;entropy of graphs provides the bridge between L2-torsion and
colored&lt;br/&gt;Jones polynomials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The volume conjecture
relates classical geometric invariants of&lt;br/&gt;three-dimensional spaces
with topological invariants motivated by&lt;br/&gt;ideas from quantum physics.
This conjecture originated in the theory&lt;br/&gt;of quantum gravity, which
cannot yet be verified experimentally. The&lt;br/&gt;mathematically rigorous
verification sought by this project of this&lt;br/&gt;and related conjectures
will support the internal consistency of&lt;br/&gt;quantum gravity. Unifying
quantum and geometric invariants is also of&lt;br/&gt;intrinsic mathematical
importance, which will yield important new&lt;br/&gt;insights in other fields.
Computer programs to study geometric&lt;br/&gt;invariants and tabulation of
knots and their invariants are&lt;br/&gt;essential tools for this research.
Undergraduate and graduate students&lt;br/&gt;involved in this project will be
exposed to sophisticated mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and computer tools.&lt;br/&gt;