* 0456135
* IRES:  Real Analysis Mathematics Opportunities for U.S. Undergraduates in Poland and the Czech Republic
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Paul Humke, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 03/31/2009
* USD 102,950.00

This International Research Experience for Students (IRES) activity will link
researchers and mentors at Saint Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota, with
counterparts at the Silesian University in the Czech Republic and the University
of Lodz in Poland. Collaboratively they will carry out a program that provides
international research experiences for U.S. undergraduate students in real
analysis. On the U.S. side, co-principal investigators Paul Humke and Bruce
Hanson from Saint Olaf will work with Jaroslav Smital at Silesian University,
CR, and Wladyslaw Wilczynski in Poland to manage a ten week, team-based approach
to work in real analysis as a spring board for doctoral research in a range of
areas, including set theory and logic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At each host
institution, the student scholars will be assigned a specific mentor who will
help select an appropriate research project and oversee their work. The shared
goal is to introduce the participating undergraduates to a highly integrated
collaborative research group through mentoring, seminars, colloquia, and
frequent informal discussions of current issues in mathematics. The U.S.
students will be prepared by the faculty at St. Olaf for their international
experience and when in Europe will continue by meeting frequently with mentors
to follow a course of research and study. The real value of the IRES scholarship
will be the students' apprenticeship in the collective research life of these
international institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project in real
analysis mathematics fulfills the program objective of developing global
scientists and engineers by enabling experts in the United States and Central
Europe to combine complementary talents and share research and education
resources in an area of strong mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts
include the introduction of U.S. undergraduate students to the global
mathematics research community through a program of study at Polish and Czech
institutions and direct involvement in their mentors' current research.