* 0456526
* Low-Dimensional Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Michal Misiurewicz, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 108,483.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will perform research in the theory
of&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems, mainly low-dimensional (both smooth
and&lt;br/&gt;continuous). He will apply analytical, topological and
combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;tools in order to investigate real and complex systems.
A substantial&lt;br/&gt;part of the project is aimed at providing bridges
between real and&lt;br/&gt;complex, one- and two-dimensional dynamics.
Investigation of a class&lt;br/&gt;of branched coverings of the plane will be
continued. Semigroups of&lt;br/&gt;affine maps will be investigated from the
point of view of ergodic&lt;br/&gt;theory. For other systems attractors,
periodic orbits, rotation sets&lt;br/&gt;and topological entropy will be in the
center of attention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For almost every phenomenon from
Physics, Chemistry, Biology,&lt;br/&gt;Medicine, Economy and other sciences one
can make a mathematical model&lt;br/&gt;that can be regarded as a dynamical
system. Sometimes the study of&lt;br/&gt;this system is extremely difficult, but
quite often it can be reduced&lt;br/&gt;to the study of a much simpler, low
dimensional one. This project is&lt;br/&gt;devoted mainly to the investigation
of the properties of these types&lt;br/&gt;of systems from the mathematical
point of view. The results that can&lt;br/&gt;be obtained are usually much
stronger than in the general case and&lt;br/&gt;often lead to much deeper
understanding of the original systems.