* 0456027
* Securely Managing the Lifetime of Versions in Digital Archives
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Aviel Rubin, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 12/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop
sophisticated techniques for managing the lifetime of data in secure versioning
systems, a practical application of the AON transform that leverages its
semantics, rather than just its security properties. The problem of revocation
will also be addressed in order to refine the security and granularity of key
regression techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent legislation has created new
requirements for retaining and securing electronic information. More than 4,000
state, local, and federal acts govern archives. The specifics of each act vary
by domain, but, when taken as a whole, they can be distilled down to a set of
technical requirements. An archive must provide privacy, confidentiality, and
non-repudiation for information. Archives must use strong encryption with
authentication for data on disk, as well as a means for secure transmission.
Legislation mandates an auditable trail of changes made to electronic records
that can be accessed on-line, which requires versioning data over time and
providing access to past versions. Governmental and corporate organizations must
ensure that compliance does not degrade security, privacy, or the enforcement of
retention policies. The combination of regulatory and organizational
requirements bring up two technical problems for secure versioning systems.
First, there is no efficient way to securely delete information, i.e. so that no
computationally practical way to recover deleted data exists. Second, systems
must provide an efficient means to change the accessibility of information
throughout time. This includes downgrading information, e.g. declassifying
information as part of the Freedom of Information Act, or, revoking privileges,
e.g. disallowing future access to information after an employee leaves the
company or transferring the rights to medical records from one health care
provider to another. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Without technical solutions to these
problems, organizations and individuals will be subject to
information&lt;br/&gt;leakage and will fail to comply with regulations. Data
that are not securely deleted are recoverable and subject to subpoena or
cryptographic attacks. After a legislated retention period, information often
represents a legal and competitive liability. Also, some regulations require
that personal medical and financial records be deleted based on time or
circumstance. Again, this deletion must be permanent, and thus, secure. Existing
solutions for secure deletion and for scoping access to information over the
lifetime of data are inadequate. They either fail to meet requirements or they
are intolerably inefficient. In this project, mew technologies will be created
that efficiently implement secure deletion and revocation in versioning systems.
A novel application of All-or-Nothing (AON) encryption will be applied that both
provides authenticated, strong encryption of data on disk and pioneers efficient
secure deletion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will lead to curriculum development at Johns Hopkins, including a short course
on the Policy and Technology in Data Storage. The PIs will offer three tutorials
based on the short course; one geared toward governmental agencies, one toward
health care providers, and one toward corporations. Tutorials will be organized
and promoted through StorageNetworking.org, an initiative for the education of
storage professionals and will be freely available to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research will address problems
introduced by recent legislation, which effect financial and medical
organizations and all levels of government. Because the solutions are general to
all storage systems that share content among versions, they apply to file
systems, distributed archives, and databases. Open-source software produced by
the project will permit anyone to construct a compliant&lt;br/&gt;storage
system, with security and deletion guarantees, at little expense.