* 0456858
* Tomography and Integral Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Eric Todd Quinto, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2010
* USD 93,000.00

ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Quinto will pursue problems in
tomography&lt;br/&gt;and the mathematical analysis of Radon transforms. He will
develop&lt;br/&gt;and refine tomographic singularity detection algorithms and
apply them&lt;br/&gt;to electron microscopy. Professor Quinto has successfully
tested his&lt;br/&gt;limited data tomography algorithm on electron microscope
data, and he&lt;br/&gt;will use these results as a basis for further refinement
with the goal&lt;br/&gt;of incorporating scattering and other effects. He will
continue&lt;br/&gt;research on the approximate inverse in three-dimensional
SONAR.&lt;br/&gt;Professor Quinto plans to prove uniqueness theorems for a model
of&lt;br/&gt;synthetic aperture RADAR, research which is based on his
pure&lt;br/&gt;mathematical work. Within pure mathematics, the
principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator plans to prove uniqueness and support theorems
for&lt;br/&gt;spherical Radon transforms. He and Professor Agranovsky will
use&lt;br/&gt;these results to characterize stationary sets of solutions of the
wave&lt;br/&gt;equation. Stationary sets, where the solution is zero for all
time,&lt;br/&gt;are very important and difficult to characterize. He plans to
prove&lt;br/&gt;uniqueness theorems for Radon transforms on spheres on real-
analytic&lt;br/&gt;manifolds and use these results to begin to characterize
stationary&lt;br/&gt;sets on rank-one symmetric spaces. He is proving Morera
theorems for&lt;br/&gt;the distinguished boundary of polydisks, and he plans to
generalize&lt;br/&gt;them to complex manifolds. He hopes to prove inverse
continuity for&lt;br/&gt;an important class of local limited data problems or
clarify when they&lt;br/&gt;do not hold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
encompasses both applied and pure&lt;br/&gt;mathematics: tomography and integral
geometry. The pure research will&lt;br/&gt;be used to develop, understand, and
justify the applied algorithms,&lt;br/&gt;and the applied problems will motivate
much of the pure research. A&lt;br/&gt;computed tomography algorithm will be
developed for electron&lt;br/&gt;microscopy and tested jointly with colleagues
at the Karolinska&lt;br/&gt;Institute in Sweden. Our goal is to produce accurate
pictures of&lt;br/&gt;viruses and small molecules using an electron microscope.
Jointly&lt;br/&gt;with a colleague and an undergraduate student, he will develop
an&lt;br/&gt;algorithm for emission tomography, a type of tomography that
locates&lt;br/&gt;metabolic processes. He will develop pure mathematics that
will show&lt;br/&gt;how well the algorithms work and where their limitations
might occur.&lt;br/&gt;These pure mathematical underpinnings are required to
ensure that his&lt;br/&gt;(or any other) algorithms are as effective as they can
be. SONAR data&lt;br/&gt;can be modeled as averages over spheres (the spherical
wave fronts of&lt;br/&gt;the sound wave), and Professor Quinto will jointly
develop new&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for SONAR. This pure mathematics is intriguing
in its own&lt;br/&gt;right. Professor Quinto will prove theorems about spherical
averages&lt;br/&gt;which will be used to understand the wave equation (the
equation that&lt;br/&gt;describes how sound and light behave). The wave equation
describes&lt;br/&gt;the motion of a drum head, and he will specify which points
on the&lt;br/&gt;drum do not move at all. Finally, he will prove theorems he
will&lt;br/&gt;apply to complex and harmonic analysis, fields in pure
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;