* 0456119
* IRES:  An American-Austrian Student Exchange for Chemistry Undergraduate Students
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2008
* Jerry Goodisman, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2008
* USD 105,000.00

The International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) program provides an
opportunity for US undergraduate students to have a foreign science and
engineering research experience with the potential to build future international
collaboration. With this award PI Karin Ruhlandt-Senge, and Co-PIs from Syracuse
University, will collaborate with Frank Uhlig in the Institut fuer Anorganische
Chemie at the Technische Universitaet Graz (TUG), in Graz Austria to create a
reciprocal ten-week research exchange program involving American and Austrian
undergraduate students in the field of chemistry. This program seeks to address
the need for American science undergraduate students to have an international
experience without detriment to their required academic science curriculum.
Offered over the summer months, the grant outlined allows American chemistry
students to be involved in intense, meaningful chemistry research in world-class
facilities, while participating in a different culture in an international
setting. US students will be recruited nationwide for this program. Syracuse
University will provide funds for two of its own students who are either from an
underrepresented community, or are first-generation college students, to
participate in the program. Students will work on different research topics from
the wide range of research opportunities in the chemistry department of TUG. The
experience of conducting original research in a different cultural environment
will allow this group of American students to enter the workforce better
prepared to operate and to lead in a global research community.