* 0456390
* U.S.-Japan Seminar:  Developing  Digital Archives and Oral Histories with Japan's KEK High Energy Accelerator Research Organization
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2007
* Sharon Traweek, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 08/31/2007
* USD 21,780.00

0456390&lt;br/&gt;Traweek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American researchers in a U.S.-Japan joint seminar on
developing digital archives and oral histories with Japan's KEK High Energy
Accelerator Research Organization to be held in Tsukuba, Japan. The co-
organizers are Professor Sharon Traweek at the University of California, Los
Angeles and Dr. Yoshinobu Takaiwa at the KEK High Energy Accelerator Research
Organization in Japan. The purposes of the meeting are to: 1) gather and
evaluate the specific methods and practices used for developing digital archives
and for collecting cohort oral histories; 2) develop detailed strategies for
achieving these goals; and 3) developing the collaboration to conduct this work.
Collecting oral histories of cohorts who have worked together on specific
projects or who have been members of an active network of colleagues will
provide a significant contribution to the understanding of such cohorts and
networks, especially how they have participated in the development of this
distributed complexly structured international community of scientists. The
methods of conducting these cohort oral histories are an important contribution
to the anthropology and history of science and technology. The development of
fully digital archives at KEK will provide an important opportunity for
understanding how archives with materials in multiple languages and scripts
should be designed. Initiating the design of an interactive digital portal for
the archive while the archive is still in the formative stages will provide a
model of how to establish an archive with open access. The resources of this
digital archive will be available to all users worldwide, including other
archives. Further, this trans-disciplinary, trans-national project can provide a
model for how to bring together researchers from across the spectrum to work
together on an important intellectual project of immediate and enduring interest
and it can also be a model to other research institutes on how to design such
projects for other archives. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers
have complementary scientific expertise in the field. This enables them to
evaluate and attract the best researchers to participate. The seminar organizers
have made a special effort to involve postdocs and graduate students as both
participants and observers. The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts
in the field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will
set the stage for future collaborative projects. Following the seminar the
organizers plan to widely disseminate the knowledge base and strategies via a
website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;