* 0456439
* US-Japan Workshop : The COSMIC Evolution Survey
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2006
* Nicholas Scoville, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 03/31/2006
* USD 44,000.00

0456439&lt;br/&gt;Scoville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan joint workshop for
scientists on the Cosmic Evolution Survey (COSMIC) to be held in Kyoto, Japan
from May 23-27, 2005. The co-organizers are Professor Nicholas Scoville at the
California Institute of Technology in Pasadena and Professor Yoshiaku Taniguchi
at Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan. The major datasets associated with the
COSMOS Hubble Space Telescope and Subaru surveys will be complete and the
workshop will focus on the cosmic evolution science enabled by this
unprecedented survey. Scientists from Europe will also be in attendance. This
group of scientists will collaborate to analyze unprecedented, broad-spectrum
datasets on the structure and evolution of the early universe. They have also
scheduled sessions to specifically address public outreach
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers have complementary
scientific expertise in the field. This enables them to evaluate and attract the
best science researchers to participate. The astrophysicists attending are
international leaders in the field. The workshop will bring together teams that
have been analyzing different cosmological elements (e.g. dark matter, AGN and
luminous galaxies) to focus on their coupled evolution. The broad impacts of the
COSMOS survey, and this workshop are enormous. This is the most substantial
survey ever done by HST (a NASA facility) and other participating facilities
(Subaru and ESO-VLT) and therefore is sure to have a long-lasting impact on
future cosmological research and on the public's understanding of the early
universe. The workshop organizers have made a special effort to involve postdocs
and graduate students as both participants and observers. Following the meeting
they have arranged for them to visit a number of research facilities. The
exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in the field will enable U.S.
participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
collaborative projects. Following the seminar the organizers plan to establish a
workshop web page. Conference proceedings will be published on this web site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;