* 0456691
* Research in High Energy Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2009
* Carleton DeTar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 09/30/2009
* USD 180,000.00

This project continues first principles studies of quantum chromodynamics (the
theory of the strong interactions) through the use of high performance computer
simulations. In calculations of known quantities the improved computational
algorithms in use have been tested in the past couple of years with excellent
results. In the next phase these algorithms will be used to extract the most
precise values to date of key numbers in the Standard Model of the fundamental
interactions in Nature. Results to be obtained are essential for analyzing
experimental measurements at national accelerator laboratories and for testing
the internal consistency of the Model. They may lead to clues about more
fundamental interactions. They will also be used to continue studies of the high
temperature phase transition between confined matter and the quark-gluon plasma
and of the strange quark content of the plasma. Such a phase transition occurred
in the evolution of the early Universe and is thought to be achievable in the
laboratory in collisions of heavy ions at the RHIC accelerator at Brookhaven
National Laboratory. Through studies of the performance and limitations of
improved algorithms, this work also broadens our understanding of lattice field
theory. The broader impacts are that these studies are important for extending
our understanding of the most fundamental basis of our physical world and of the
origins of our Universe. Algorithmic ideas are likely to have applications in
other computational fields. The supported activity promotes the development of
young scientists trained in computational skills.