* 0456807
* SGER: Application of Dynamic Failure Mechanics to Material and Interface Selections for Protecting Critical Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2008
* Luoyu Xu, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 08/31/2008
* USD 97,337.00

Abstract for: &lt;br/&gt;SGER: Application of Dynamic Failure Mechanics to
Material and Interface Selections for Protecting Critical Structures, CMS
proposal 0456807&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Luoyu Xu, Vanderbilt
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American homeland is in imminent danger of
terrorist action. Although buildings, bridges, nuclear power plants and like
structures might not avoid catastrophic failure in extreme events, research
needs to be carried out to protect critical structures. In the case of existing
structures, a quick and effective way to achieve this goal is to use structural
protection systems such as composite jackets. Previous applications of composite
materials to civil structures were mainly focused on structural rehabilitation
under fatigue or seismic loading (i.e., low strain rate situations). Systematic
studies on improving structural survivability using composite materials and
other protective materials under impact or blast loading condition (high strain
rate situations) have received only preliminary attention. However, fundamental
scientific groundwork is still significantly lacking. The goal of this proposal
is to explore the fundamentals of dynamic failure mechanism and mechanics
involved in improving structural survivability using protective systems, before
these systems can be extensively applied to critical structures. This objective
will be implemented through real-time, small-scale model &lt;br/&gt;experiments
of dynamic failure incorporating dynamic fracture mechanics analysis.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activities is the
identification of an interdisciplinary area of fundamental and practical
importance. Complicated dynamic failure mechanism and mechanics can be
extensively explored through carefully designed small-scale model experiments
before these principles are applied to practical large-scale structures. The
proposed activities will advance knowledge and understanding within the field of
dynamic failure mechanics and across broader fields including composite
materials and structural engineering. Since this project is focused on a highly
visible research area of international importance to the general population, it
is expected to lead to an immediate impact on society. &lt;br/&gt;