* 0456171
* Workshop: Building a Sorghum Genomics Roadmap, November 9, 2004, St. Louis, MO
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2005
* John Mullet, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 10/31/2005
* USD 19,250.00

PI: Stephen Kresovich, Cornell University

Co-PIs: Jeff Bennetzen, The University of Georgia John Mullet, Texas A&M
University Andrew Paterson, The University of Georgia Theresa Fulton, Cornell
University

Collaborator: Jeff Dahlberg, National Grain Sorghum Producers

Date: 9 November 2004 Location: St. Louis, MO

As a model for large genomes of many tropical grasses, sorghum [Sorghum bicolor
(L.) Moench] is a logical complement to Oryza (rice), a distant relative that
will be the first grass genome to be completely sequenced. Sorghum also serves
as a bridge to several economically important large- genome crops including
maize and sugar cane. Because of advances in both science and technology, it is
an opportune time to convene an international planning session to advance
sorghum as a candidate for genome sequencing that will provide cost-effective
information of use to both basic and applied researchers.

The goals of workshop are:

1) to obtain a status report on the development and accessibility of sorghum
genome research information, technologies, and infrastructure, 2) to identify
future priorities and needs for sorghum genomics research, and 3) to better
organize the sorghum community and more closely link basic and applied research.

The meeting will span one full day, and be organized into several sessions
including:

(1) status and needs for sorghum genome map resources, (2) status and needs for
databases, (3) approaches and status of sorghum gene and genome sequencing, (4)
status and needs for sorghum germplasm and population development, (5)
rationale, support, and coordination of sorghum genomics research, and (6)
planning for the future.

The workshop will include representatives from academia, government, and the
private sectors coming from (but not necessarily limited to) the U.S.,
Australia, Brazil, China, France, India, and key countries in sub-Saharan Africa
(Mali and Niger). Most of these countries and international programs have active
genomics research activities focusing on sorghum improvement. In addition to
individuals actively working on sorghum, we also will invite representatives
from other plant genome sequencing projects so that they might provide insights
and advice into to the planning, organization, and execution of joint efforts.
The workshop will last one day and will result in a summary document that will
be distributed to all participants as well as others interested in advances in
sorghum genomics.

