* 0456755
* Identification of Processing Parameters for Strength and Durability of Spot Friction Welds in Lightweight Sheet Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Jwo Pan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2010
* USD 239,953.00

The objective of this research is to fully characterize the effect of processing
parameters on strength and durability of spot friction welds in aluminum sheets.
The approach is to conduct a combined experimental, computational and analytical
investigation. Processing parameters such as tool geometry, tool compressive
force, tool speed and tool holding time for strength and durability of welds
will be identified in the experiments. Failure and fatigue mechanisms will be
examined for welds formed under different processing conditions. Finite element
computational analyses will be conducted to understand the macroscopic plastic
deformation of the interfacial surface. Shear localization theoretical analyses
will be performed to identify the weld size for determination of strength and
durability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The traditional resistance spot welding of
aluminum sheets has several technological challenges such as limited electrode
tip life and high probability of poor welds. Alternative joining methods for
aluminum sheets are currently sought by the automakers. The spot friction
welding of aluminum sheets is a new technology. A fundamental understanding of
spot friction welding will help the US automotive industry to quickly adopt the
technology for the global competitiveness. Due to its extremely low energy
consumption, the spot friction welding process to join aluminum sheets can save
energy significantly. In addition, more lightweight aluminum sheets used in
vehicle structures result in good fuel economy and energy conservation of the
nation. Furthermore, spot friction welds can potentially be used to replace the
rivets used in airplanes to save the weight and the manufacturing cost of the
aerospace industry. The research results will be taught in three graduate
courses. One graduate course entitled "Fatigue Testing and Analysis for
Durability" will be taught through a distance-learning program for engineers in
the automotive industry via the internet. &lt;br/&gt;