* 0456917
* RUI:    Numerical Simulations of Neutron Stars, Black Holes and Gravitational Radiation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Thomas Baumgarte, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 07/31/2009
* USD 132,676.00

This award supports a well-integrated program of research and teaching in
computational physics at Bowdoin College, a highly selective undergraduate
institution located in Brunswick, Maine. The awarded funds will provide support
for research in numerical relativity and computational astrophysics and for
undergraduate students to participate in this research. The research goals,
involving supercomputer simulations of neutron stars and black holes, are
primarily motivated by the prospect of detecting gravitational radiation from
such objects with the new generation of gravitational wave laser
interferometers, including the now operational Laser Interferometer
Gravitational wave Observatory (LIGO.) To identify and interpret any observed
signals, and to extract their astrophysical content, requires theoretical models
of their sources. Likely sources such as binary neutron stars and black holes
must be modeled within the framework of general relativity. This research is
aimed at developing the necessary numerical algorithms, at numerically
constructing such theoretical models, and at predicting gravitational wave
signals for comparison with future observation. Undergraduate students will
actively participate in a computational physics research group, providing them
with a "hands-on" research experience and generating a research-enriched
learning environment. The students will work on a variety of well-defined,
manageable and meaningful projects, including, for example, the generalization
and extension of previous results and the exploration of simple model problems.
They will also have the opportunity to collaborate with scientists at other
institutions and to present their work at conferences and in publications,
making this research experience a very valuable preparation for graduate
training and other future careers in the sciences and beyond.