* 0456625
* Wiener - Hopf Factorization and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Leiba Rodman, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2009
* USD 152,999.00

ABSTRACT: Professors Rodman and Spitkovsky will study a variety of problems
concerning factorizations of matrix and operator functions of the Wiener-Hopf
type and their applications. These include: (1) Almost periodic factorizations;
(2) Factorization in abstract abelian groups; (3) Constructive Wiener-Hopf
factorizations; (4) Corona type theorems; (5) Interpolation; (6) Numerical
ranges; (7) Nonlinear matrix equations and queueing problems; (8) Inverse wave
scattering; (9) Riemann-Hilbert &lt;br/&gt;problems; (10) Financial mathematics.
In the AP factorization problems, the PIs will study existence of factorizations
and obtain a more complete and constructive (whenever possible) factorization
picture, with emphasis on concrete AP matrix functions of one and several
variables arising in applications in particular. Well-known (in some cases)
connections with corona type theorems will be further explored, both in the
abstract setting of factorization in abstract abelian groups, with respect to a
total order on the dual group, and in the more concrete setting of classes of AP
matrix functions. Related issues include invertibility and Fredholmness criteria
for Toeplitz operators with matrix symbols and finite section methods for these
operators on suitable Besikovitch spaces. The PIs will also focus their
attention upon several application areas of Wiener-Hopf factorization.
Difference equations on a finite interval that play a role in inverse wave
scattering will be studied via factorization of a certain family of four-by-four
matrix functions; in another aspect of inverse scattering, J-unitary AP matrix
valued polynomials with finite Fourier spectrum and their factorizations are of
importance. Riemann-Hilbert problems and closely connected topics (such as
orthogonal functions) will be studied with respect to non-standard contours,
including contours with self-intersections. This includes parameter dependence
of solutions of the Riemann-Hilbert problems on non-standard contours. Wiener-
Hopf factorization will also be used to design quadratically convergent
algorithms for solving queuing models, in particular M/G/1 Markov chains. The
convergence will be proved theoretically, and effectiveness of the algorithms
will be tested in numerical experiments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research grew out of classical areas of analysis and operator theory. The choice
of topics is both influenced by and aimed to applications. Classical Wiener-Hopf
factorization has been used as a powerful tool in integral equations, partial
differential equations and diffraction theory. The PIs will continue their study
of its natural generalization to almost periodic matrix valued functions (of one
and several variables) which arises in consideration of integral equations on
finite intervals and related problems in inverse scattering and other parts of
mathematical physics. The expected results in the theory of Riemann-
Hilbertmproblem and related orthogonal functions will be used in filter design,
compression and analysis of images, and multivariate stochastic processes. Novel
applications will be studied, in particular, financial mathematics, where the
recent more adequate Levy processes models of derivatives pricing lead to
convolution equations of the type that Wiener-Hopf factorization techniques are
well-suited for. Interactions with scientists and engineers in diverse fields
are anticipated. In addition, the PIs will also involve undergraduate students
in their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;