* 0456890
* Probing the Isospin Dependence of In-Medium Nuclear Effective Interactions at the Rare Isotope Accelerator
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Bao-An Li, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 01/31/2007
* USD 95,511.00

Isospin asymmetry is a measure of the imbalance between the numbers of neutrons
and protons in finite nuclei and/or infinite nuclear matter. How do neutrons and
protons interact among themselves in extremely isospin asymmetric systems, such
as, neutron stars? How does the equation of state, i.e., a relationship among
energy, density and temperature, change as a function of isospin asymmetry in
neutron-rich nuclear matter? Answers to these questions have significant
astrophysical ramifications for the structure of neutron stars and the dynamics
of supernova explosions. However, astrophysical observations are too limited to
answer these questions. Fortunately and interestingly, these questions can be
studied experimentally by using nuclear reactions induced by short-lived isotope
beams at the planned Rare Isotope Accelerator (RIA) in the USA and other
competing facilities abroad. The physics associated with these experiments is
currently one of the major thrusts and at the foremost front of nuclear
sciences. In particular, with high energy neutron-rich beams at RIA, a transient
state of nuclear matter with appreciable isospin asymmetry and compression of
more than twice the saturation density of normal nuclear matter can be created.
RIA will thus provide a unique opportunity to explore the nature of nucleonic
matter under extreme conditions of isospin asymmetry and density. To facilitate
the success of the experimental research on the isospin dependence of the in-
medium nuclear effective interactions and the nuclear equation of state, I shall
carry out theoretical studies on several issues important for planning
experiments and interpreting data by investigating novel properties of neutron-
rich matter and their manifestations in nuclear reactions induced by rare
isotope beams. The major foci of my work will be on developing new models for
nuclear reactions induced by radioactive beams; identifying the role of isospin
degree of freedom in the reaction dynamics; determining experimental observables
that can be used to extract critical information about the isospin dependence of
the in-medium nuclear effective interactions; and constraining the equation of
state of isospin asymmetric nuclear matter.