* 0456857
* International Engineering Research and Education Workshop "In-situ Evaluation of Masonry and Wood Historic Structures: Challenges and Opportunities"
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2005,02/28/2006
* Bohumil Kasal, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/28/2006
* USD 28,800.00

This workshop will bring together a group of engineers and scientists from the
United States, the Czech Republic, Italy and Germany who have expertise in the
technical aspects of historic timber and masonry structure preservation. The co-
organizers are Bohumil Kasal of North Carolina State University, Milos Drdacky
of the Czech Institute of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics and Luigi Binda of
Politecnico di Milano. Their overall goal is to exchange knowledge and develop
an agenda for future international collaborative research and education
activities. For immediate impact, U.S. and European graduate and undergraduate
students will attend the workshop and participate in field demonstrations of
various techniques, at historic sites in the Czech Republic.

The workshop agenda features: 1) identification of infrastructure requirements
and non-destructive technologies needed to assess historic buildings and 2)
preparation of a general framework for an international graduate degree in
engineering and restoration of historic structures. Results should lead to the
definition of effective applications of state-of-art non-destructive
technologies and to the proper documentation and assessment of existing
structures. In terms of human resource development, the meeting is expected to
contribute the preparation of a new generation of professionals who understand
the specifics of engineering evaluation and preservation of both historic and
modern structures.

This multidisciplinary workshop fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Europe to
combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts include early career
introduction of U.S. graduate and undergraduate students to engineers in the
international research community who lead efforts to effectively preserve
historical structures that represent global cultural heritage.