* 0456436
* U.S.-Mexico Workshop:  Bridging Nanoscale Forces and Interfacial Phenomena to the Macroscopic World; Mexico; Cancun, Mexico, January 2006
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2005,07/31/2005
* Philip Pincus, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

This award will help to support a workshop on nanoscale forces and interfacial
phenomena to be held in Cancun, Mexico around January 2006. Organized by Dr.
Norma Alcantar of the U. of South Florida and Dr. Phillip A Pincus of the U. of
California-Santa Barbara, together with international partners Dr. Tomas Viveros
of the Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana in Iztapalapa, Mexico, Dr. Suzanne
Giasson, of the University of Montreal, and Dr. Roger Horn of the University of
South Australia, the workshop will involve representatives from approximately 42
universities worldwide and international student participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will bring together scientists that are
international leaders in measuring and analyzing surface forces and interfacial
phenomena to provide a substantive training experience for students,
postdoctoral researchers and investigators who are at early stages in their
career. It will feature a discussion of critical issues facing colloid and
interface science. Students and postdoctoral researchers will present their work
in poster sessions. Ultimately, the workshop aims to foster collaborations at
multiple levels (interdisciplinary and internationally) to attack complex
problems that connect the nanoscale world to the macroscopic world. The Office
of International Science and Engineering and the Directorates of Engineering and
Mathematical and Physical Sciences are sharing in the funding of this
activity.&lt;br/&gt;