* 0456448
* Continuation of an Investigation of Certain Operators and Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Jingbo Xia, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 85,000.00

The PI will continue the research that he has been pursuing under the support of
the National Science Foundation. The specific areas of the proposed research
include the following: (1) Hankel operators on certain reproducing-kernel
Hilbert spaces. Here the main question is the membership of these operators in
various norm ideals. The reproducing kernel will be involved in many
quantitative estimates. (2) Factorization of unimodular functions on the unit
sphere. The goal here is to determine whether or not certain well-known
factorization for unimodular functions in the one-variable case can be
generalized to the case of several variables. (3) Simultaneous diagonalization
of commuting tuples of self-adjoint operators modulo various norm ideals. This
problem has been solved (with NSF support) in the case where the norm ideal is
the Schatten p-class when p is strictly greater than 1. The PI will next
consider the case where p is 1, i.e., where the norm ideal is the trace class.
This is a difficult problem, but this is also an important problem because of
its potential applications. The PI will also consider a class of ideals which
are related to the Schatten class. (4) Certain norm estimates related to the
Cauchy projection on the unit sphere. If they can be established, these
estimates will provide new insight on the Cauchy projection.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research is that it pushes the limit of
some of the existing techniques and it helps us better understand the structure
of the spaces, operators and operator ideals mentioned above. The proposed
problems are fairly representative of the current research interests in operator
theory and operator algebras, which is a study of, among other things, the
spectral properties of various linear operators. In part inspired and demanded
by the development of the quantum theory in the early part of the twentieth
century, this study was initiated by great mathematicians such as H. Weyl and J.
von Neumann. Because additivity (i.e., linearity) appears in many fundamental
aspects of nature, operator theory provides the right mathematical tools for
scientific fields ranging from atomic physics to optimal control. Many abstract
problems in operator theory and operator algebras owe their origin to these
fields of applications. In this sense the broader impact of research in operator
theory and operator algebras is its contribution to our understanding of the
physical world. For example, both for theoretical reasons and for practical
applications, quite often one must deal with, or introduce, perturbations which
are "small" by some measure or other. Problem (3) is about such perturbations.
The root of this problem can be traced back to a paper of Weyl published in
1909, which asserts that a continuous spectrum can be turned into a discrete one
by a compact (which is a measure of "smallness") perturbation. The problems
proposed here require both modern techniques and classical-style mathematical
analysis. A theme which underlies all these problems is the establishment of
various estimates (i.e., bounds). In general, the sharper the estimates, the
better results one obtains.

