* 0456848
* An Electrochemical NMR Investigation of Ligand-Protected Metal Quantum Dots: Metal-Ligand Interactions and Ramifications in Molecular Electronics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* YuYe Tong, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2009
* USD 405,000.00

Professor YuYe Tong of Georgetown University is supported by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry program to apply nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy to investigate metal-ligand bonding interactions in
alkanechalcogenol-protected metal (Au, Ag, Pd, and Pt) nanoparticles and quantum
dots. A general aim is to advance understanding at the molecular level of
factors that govern charge transfer in these nanoscale systems. NMR spectroscopy
measurements are being performed on metal nanoparticles in solution that are
held in a fixed charge state through electrochemical potential control. The
spectroscopic information is being used to determine Fermi level local density
of state values in relation to ligand structure and electronic interactions
between the metal nanoparticle and the contacting element (S, Se, or Te). The
work is developing multinuclear (i.e., 13C, 77Se, 109Ag, 195Pt, 125Te) NMR
strategies for general application to nanostructured materials.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Advances being made by the Tong group through combined applications
of NMR spectroscopy and electrochemistry are impacting areas of technological
importance, in particular the field of molecular scale electronics. The research
is providing insights into chemical bonding interactions between metal
nanoparticles and ligands attached to the surface. The work has ramifications in
the design of molecular electronic materials.&lt;br/&gt;