* 0456892
* Toward a Quantitative Model for Excited-State Proton Transfer:  From "Super" Photoacids to the Green Fluorescent Protein
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2008
* Kyril Solntsev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2008
* USD 486,000.00

This research involves the development of tools for examining fast proton
transfer in heterogeneous condensed phases, including polymers and proteins, and
the formation of practical physical and theoretical models for their use. Thus,
this effort includes design of new substrates, synthetic methodology, kinetic
analysis, and theoretical modeling. Proton transfer encompasses a vast array of
physiologically and chemically important processes. Most of these processes
occur in heterogeneous media and relatively simple diffusion models have been
used to account for the rates in such systems up to this point. Professor
Tolbert's work will include the synthesis of new photoacids, studies of proton
transfer dynamics, photocatalysis studies, studies of proton transfer at
interfaces and in supercritical fluids and studies of Green Fluorescent Protein
(GFP). The studies proposed represent an effort to advance our understanding of
excited state acidity so that the tools available for studying excited-state
proton transfer are as accessible as those for studying photoexcited electron
transfer. The possibility of using "super" photoacids to catalyze chemically
amplified reactions such as photo polymerizations and depolymerizations will be
investigated. Matrix effects on the fluorescence properties of GFP are currently
of great interest. The proposed studies in biological excited-state proton
transfer in GFP will address some of these effects. Understanding these effects
could greatly expand the usefulness of GFP as a biological tool.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the
research of Professor Laren Tolbert of the School of Chemistry and Biochemistry
at Georgia Institute of Technology. Proton transfer is a fundamental process in
numerous chemical and biological systems. Achieving a better understanding of
the factors controlling excited state acidity and the mechanisms of proton
transfer in diverse environments are therefore highly desirable goals. The
chemical industry is increasingly moving toward so-called "green" chemistry,
which involves heterogeneous solventless or minimal solvent "complex fluid"
environments. Thus experimental approaches that are amenable to studying proton
transfer in these systems are required. Professor Tolbert's approach has been to
elucidate the transition state by synthesizing unique substrates, then using
these to test various models for proton transfer both in the strong acid and
weak acid regime. Professor Tolbert has been unusually successful in involving
students at all levels in research and these students have contributed
significantly in all areas of chemistry. The strong international collaborations
and proven track record of Professor Tolbert in developing minority Ph.D.
students will make significant contributions to the human resources needs of the
chemical enterprise in the United States.

