* 0456406
* Workshop for Scientists and Engineers on  Structural Deformations at the Historic Site of Angkor, in Cambodia
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2008
* Marianne De Laet, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 03/31/2008
* USD 33,000.00

0456406&lt;br/&gt;Dasgupta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Cambodia joint workshop for
scientists and engineers on the structural deformations at the historic site of
Angkor in Cambodia to be held in Phnom Penh, Cambodia in December 2005. The co-
organizers are Professor Gautam Dasgupta at Columbia University in New York and
Professor Abhay Pattinaik, at the Build Bright University in Phnom Penh,
Cambodia. The purpose of the workshop is to explore some unconventional
challenges in civil engineering relative to issues of sustainable development at
the World Heritage Site of Angkor in Cambodia. This would include mechanics of
materials, stochastic computation, computer graphics and animation for CAD.
Designing a methodology that uses remote sensing, geographic information
systems, and distributed computing technologies will be based on knowledge of
the theories and principles underlying urban development, cultural dynamics and
environmental forces. The quantitative system will allow for better analysis and
management of the evolving social and environmental systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers have complementary scientific expertise
in the field. This enables them to evaluate and attract the best science and
engineering researchers to participate. This project should lead to other areas
of possible support such as field research with ground penetrating radar and
software engineering for Geographical Information Systems to initiate
infrastructure development for research and education. The seminar organizers
have made a special effort to involve postdocs, graduate and undergraduate
students as both participants and observers. The exchange of ideas and data with
Cambodian experts in the field will enable U.S. participants to advance their
own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative projects. Following
the seminar the organizers plan to establish a workshop web page. Conference
proceedings will be published on this web site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;