* 0456240
* Problems in Chaotic Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Edward Ott, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2009
* USD 253,650.00

Project Summary &lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for a three-year
theoretical/computational program on the study of chaotic systems. The principal
investigator and graduate students will carry out the work. It is anticipated
that, through their participation in the proposed research, the graduate
students will become proficient in the theory of nonlinear dynamical systems,
the design and implementation of computer experiments, and the modeling of
physical systems. Two problem areas will be addressed: &lt;br/&gt;1) The onset
of synchronization in systems consisting of many interconnected dynamical units:
Synchronization in systems of many interconnected dynamical (perhaps chaotic)
units depends on the characteristics of the individual connected units, on the
topology of the coupling network, and on the strengths of the couplings along
each link. Our past work in this area was on systems of chaotic units where the
coupling was global (all-to-all) and all links had equal coupling strength, and
focused on providing a general theory of the transition from incoherent behavior
to periodic oscillation. We propose to greatly extend this work to much more
general connection topologies. This problem is important in physical and
chemical systems, but perhaps its greatest interest is for biological systems
where coherent oscillations are extremely prevalent and apparently result from
the interaction of many small units. &lt;br/&gt;2) Chaotic mixing and advection
in fluids: This general class of problems is extremely important for a large
variety of applications, yet there remain very interesting and significant basic
open problems. Our past work has introduced the concept of finite time Lyapunov
exponents and large deviation theory to this area, and we have used this to
study fractal dimension, power spectra, and structure functions in a variety of
flow situations. The main area of our proposed investigation will be on the
effect of rigid boundaries in confined chaotic flows (potentially significant in
most laboratory experiments). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The onset of synchronism in large highly connected systems
is a basic problem of inherent interest, and addresses important real-world
problems, such as oscillatory behavior in biological systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chaotic mixing and advection is a problem of fundamental
importance with impact in fields ranging from atmospheric science to chemical
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For both problem areas, previous work by the
PI will serve as a strong base and starting point for the proposed research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activity will promote the training of graduate students in important areas of
research, and, by interaction with the larger chaos group at the university, it
will educate others in these issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding
gained through this research will be useful in a variety of fields, including
physics, biology , engineering, and meteorology. &lt;br/&gt;