* 0456693
* Selective Production of Large Water Soluble Organics from Biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* James Dumesic, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2009
* USD 296,695.00

Abstract

Proposal Title: Selective Production of Large Water-soluble Organics from
Biomass

Proposal Number: CTS-0456693

Principal Investigator: James A. Dumesic

Institution: University of Wisconsin-Madison

Analysis (rationale for decision):

The goal of this research is to produce liquid alkanes ranging from C7-C15 from
biomass as a premium fuel for diesel-hybrid electric and hybrid electric-
homogeneous charge compression ignition engines. Therefore, research will be
undertaken to develop new processes to prepare large, water-soluble organic
compounds from biomass by condensing biomass-derived aldehydes with solid base
catalysts in the aqueous phase and by selectively converting biomass-derived
oxygenated hydrocarbons to aldehydes so that they can undergo effective aldol
condensation reactions. Oxygenated hydrocarbons such as furfural and
hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) are readily produced from biomass, and it is planned
to study aldol condensation reactions of these compounds with other biomass-
derived oxygenated hydrocarbons such as glyceraldehyde, dihydroxyacetone and
acetone over solid base catalysts. It is also proposed to study how furfural and
HMF can be converted to chemical intermediates that can undergo aldol self-
condensation reactions to form C10 and C12 compounds.

The intellectual merit of the proposed work is the elucidation of reaction
pathways and catalytic materials that will produce liquid alkanes from renewable
biomass resources. These studies will address the fundamental issues that
control catalytic activity, selectivity and stability for the processing of
biomass-derived feedstocks. In terms of the broader technological impact, the
results from these studies will provide a basis to address how new catalysts and
catalytic processes can be developed to provide clean-burning liquid alkane
fuels from renewable biomass resources. These results will provide a basis for
understanding how heterogeneous catalysts can be developed for selective
dehydration, hydrogenation-dehydrogenation, and aldol condensation reactions of
biomass-derived reactants, thereby impacting the design of future biorefineries.
This project will thus educate and train graduate students, postdoctoral
students, and undergraduate students in the emerging area of heterogeneous
catalysis in biorefining. The educational and outreach efforts of this project
will be coordinated with NSF-funded MRSEC and NSEC programs at the University of
Wisconsin in areas related to nano-structured materials (of which heterogeneous
catalysts are key examples).

