* 0456261
* Theoretical Studies of Rotating Trapped Atomic Gases
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Erich Mueller, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 05/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

This proposal describes a theoretical study of the rotational properties of
clouds of ultracold atoms. Building on his previous work, the investigator will
explore several topical subjects, with the fol- lowing four objectives. (1) He
will calculate the topological structures which will form in a rapidly rotating
gases of spin-1 bosons in the presence of magnetic fields. (2) He will determine
the kinet- ics of spinning up small clusters of atoms at the nodes of an optical
lattice. (3) He will produce a practical scheme for creating fields which couple
to neutral atoms in the same way that the electromagnetic fields couple to
charged particle. (4) He will study interference between rotating clouds and
demonstrate that an interference experiment can distinguishing condensed and
strongly correlated rotating states. These projects are motivated by both
interest in fundamental physical properties of these cold gases [topics (1),
(2), and (4)] and by a desire to produce experimental protocols to create and
measure exotic states of matter [topics (2), (3), and (4)]. Topic (1) addresses
the basic ground state properties of clouds of rotating atoms. Topic (2) allows
the study of fundamental questions of energy and entropy transfer in isolated
systems, while possibly providing an experimental pathway to producing analogs
of quantum Hall effects. Topic (3) is aimed at producing a valuable tool for
exploring vortex physics, quantum Hall effects, the pinning of vortex lattices,
and the interplay between lattices and quantum Hall effects. Topic (4) studies
the basic coherence properties of both condensed and correlated states, and
provides an experimental strategy for distinguishing these states. The
investigator will use an array of analytic and computational techniques, related
to those used in previous projects. These include lowest-Landau-level calculus,
field theory, variational methods, numerical exact diagonalization, and
numerical Monte-Carlo.