* 0456387
* U.S.-Japan Seminar:  Advances in Polymer Chemistry and Their Impacts upon Society
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2006
* Karen Wooley, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 03/31/2006
* USD 34,011.00

0456387&lt;br/&gt;Wooley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan joint workshop for
scientists on advances in polymer chemistry and their impacts upon society to be
held in South Lake Tahoe, California from June 24-29, 2005. The co-organizers
are Professor Karen Wooley at Washington University and Professor Toshio Masuda
at Kyoto University in Japan. Polymers are playing an increasing important role
in every person's life, by serving as structural materials, insulating
materials, packaging materials, etc. for commodity and high-end products.
Furthermore, there is enormous potential benefit to society by capitalizing on
emerging polymer materials that have resulted from the more recent development
in synthetic chemistry to control the macromolecular architecture, size, and
size distribution, supramolecular chemistry to control their assembly into
complex structures, and physical chemistry to study the properties and
behaviors. All of the above topics, plus additional ones, will be discussed with
a common focus on future directives for polymer
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers have complementary scientific
expertise in the field. This enables them to evaluate and attract the best
science researchers to participate. Many advances have been realized by
researchers in Japan and the US and each of these countries is recognized as a
leader in the synthesis of polymers having control over the macromolecular
topology, stereochemistry and regiochemistry, and in the design of such well
defined materials for "programmed" supramolecular assembly, often with cues
being taken from biological systems. The topics covered by the workshop are not
only at the forefront of polymer chemistry, but have direct relevance and impact
to major growth areas such as nanoscience and bio-related materials. The
workshop organizers have made a special effort to involve postdocs, graduate
students and undergraduate students as both participants and observers. The
exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in the field will enable U.S.
participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
collaborative projects. Conference proceedings will be published in the "Journal
of Polymer Science." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;