* 0456830
* The Coherent BREMS Project: Baryon Resonance and Exotic Meson Search
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2006
* Steven Shropshire, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2006
* USD 30,000.00

We seek to build upon our earlier work and investigate the nature
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;of resonant baryon states by probing protons with
polarized photons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The set of experiments forming the
first phase of the g8 run took &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;place in the summer of 2001
(6/04/01 - 8/13/01) in Hall B of Jefferson &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lab. These
experiments made use of a beam of linearly-polarized photons
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;produced through coherent bremsstrahlung and represent the
first time &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;such a probe has been employed at Jefferson
Lab. The second phase of &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;g8 will take place in the summer
of 2005 (6/20/05 - 8/31/05). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific purpose of g8 is to improve the understanding of the
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;underlying symmetry of the quark degrees of freedom in the
nucleon, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;the nature of the parity exchange between the
incident photon and the &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;target nucleon, and the mechanism
of associated strangeness production &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;in electromagnetic
reactions. With the high-quality beam of the tagged &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and
collimated linearly-polarized photons and the nearly complete angular
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;coverage of the Hall-B spectrometer, we seek to extract
the differential &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;cross sections and polarization
observables for the photoproduction of &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;vector mesons and
kaons at photon energies ranging between 1.10 and 2.25 GeV.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research has already
yielded two PhD and two Master's theses, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;as well as one
NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. A good part of the funding
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;for this proposal will provide support for one PhD
student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;