* 0456402
* U.S.-Australia Workshshop:  Frugivory and Seed Dispersal
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2007
* Eugene Schupp, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 05/31/2007
* USD 33,000.00

Schupp&lt;br/&gt;0456402&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
U.S.-Australia Workshop on Frugivory and Seed Dispersal, July 9-16, 2005, at
Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia. The co-organizers are Eugene Schupp,
Utah State University, and David Westcott, CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific &amp;
Industrial Research Organization), Canberra, Australia. Fifteen scientists from
the United States will meet with 20 researchers supported by Australia. The
workshop is integrated with an international symposium attended by a larger set
of researchers, including some from New Zealand and several Asian countries. The
discussions will incorporate discussion of international collaboration,
especially the major issues that can best, or perhaps only, be addressed by
large-scale international collaborative research. A symposium proceedings is
planned, and outcomes from the workshop will be put on a workshop website to be
developed either at Utah State University or Griffith
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-animal interactions have interested
ecologists since Darwin, but the fields of frugivory and seed dispersal
developed slowly. Nonetheless, as publications increased rapidly over the last
30 years, three international symposia-workshops have been held to assess the
field and develop future directions: 1985 and 1991 in Mexico and 2000 in Brazil.
All resulted in publications that shaped the field and invigorated research. The
objective of this fourth symposium is to bring a diverse group of international
researchers together to assess future collaboration, build a sense of community,
and identify common threads.&lt;br/&gt;