* 0456180
* Collaborative Research: Tectonothermal History of the Acatl√°n Complex, Southern Mexico: A Record of the Closure of the Rheic Ocean?
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Brent Miller, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2006
* USD 92,982.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The well-exposed Acatlan Complex of southern Mexico records
the closure of a major Paleozoic ocean. Exposing Mexico's largest area of
Paleozoic geology (27,500 km&lt;br/&gt;2 ), the complex comprises an assemblage
of repeatedly deformed clastic metasedimentary sequences, locally eclogite-
facies mafic-ultramafic suites, and arc-related granitoid bodies that together
record a protracted history of Paleozoic orogenesis. Juxtaposed against
granulite facies gneisses of late Mesoproterozoic age with an Amazonian affinity
(the Oaxacan Complex), the nature of the tectonostratigraphic record of the
Acatlan Complex is not only central to the accretionary history of Mexico, but
also bears upon wider issues of Paleozoic continental reconstructions. Despite
its importance, however, a targeted structural-geochronological study of the
complex of the type needed to unravel its tectonic history has yet to be
undertaken. As a result, significant aspects of its geologic evolution are
uncertain and existing models for its tectonic development are in conflict.
Thus, the age and number of tectonothermal events the complex records are
uncertain, key aspects of its kinematic history are unknown, its initial
deformation has been variably correlated with the Taconic, Salinic and Acadian
events of the Appalachians, and its evolution has been attributed to closure of
both the Iapetus and Rheic oceans. To help resolve these controversies and
clarify the complex's tectonic history, The PI's propose to conduct an
investigation that combines detailed field mapping, structural-kinematic
analysis and geochemistry with precise laserprobe &lt;br/&gt;40 Ar/ 39 Ar,
conventional U-Pb and ion-microprobe age dating. The investigation will use a
targeted approach aimed at determining (1) the precise age, inheritance and
kinematic significance of the complex's granitoid bodies, (2) the depositional
age, provenance and tectonothermal history of its metasedimentary sequences, and
(3) the precise age and tectonothermal evolution of its mafic-ultramafic units.
These data are essential to understanding the tectonic history of the complex
and will be used to establish its role in Mexico's accretionary history and to
evaluate its linkages to the Appalachians.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Structural-kinematic analysis in combination with geochemical fingerprinting and
precise geochronology provides a powerful tool for unraveling the tectonic
history of regions of complex geology. The proposed project will greatly clarify
the evolution of this important Paleozoic terrane and, in so doing, provide new
insight into key aspects of the Paleozoic accretionary history of Mexico, its
relationship to the development of the Appalachians, and its role in Laurentia-
Amazonia connections for the Neoproterozoic and Paleozoic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Preliminary analysis of the
tectonostratigraphic record of the Acatlan Complex coupled with its close
association with the late Mesoproterozoic Oaxacan Complex, the Paleozoic cover
of which contains fossils of Gondwanan affinity, suggests that the complex
records the closure of the Rheic Ocean. If so, its tectonothermal evolution
promises new insight into the history of this important but poorly understood
ocean, the closure of which produced the climactic Ouachita-Alleghenian-Variscan
collision between Gondwana and Laurussia during the assembly of Pangea. The
project also represents an international collaboration between the United States
and Mexico that will promote joint research and educational partnerships and
provide both undergraduate and graduate students with unique opportunities for
research and international exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;