* 0456241
* Development and Field Validation of Innovative Instrumentation for Measurement and Partitioning of Ecosystem Carbon Exchange Using Isotopic Fluxes of CO2 Species
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Daniel Murnick, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 07/31/2009
* USD 742,403.00

This award supports the development field-capable instrumentation capable of
high frequency (10 Hz) sampling of isotopic fluxes of carbon dioxide (12CO2 and
13CO2). Study of atmospheric gases, atmospheric chemistry, and global carbon
cycle would greatly benefit from the availability of instrumentation capable of
accurate, precise, and high-speed measurements of isotopic fluxes. The
instrumentation will enable long-term measurement of net ecosystem exchange
(NEE) of carbon with concurrent, real-time partitioning of NEE into its
photosynthetic and respiratory components when coupled to existing high
frequency eddy covariance (EC) micrometeorological techniques. The
interdisciplinary development team includes a physicist expert in use of lasers
in stable isotope analysis, an ecosystem modeler with extensive field
experience, and a plant ecophysiologist specializing in leaf-level
photosynthetic gas exchange. The team will expand the capabilities of a new
laser-based stable carbon isotope analysis system (acronym LARA) and to perform
validating field experiments. The LARA technique is based on the existence of
large isotope shifts in molecular spectra, the use of fixed frequency isotopic
lasers and sensitive detection via the laser optogalvanic effect. The effort
will involve the participation of post doctoral associates, graduate and
undergraduate students of physics, biological and environmental science and high
school interns who will be trained in optical science, measurement science,
biometeorology, environmental physics and ecology. Undergraduate and graduate
courses taught by the faculty participants will include trips to the field site
and exercises utilizing data gathered during the project.