* 0456232
* Collaborative Research: FRG: Ferroelectric phenomena in soft matter systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2008
* Maria-Carme Calderer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2008
* USD 286,010.00

In this Focused Research Group project the investigators&lt;br/&gt;study the
behavior of a class of soft materials characterized by&lt;br/&gt;strong coupling
of electrical, optical, and mechanical properties. &lt;br/&gt;Such materials,
which include some liquid crystals and elastomers,&lt;br/&gt;can be used to
develop ultra-fast switches for video display --&lt;br/&gt;based on electro-
optical coupling -- and miniature sensors and&lt;br/&gt;actuators -- based on
the electro-mechanical coupling. One goal&lt;br/&gt;is to determine the
conditions that enhance the combined effects&lt;br/&gt;of the soft-elasticity
modes of elastomers and their ferroelectric&lt;br/&gt;response by application of
external electric fields. In these&lt;br/&gt;studies the investigators combine
mathematical analysis, modeling,&lt;br/&gt;computer simulations, physical
experiments, and application of the&lt;br/&gt;three-dimensional visualization
techniques. These mathematical&lt;br/&gt;problems are analytically modeled by
highly nonlinear elliptic,&lt;br/&gt;parabolic, mixed hyperbolic-parabolic and
stochastic systems of&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations, including the
equations of&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear elasticity, viscoelastic flow, and Maxwell's
equations&lt;br/&gt;of electrodynamics. Partial differential equation methods
for&lt;br/&gt;phase transitions, modeling, and numerical tools such as
spectral&lt;br/&gt;methods and adaptivity to simulate the solutions are among
the&lt;br/&gt;techniques employed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project is a
comprehensive effort towards modeling and&lt;br/&gt;development of soft matter
actuator and sensor devices used in a&lt;br/&gt;vast array of applications,
including ultra-fast optic and video&lt;br/&gt;switching, artificial muscles,
biological membranes, and&lt;br/&gt;filaments. Increase of switching speeds and
size reduction of the&lt;br/&gt;device are two relevant technological goals at
the heart of the&lt;br/&gt;investigation. One type of materials to investigate,
liquid&lt;br/&gt;crystal elastomers, can be thought of as rubber networks
that&lt;br/&gt;require very little energy to be deformed along
special&lt;br/&gt;directions. This property, coupled with the efficient response
of&lt;br/&gt;the material to electric fields, may offer optimal ingredients
for&lt;br/&gt;developing high speed devices able to provide very
large&lt;br/&gt;mechanical deformations with the application of electric
or&lt;br/&gt;magnetic fields of small magnitude. These are highly
desirable&lt;br/&gt;properties, for instance, in the design of artificial
muscles for&lt;br/&gt;robots. The investigators carry out the studies by
combining&lt;br/&gt;mathematical analysis, computer simulations, and
physical&lt;br/&gt;experiments. Use of three-dimensional visualization
techniques is&lt;br/&gt;important in both conducting the work and disseminating
the&lt;br/&gt;results. Many of the problems present modeling challenges
that&lt;br/&gt;call for a synergistic effort of mathematicians and physicists.
A&lt;br/&gt;central principle in this endeavor is close cross-
disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;interaction among the applied and numerical analysts and
the&lt;br/&gt;physicists of the group. A major component of the project is
the&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary training of post-docs and graduate
students,&lt;br/&gt;including the organization of a summer school, development
of new&lt;br/&gt;courses, and summer research opportunities for
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students. Interdisciplinary conferences, group
workshops, and&lt;br/&gt;seminars devoted to the FRG project at each institution
are also&lt;br/&gt;planned.