* 0456703
* Collaborative Research: Studies of Aging and Memory in Granular Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2006
* Corey O'Hern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Keith E. Herold
* 07/31/2006
* USD 46,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT-0456703&lt;br/&gt;Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Studies of aging and
memory in granular materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;W. Losert (Department of
Phyiscs, IPST, and IREAP, University of Maryland),&lt;br/&gt;C.S. O.Hern,
(Departments of Mechanical Engineering and Physics, Yale
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We seek a deeper understanding of aging and
memory in jammed granular materials. Our research focus is on the structure,
slow evolution and initial failure of the jammed state. We will use novel 3D
imaging techniques of individual grains and complementary molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations to study the slow evolution of the grain-scale properties of
granular materials under shear stress. We believe that the results from these
studies can be used to build better models for yielding and the initiation of
flow in jammed granular systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Few
studies have been able to analyze the arrangements of individual grains during
the aging process in granular materials. This largely results from the fact that
non-invasive and nondestructive techniques for locating the positions of grains
in 3D are only now available. We will use several state-of-the-art techniques to
study the microstructure during aging: confocal microscopy and fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET) at the University of Maryland and synchrotron
x-ray microtomography at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility in
Grenoble, France. Prof. Wolfgang Losert (WL) will conduct the experiments in
collaboration with Profs. Renaud Delannay (Rennes) and Doug English (Maryland).
Prof. Corey O.Hern (CO) will perform MD simulations of simple models of
frictional granular materials to guide future experiments, investigate the
stability of experimentally obtained jammed configurations, and probe parameter
regimes that are not easily accessed by experiments. CO has extensive experience
in simulations of athermal systems and access to ample computational resources.
The proposed collaboration between simulation and experiment will allow us to
make significant and swift progress in developing a more microscopic explanation
of aging and history dependence in granular
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: An improved fundamental
understanding of how jammed granular matter starts to flow may lead to advances
in the processing, transport, and storage of these systems, which includes a
large fraction of industrial raw materials, food, and pharmaceutical products.
Specific advances may include 1) prevention of catastrophic failure of heaps of
granular media even after prolonged storage, 2) optimized civil engineering
procedures for the settling of soil, and 3) a better understanding of highly
cohesive jammed nanoparticles for nanotechnology applications. Through this
project we will train new scientists to use several powerful experimental
techniques such as confocal microscopy, x-ray tomography, and FRET. We will also
develop demonstration materials to highlight the complex and unexpected
properties of granular flows in very visual ways. These demos will be used in
undergraduate courses, lab open houses, and public lectures to demonstrate the
fascinating properties of granular materials to audiences that may not be
familiar with them. We will strongly encourage undergraduate student involvement
in the proposed research, e.g. the computational projects are ideal for
undergraduates, who, with a basic knowledge of computer programming can begin
immediately running existing MD simulations and analyzing data. Lastly, we will
take steps to reduce the racial and gender imbalance that exists among students
in physics and engineering. Both PIs will actively recruit women and
underrepresented minorities into their respective programs. CO will do so for
the Yale Engineering and Applied Science program by serving on the Graduate
Admissions Committee. CO will also mentor undergraduate students from the
Science, Technology and Research Scholars program for minority students at Yale
and WL will mentor minority high school and undergraduate students in the
Washington, DC area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;