* 0456394
* NER:     Conducting Polymer Nanocontainers and Conducting Polymer-Carbon Nanotube Junctions
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Liming Dai, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0403130&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of
Akron&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dai , Liming&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER:
Conducting polymer nanocontainers and conducting polymer-carbon nanotube
junctions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abtsract:&lt;br/&gt;The recent development of
nanoscience and nanotechnology could revolutionize computers and electronics by
miniaturizing transistors and developing novel integration methods. This
proposal aims at performing a feasibility study on the synthesis of conducting
polymer nanostructures and their junctions with aligned carbon nanotubes. The
proposed research stemmed from our long-term interest in nano-/micro-fabrication
of conducting polymers and aligned carbon nanotubes. The main approach involves
the use of nanobubbles generated on aligned carbon nanotube tips as the template
for electrodeposition of conducting polymers, leading to the generation of novel
conducting polymer nanostructures (e.g. polymer nanotubes) and conducting
polymer-carbon nanotube junctions. Examples include the formation of novel
multiple metal-semiconductor or semiconductor-semiconductor junctions by
sequential electrodeposition of different conducting polymer nanostructures on
the aligned carbon nanotube tips and novel switchable junctions by
electrochemical and/or chemical doping of the conducting polymer components. In
conjunction with the proposed multi-scale modeling and simulation efforts for
fundamental understanding of the conducting polymer nanostructures and their
junctions with carbon nanotubes, results from the proposed studies could open up
new possibilities for fabricating novel integrated circuits and electronics, for
example, through 3-dimensional integration and/or by chemically-induced
switching memory devices. In addition, the use of conducting polymer
nanostructures for sensing and controlled release applications will also be
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;