* 0456676
* Collaborative Research: MIP: Physiology and molecular ecology of thermophilic nitrate-reducing microorgansisms at deep-sea hydrothermal vents
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2010
* Costantino Vetriani, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2010
* USD 315,169.00

This study will investigate the physiology and ecology of thermophilic, nitrate-
reducing microorganisms at deep-sea hydrothermal vents. Since the microbial
contribution to the nitrogen cycle at deep-sea hydrothermal vents remains
largely unknown, this study is designed to fill this gap. Recent studies
revealed the occurrence of novel thermophilic microorganisms that couple the
reduction of nitrate with autotrophic CO2 fixation in marine geothermal
environments. The ecological significance of such a microbial community at deep-
sea vents is twofold: 1) these organisms contribute to the primary productivity
by fixing CO2, and 2) their nitrate respiratory metabolism (namely, the
reduction of NO3- to NO2-, N2, or NH4+) imply that nitrogen is conserved within
the vent system and is recycled into the vent nitrogen cycle. This research will
integrate novel cultivation and molecular techniques with stable isotope
analyses to explore the physiology of nitrate-reducing microorganisms, and to
assess their functional diversity and activity. By establishing a link between
physiology, phylogeny and activity, this study will contribute to our
understanding of the ecological relevance of nitrate-reducing organisms at deep-
sea vents, as well as their contribution to both the carbon and nitrogen
cycling. This research will also contribute to the expansion of the database of
genes relevant to CO2 fixation and NO3- reduction, allowing for the improvement
of detection tool for monitoring these microbial processes in the environment.
Training opportunities will be offered to one graduate student and several
undergraduate students, and educational and outreach activities associated with
several NSF-sponsored programs (e.g., the Mid-Atlantic Center for Ocean Science
Education Excellence and the Student Experiments at Sea) will be supported as
well.