* 0456335
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: 3D Temperature and Composition Structure of the Upper Mantle Using Seismological and Mineral Physics Constraints
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2008
* USD 153,695.00

This is a collaborative study between seismologists, mineral
&lt;br/&gt;physicists and geodynamicists at UC Berkeley and at the Univ. of
&lt;br/&gt;Michigan, the goal of which is to combine observational constraints
&lt;br/&gt;and theoretical tools from their respective&lt;br/&gt;fields and
investigate large scale 3D variations in temperature and &lt;br/&gt;major
element chemistry in the earth's upper mantle directly from the
&lt;br/&gt;inversion of seismic waveforms. At the heart of this proposed study
&lt;br/&gt;is the conjecture, supported by theoretical&lt;br/&gt;considerations,
that the one step inversion of seismic waveforms for &lt;br/&gt;physical
parameters such as composition C and temperature T, should &lt;br/&gt;yield more
stable results than the standard approach of first &lt;br/&gt;inverting for
velocity and attenuation structure separately, and then &lt;br/&gt;interpreting
the obtained maps in terms of physical parameters. The &lt;br/&gt;latter is
currently inhibited by the poor resolution in 3D upper &lt;br/&gt;mantle
attenuation, Q, due to contamination of amplitudes by largely
&lt;br/&gt;unmodelled, but&lt;br/&gt;significant, effects of focusing and
scattering. The coupled &lt;br/&gt;character of the equations in the one step
approach, combined with &lt;br/&gt;the strong sensitivity of amplitudes to T
(through anelastic terms) &lt;br/&gt;should offset the approximate character of
the available mineral &lt;br/&gt;physics partial derivatives as well as the
errors due to inadequate &lt;br/&gt;theoretical treatment of
focusing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will: 1) invert a global
collection of long period &lt;br/&gt;seismic waveforms for T and radial
anisotropy, using recent&lt;br/&gt;experimental contraints on dispersion and
attenuation in the &lt;br/&gt;uppermost mantle; 2) starting from the model
obtained in (1), they &lt;br/&gt;will test their ability to invert for lateral
variations in &lt;br/&gt;composition (as expressed in terms of basalt
depletion). Partial &lt;br/&gt;derivatives with respect to C and their
uncertainties will be &lt;br/&gt;evaluated and provided by the mineral
physicists in the team using a &lt;br/&gt;self-consistent formalism which
incorporates results from &lt;br/&gt;experiments and first principles
calculations. At this point, they &lt;br/&gt;will also incorporate geodynamical
constraints to increase &lt;br/&gt;resolution of the compositional component of
the inversion. An &lt;br/&gt;iterative procedure will be required at each step
in the inversion &lt;br/&gt;process, because of the dependence of various
partial derivatives on &lt;br/&gt;temperature, due to the presence of strong
attenuation and phase &lt;br/&gt;changes, as well as the large uncertainties
remaining in the &lt;br/&gt;estimation of these partial derivatives. The project
includes &lt;br/&gt;funding for two students and a post doc, who will be trained
using a &lt;br/&gt;cross-disciplinary approach.&lt;br/&gt;