* 0456937
* Electron Correlations and the Properties of Metals and Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* David Langreth, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2009
* USD 390,000.00

This theoretical project contains several related components in condensed matter
physics. The first is a density functional theory of both long-range and short-
range interaction between microscopic and mesoscopic bodies. Density functional
theory (DFT) provides a method for the calculation of the electronic and
geometric structures of molecules and materials that are too large for wave-
function methods to be practical. DFT has been very successful in calculations
on high density condensed matter and on covalently bonded molecules. However, it
has generally failed in applications to matter bonded by long-range van der
Waals (vdW) or dispersion interactions. Sparse matter, including soft condensed
matter, many types of layered condensed matter, many organic complexes, and
important parts of biological matter, have been out of reach. The principal
investigator has found methods which show promise for rectifying this problem,
and this research will further test and develop them. Applications to layered
solids, organic matter, and even biological matter, such as the nucleic acids
DNA and RNA, will be carried out. The second component of the project is the use
of the so-called quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) method on vdW complexes. This is a
method of electronic structure calculation based on computer sampling, which can
obtain results with a known accuracy. Although it is an important electronic
structure method in its own right, it will be used to supplement existing wave-
function calculations for the validation of the accuracy of the new density
functional methods developed. The third component will be an attempt to
understand transport in quantum dots acting as single electron transistors and
consisting of very small artificial structures embedded in metallic layers on
semiconductor surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The research on
DFT for vdW interactions has the potential to further our understanding of these
important and ubiquitous forces. The complementary work on QMC is an important
validation tool. The study of single electron transistors includes fundamental
concepts and issues in condensed matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Development of an effective DFT for vdW interactions will have wide
application and importance. Understanding of transport in quantum dots will
impact nanoelectronics. The project will provide excellent training for students
and postdoctoral associates.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical research
project in condensed matter physics deals with developing methods to understand
the electronic structure of atoms, molecules and solids. In particular, the
methods will apply systems in which components interact weakly and over long
range. Examples of such weakly interacting systems include much of organic
matter, including biological systems. Thus, successful completion of this
project can have wide impact. In a separate project the behavior of electrons in
quantum dots will be studied. This can lead to a better understanding of the
foundations of nanoelectronics The research provides excellent training for
students and postdoctoral associates.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;