* 0456908
* Collaborative Research:  Tailoring Solid Catalysis for Selective Reaction of Multifunctional Molecules
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Will Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 08/31/2008
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Tailoring
Solid Catalysts for Selective Reaction of Multifunctional Molecules
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0456899/CTS-0456908&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: John
Monnier/J. William Medlin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of South
Carolina Research Foundation/University of Colorado at
Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis (rationale for
decision):&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A major goal of modern catalysis research is
design and fabrication of "next generation" bimetallic catalysts that are
selective toward reaction of a particular functional group. Bimetallic catalyst
synthesis is typically carried out by either simultaneous co-impregnation of
both metal salts onto the catalyst support or by successive steps of metal salt
addition. For either of these preparative methods, it is virtually impossible to
ensure formation of only bimetallic particles; rather, formation of separate
metallic particles of both metals can and does occur. Thus, it is very difficult
to characterize such catalytic systems, and even more difficult to correlate
catalyst performance with bimetallic catalyst composition. One promising
technique is electroless deposition (ED), which allows one metal component to be
deposited in controlled quantities on the surface of a second metal. Because ED
is a method that can be scaled up for the economical production of large amounts
of catalyst, it shows great promise for catalytic applications in which
selectivity can be tuned through adjustment of the surface composition. In this
effort, ED will be employed as a tool for tailoring nanoscale, bimetallic
catalysts that may be selective for hydrogenation of one of the two diverse
functional groups of 1-epoxy-3-butene (EpB) and its isomer, crotonaldehyde
(CrH). The catalyst evaluation results will be coupled with fundamental modeling
and surface science studies to assess the utility of ED for preparation of
selective bimetallic catalysts, and to take steps toward making rational
improvements in catalyst design based on a fundamental understanding of bi-
functional, reagent surface chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader
technical impact, the selective hydrogenation of EpB and CrH represents an
important industrial target for production of a variety of fine chemical
products. ED-prepared catalysts that facilitate higher selectivity can help to
reduce process separations costs, over-use of feedstocks, and emissions to the
environments. This collaborative effort will also allow graduate and
undergraduate students to be involved in the integration of diverse research
approaches within the catalysis community, ranging from surface science
experiments to computational chemistry to selectivity probes of realistic
catalysts. The broad experience gained by the students who work on this project,
as well as the interactions with multiple principal investigators at different
institutions, will allow those students to recognize the important contributions
available from these different types of catalysis studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;