* 0456862
* SGER:  Superfluid State of Solid Helium Four
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2005,09/30/2007
* Haruo Kojima, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 09/30/2007
* USD 185,710.00

Recent torsion oscillator experiments showed the first probable evidence of
superfluidity of solid He-4 below 230 mK. It is now crucial to provide an
independent and distinct experimental verification of the superfluidity. In this
SGER project, it is proposed to search for propagation of fourth sound in solid
He-4. Fourth sound propagation occurs only if the material becomes superfluid
and the observation of it constitutes an unmistakable proof of superfluidity. It
is proposed to conduct the first such search in solid He-4 using a
superconducting film bolometer. When solid helium transforms into a superfluid,
an associated signature in specific heat is expected. In collaboration with
Prof. Chan's group (Pennsylvania State University), the specific heat of solid
He-4 will also be measured down to 5 mK at Rutgers University. The superfluidity
in solid He-4 should affect its mechanical properties such as its response to
externally applied stress. It is also proposed to search for the influence of
supersolidity on the phenomenon of stress-driven instability at the liquid solid
interface. All three proposed experiments are risky since the behavior of the
supersolid phase is largely unknown. The impact of the results will be enormous:
it will open up a new field of research in both experiment and theory to study
the fundamental physical mechanism behind the "supersolidity" at low
temperatures. The proposed research will expose and train undergraduates,
graduates and post-graduates in the advanced principles and technologies in
fundamental research in low temperature physics. The experience in the proposed
basic research will lay the intellectual foundation for the young scientists in
preparation for their future careers in academia, industries and society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Is it possible that a solid
can flow as if it has no viscosity? The answer is affirmative according to the
recent experiment carried out to measure the rotational inertia of solid helium
four at very low temperatures, just a few tenths of a degree above the absolute
zero temperature. It is now crucial to provide an independent and distinct
experimental verification of the superfluidity of solid helium. Through a series
of studies, this SGER project attempts to prove or disprove the existence of
"supersolid helium." The impact of corroborative proof of supersolid (or
otherwise) will be enormous: it will open up a new field of research in both
experiment and theory to study the fundamental physical mechanism behind the
"supersolidity" at low temperatures. When we understand this novel phenomenon,
improvements and control of materials properties such as friction, adhesion, and
flow, should become possible. Thus, these studies have potentially broad and
important impacts on fundamental science as well as eventual technological
advancement. The project will attempt to give an independent proof of
superfluidity of solid helium four by searching for the fourth sound
propagation, which would not occur unless the material is a superfluid. The
fourth sound is the acoustic wave in which only the superfluid fraction moves
leaving the rest of solid at rest. Observation of the fourth sound propagation
will provide an unmistakable proof of superfluidity. Another part of the project
is to measure the heat capacity of solid helium four down to 0.005 K in search
of thermodynamic signature of the superfluid transition. The proposed research
will expose and train undergraduates, graduates and post-graduates in the
advanced principles and technologies in fundamental research in low temperature
physics. The experience in the proposed basic research will lay the intellectual
foundation for the young scientists in preparation their future careers in
academia, industries and society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;