* 0456951
* Quantum Foundations and Quantum Information
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2008
* Robert Griffiths, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 203,143.00

Quantum Foundations and Quantum Information &lt;br/&gt;Project Summary
&lt;br/&gt;1. Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;Advances in the study of quantum
foundations using the (consistent or decoherent) histories approach have made it
possible to resolve, or at least better understand, a number of the paradoxes
which have perplexed students of quantum mechanics ever since it was developed
in the early twentieth century. The fruits of this work, in particular the
possibility of applying probability theory to microscopic quantum systems in a
consistent way, will be used to study some of the remaining conceptual
difficulties of quantum theory, in particular the nature of quantum locality:
are there or are there not in the quantum world nonlocal influences producing
action at a distance contrary to relativity theory? In addition, consistent
probabilistic ideas will be employed to elucidate the physical significance of
some of the standard tools used by quantum physicists, such as density operators
and POVMs, whose mathematical de nitions are clear and simple, but whose
intuitive significance is often very obscure and the subject of dispute. Various
problems in quantum optics, including the nature of the quantum jumps exhibited
by an ion in a trap when illuminated in a suitable way by laser light, will be
studied using simplified quantum models whose properties are easily calculated
and thus make it possible to get to the essential ideas behind quantum processes
without &lt;br/&gt;lengthy mathematical calculation. Finally, the nature of the
"weak measurements" introduced by Aharonov and collaborators will be studied
using POVMs and statistical correlations. &lt;br/&gt;The nature of quantum
information, as it arises in quantum computation and quantum cryptography, will
be investigated by applying ideas from standard (classical) information theory,
as developed by Shannon and his successors, to the statistical correlations
between microscopic quantum systems corresponding to consistent sets of
probabilities generated by different types of entangled state. A special focus
will be on the question of how much information of a particular type about one
quantum system is present in a different system due to their statistical
correlation. This will be studied both for quantum communication channels, where
one is interested in correlated quantum properties at two different times, and
for entangled states, where the properties are those of two different systems at
the same time. The question of how entangled quantum states can be
distinguished, and the nature of the statistical correlations that arise during
the process of decoherence, are among the subjects to be investigated from this
point of view. &lt;br/&gt;2. Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;The research effort will
contribute to the education program at Carnegie-Mellon University at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels through providing research projects for
students studying physics and computer science. Postdoctoral research associates
will have an opportunity to sharpen their skills while participating in this
research group, making them more valuable members of the scientific community.
Students and postdocs will take part in an ongoing seminar series in quantum
information, and occasional courses which address these subjects, both of which
attract other scientists and science students living in Pittsburgh. The results
of foundations research as embodied in occasional lectures and articles written
for teachers, possibly even a textbook, will help improve the teaching of
quantum mechanics, a subject which students always find very difficult, not
least because of the conceptual confusion produced by unresolved foundations
issues of the type this research is designed to clear up.&lt;br/&gt;