* 0456822
* Conference on Complex Analysis, Differential Geometry, and Partial Differential Equations; May 2-6, 2005; New York, NY
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Duong Phong, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Wing Suet Li
* 03/31/2006
* USD 30,000.00

Conference on Complex Analysis, Differential Geometry, and Partial Differential
Equations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a week-long
conference on the many aspects of&lt;br/&gt;complex analysis, differential
geometry, and partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations centered around the theme
of&lt;br/&gt;canonical metrics in geometry. Of particular
importance&lt;br/&gt;are recent developments such as multiplier ideal
sheaves,&lt;br/&gt;Bergman kernels and asymptotic stability in
geometric&lt;br/&gt;invariant theory, Hamiltonian dynamics and complex Monge-
Ampere&lt;br/&gt;equations, geometric heat flows, and energy
functionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Canonical metrics involve typically a non-
linear system&lt;br/&gt;of partial differential equations, where the unknown is
a&lt;br/&gt;tensor. They arise from geometry and topology, but
they&lt;br/&gt;are also closely to basic equations from
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;physics such as Yang-Mills equations and
Einstein's&lt;br/&gt;equations in general relativity. They are usually
very&lt;br/&gt;difficult to solve, but there has been recently an
influx&lt;br/&gt;of new ideas from many different directions. This
conference&lt;br/&gt;will help cross-fertilization of ideas between the
leading&lt;br/&gt;experts, and introduce a new generation of young
students&lt;br/&gt;and postdoctoral researchers to problems and methods in
the&lt;br/&gt;area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;