* 0456110
* U.S.-Chile Dissertation Enhancement:  Dispersal, Competition, and the Synergistic Interactions of Multiple Species Invasions
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2006
* John Wootton, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 04/30/2006
* USD 17,057.00

Proposal 0456110&lt;br/&gt;PI Wootton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this U.S.-Chile
dissertation-enhancement project supported by the Americas Program of the Office
of International Science and Engineering, John Wootton and Lisa Nelis of the
University of Chicago will pursue a program of research using a combination of
field experiments and modeling to investigate how a non-indigenous herbivore (a
rabbit) affects the structure of plant communities invaded by a non-indigenous
plant (trun). Research conducted on Robinson Crusoe Island, Chile will address
(1) mechanisms that control rates and patterns of invasion, (2) the role of
epizoochory in dispersal of seeds of native and non-indigenous plants, and (3)
the potential for synergistic, cross-trophic interactions among non-indigenous
organisms. This research will be done in collaboration with Jose Miguel Farina
Rivas from the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile and CONAF, the Chilean
counterpart to the US National Park Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactive
effects of different exotic species are poorly understood, and this work will
have significant implications for managing an island ecosystem. The project
focuses on a topic of considerable importance to conservation of native biota
and will facilitate an excellent collaboration between American and Chilean
ecologists. Each year of the study, copies of all new data, results, and
publications will be archived with all participants, and with CONAF for their
records and for their use in applications for funding for conservation and
restoration of the islands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;