* 0456086
* The development and implementation of algorithms to investigate drop fragmentation under shear for viscoelastic liquids with surfactant
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2009
* Yuriko Renardy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2009
* USD 199,998.00

The proposed research concerns the development and implementation of new
algorithms for the &lt;br/&gt;numerical investigation of drop breakup under
shear. The investigator has used the&lt;br/&gt;volume-of-fluid (VOF) approach to
simulate Newtonian liquids, including the effect of &lt;br/&gt;inertia, and
insoluble surfactants at low concentration. A fixed regular grid is used. The
&lt;br/&gt;motion of fluid interfaces is tracked by means of a color function,
which represents the &lt;br/&gt;volume fraction for a fluid in a grid cell. At
each time step of the numerical simulation, &lt;br/&gt;the color function is
advected with the flow, and gradients of it are used to reconstruct
&lt;br/&gt;the position of the interface and to compute the interfacial tension
force. In prior work, &lt;br/&gt;the first and second derivatives of the color
function have been approximated by finite &lt;br/&gt;differences. However, since
the color function is actually a step function, the use of
finite&lt;br/&gt;differences for derivatives in nonlinear combinations such as
curvature is problematic. The &lt;br/&gt;conventional remedy is to use a
smoothed color function. This, on the other hand, requires a &lt;br/&gt;length
scale of smoothing which is small relative to physical scales but still large
relative&lt;br/&gt;to the mesh size. In practice, smoothing introduces numerical
diffusion into the interfacial &lt;br/&gt;tension force. In drop breakup
simulations, for instance, smoothing on the order of two or &lt;br/&gt;three
times the mesh size still leads to non-convergence of satellite drop volumes
with &lt;br/&gt;spatial mesh refinement. The investigator has recently developed
the method PROST, which is a&lt;br/&gt;parabolic representation of the interface
in the surface tension force and which requires no&lt;br/&gt;smoothing. The
interface is reconstructed from a least square fit of a paraboloid to the
&lt;br/&gt;values of the color function in a given cell and its neighbors, and
the curvature and normal&lt;br/&gt;are retrieved from this paraboloid. This
leads to convergence of daughter drop volumes with &lt;br/&gt;mesh refinement.
The objective of the proposed research is to develop algorithms with the
VOF&lt;br/&gt;- PROST framework to simulate viscoelastic liquids with
surfactants, and to implement the code&lt;br/&gt;on large-scale parallel
processing systems. The mathematical model allows the liquids to
have&lt;br/&gt;memory, first and second normal stress differences, and shear-
thinning. A nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;constitutive model is used for soluble
surfactants, with advection along the interface and &lt;br/&gt;exchange with the
bulk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The breakup of liquid drops suspended in another
liquid occurs in a number of chemical &lt;br/&gt;processes, such as the
commercial mixing of molten plastics to form new materials in the
&lt;br/&gt;recycling industry. Upon mixing, the size and distribution of the
daughter drops influence &lt;br/&gt;the quality of the product, and therefore it
is important to be able to control these &lt;br/&gt;outcomes. This is difficult
to predict for a commercial mixer because of the complexity of
the&lt;br/&gt;fluid flow, resulting in a trial and error approach. The
investigator's starting point for a &lt;br/&gt;theoretical prediction is to
study the deformation of a single droplet in a well-defined
flow&lt;br/&gt;field. Numerical algorithms are devised to track the history of
drop deformation and breakup,&lt;br/&gt;which is an important contribution to
the fundamental knowledge base of manufacturing &lt;br/&gt;processes that
involve mixing two immiscible liquids. The success of this work depends on
the&lt;br/&gt;physical modeling of the liquids to compare with available
experimental data, the accuracy of&lt;br/&gt;the algorithms to solve the
equations, the implementation on high-performance computing
&lt;br/&gt;platforms, and established collaborations with engineers who perform
controlled experiments. A&lt;br/&gt;broader impact is that the algorithms apply
to a wider class of fluid-fluid systems, such as&lt;br/&gt;the processing of
physiological fluids. The participation of a postdoctoral research
&lt;br/&gt;associate and a graduate student is an essential educational
component of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;