* 0456055
* Digital Preservation Lifecycle Management:  Building A Demonstration Prototype for the Preservation of Large Scale Multimedia Collections
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2007
* Brian Schottlaender, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 04/30/2007
* USD 500,000.00

Increasingly, intellectual content is 'born digital', as a consequence of which
the digital library and digital archival communities find themselves faced with
unique preservation challenges, challenges that call for comprehensive digital
preservation lifecycle management processes. These processes, in turn, need to
be unobtrusive, with minimal impact on content production and dissemination. In
order to make it as easy as possible for content creators to preserve their
content for the long-term, preservation processes should be integrated into the
content production lifecycle. This project will demonstratef a software
technology that will comprise such a preservation environment for a video
collection that includes other related multi-media content such as audio,
transcripts, annotations, related and introductory Web pages, and descriptive,
technical, and rights metadata currently being captured in a FileMakerProTM
database. The proposal is to take an existing video production workflow that is
currently being used for producing and Web-casting video content in a small-
scale studio setting, and to integrate it with a digital preservation life-cycle
management process that will enable the digital content to be archived for long-
term preservation. The collection, 'Conversations with History', is produced at
the University of California, Berkeley, edited by University of California, San
Diego TV (UCSD-TV), and broadcast and Web-cast through
UCTV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major research and development challenge to
address the development and automation of preservation processes that comprehend
the accession, description, organization, and preservation of the video
collection and associated content. The automation of these processes requires
the integration of workflow systems that are used in active production with
preservation systems, and the tracking of the execution of the preservation
processes for completion and error recovery. The system will demonstrate an
effective preservation methodology by 1) ensuring that preservation 'of last
resort' is available for at-risk multi-media collections of critical lasting
importance; 2) ensuring that preservation is available for collections that will
expand and evolve over time, while managing evolution in the underlying software
technologies; and 3) demonstrating a standard reference model for digital
preservation lifecycle management that can be integrated into active production
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: A report from the April 2002
workshop sponsored by the NSF and the Library of Congress states 'Solutions are
urgently needed to prevent further loss of valuable digital information - these
problems are urgent - action is needed now, not some time in the future'. The
proposed demonstration of digital preservation lifecycle management addresses
this critical problem by showing that current software systems provide the
required functionality, can be implemented at scale, and can preserve at-risk
collections. The demonstration will show an ingestion model and collection
management for multi-media material, in which preserved intellectual capital is
easily accessible, and research results, educational material, and new knowledge
can be incorporated smoothly over the long term. The system integrates digital
library, data grid, and persistent archive technologies, with the goal of
providing a fundamental building block for long-term collection management and
preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: The NSF Cyberinfrastructure
program, the Library of Congress National Digital Information Infrastructure and
Preservation Program (NDIIPP), and the National Archives and Records
Administration (NARA) Electronic Records Archive all are actively concerned with
the preservation of data. The demonstration of the ability to extract material
from a production environment and import the&lt;br/&gt;material into a scalable
preservation environment is essential for making preservation viable. The
demonstration of publication, preservation, federation, and analysis will serve
as a proof of preservation&lt;br/&gt;concepts to a broad community including
humanists, social scientists, scientists, engineers, students, and&lt;br/&gt;the
general public. The extension of the demonstration project into a production
facility will enable other&lt;br/&gt;public and at-risk digital content to be
preserved. The preservation architecture will support federation
of&lt;br/&gt;existing digital libraries and preservation environments, enabling
the expansion of the facility to all&lt;br/&gt;communities. It will provide a
replicable model that will demonstrate a system that can contribute to
a&lt;br/&gt;scalable prototype for a truly national preservation backbone.