* 0456420
* Transactions between Granular Flow and Solidification: Merging Multiphase Transport with Statistical Mechanics
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2007
* Troy Shinbrot, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 03/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT - 0456420&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular physics has
undergone a renaissance of interest over the past decade, leading to new and
exotic phenomena ranging from solitary oscillons. [Umbanhowar, 1996] to as yet
unexplained traveling segregation waves [Choo, 1997]. These and other surprising
behaviors continue to be discovered at a regular rate largely because we cannot
predict outcomes in granular experiments in advance, as we can in the more
analytically mature companion field of fluid dynamics. In restricted regimes,
for example for rapid collisional flows, reliable granular models have been
developed and proven, but few if any predictive models exist that capture
multiple regimes ranging from the solid-like to the fluid-like. Therefore in
this proposal, we seek to focus precisely on the interface between solid-like
and fluid-like coexisting regions with the ultimate goal of producing an
experimentally validated, quantitative, first principles model that spans the
solidified-fluidized interface of granular beds. The proposed approach combines
detailed experimental measurements of granular density and flow data with an
existing analytic model. We will focus our investigations on cascading flow on a
disk: a system that has not been extensively studied before, yet reveals a rich
variety of states with complex interfaces that I believe can serve as a unique
and useful testbed for the investigation of the features of interest. In
addition to exhibiting numerous distinct patterned states, the disk system
permits us to probe bed responses to centrifugal stress, which will provide
unique insights into solidification and fluidization mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Significance &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is not
currently possible to make generally applicable and practically useful
predictions in granular systems where solid-like and fluid-like regions co-
exist. Yet this state describes a considerable range arguably even a majority of
industrial and geophysical granular systems (see below). The work proposed will
generate significant improvements both in quantitative characterization of
internal and surface states of such systems and in predictive modeling
capabilities. The work will achieve this through the combination of a validated
continuum model that permits the accurate simulation of solidified and fluidized
regimes simultaneously with the best available experimental techniques including
Particle Image Velocimetry of high speed video and X-ray Imaging. The
experimental configuration that we will study is unique and permits the
evaluation of how granular flow responds to changes in applied compressive
stress and induced shear. The computational model has been demonstrated to
correctly reproduce complex solid-fluid transitions in granular suspensions, and
will be extended to dry grains in this work. This approach will lead to a
detailed understanding of internal states within a complex granular bed, to
significant advances in rheological modeling of transitional granular flows and,
potentially, to a major improvement in predictive modeling capability to
problems previously inaccessible to accurate simulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Implications &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One does not
need to look hard to find broad implications of this research. On the industrial
side, the implications are clearcut: as we describe in the proposal
introduction, manufacturing efficiencies drop to 60% when granular materials are
involved [Nelson, 1995], and taking the pharmaceutical industry as a case in
point, entire manufacturing plants and product lines are not infrequently shut
down entirely due an inability to scientifically predict outcomes and consequent
failures in the reliable design of granular flow and mixing systems [USA, 1994;
Muzzio, 2002]. The data that the proposed work will provide will be of direct
benefit for the predictive design of industrial systems ranging from tumblers to
chutes in which both solidified and fluidized states co-exist. Further afield,
in geological systems the proposed work can be applied directly to landslide
dynamics, but even within this field, there are broader implications than one
might suspect. For example, there remains an unresolved paradox in Martian
geophysics in which there is simultaneously strong geomorphological evidence for
recent liquid surface water (e.g. sinuous channels) and definitive evidence that
surface temperatures and pressures are far below values that could sustain this
water [Christensen, 2003; Malin, 1999, 2000]. Into this controversy has been
thrown the suggestion that many of the landforms associated with liquid water
may in fact have been produced by dry Aeolian processes [Treiman, 2003; Leovy,
2003]. Yet there exists little in the way of fundamental predictive modeling
that could definitively confirm or refute this suggestion [Shinbrot, 2004b].
Likewise, in terrestrial geophysics, the energy dissipated by long runout
avalanches [Melosh, 1996] and by earthquakes [Scott, 1996] have been measured to
be perplexingly small, and the work that we describe stands to shed light on
frozen-fluidized granular interactions in these systems as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;