* 0456287
* US-UK Workshop: Cognitive Robots and Control
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2007
* Kazuhiko Kawamura, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 03/31/2007
* USD 49,956.00

This one-year award will support US participation in a U.S.-U.K. joint workshop
on "Cognitive Robots and Control," organized by the PI at Vanderbilt University
and by William Harwin at the University of Reading, to be held in Reading, UK,
in 2005. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The field of robotics has
evolved independently of cognitive science and neuroscience except for classical
artificial intelligence and neural networks. However, most robots lack
robustness. One challenge for the robotics community is the realization of
cognitive robots through the integration of robotic body and mind that can
handle difficult or novel situations. In the effort to understand human
cognition and to develop embedded cognitive artifacts, all three fields will
benefit by collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will bring
together researchers and students in robotics, philosophy of mind, cognitive
science, and computational neuroscience to address the following broad issues:
What can the robotics community learn from advances in cognitive science and
computational neuroscience to develop the next generation of robots? How can
international collaboration in this emerging field be established? What kinds of
research topics should be pursued? How can the robotics community contribute to
the cognitive science and neuroscience communities?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. The workshop will help develop: 1) strengthened partnerships between
researchers in the field of robotics, machine consciousness, cognitive science,
artificial intelligence (AI), and neuroscience; 2) the development of robots and
other cognitive systems capable of responding robustly in novel situations; and
3) test beds for cognitive scientists and neuroscientists to validate their
cognitive and learning algorithms and models. By including students and
underrepresented groups, the workshop will foster the development of new
researchers in this interdisciplinary area.