* 0456070
* US-Pakistan 2nd International Workshop on Research and Development in Information Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Ashfaq Khokhar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 20,000.00

0456070 &lt;br/&gt;Khokhar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
the Second International Workshop on Research and Development in Information
Technology to be held in Islamabad, Pakistan, in December 2004. The organizers
are Dr. Ashfaq Khokhar, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science at the University of Illinois at Chicago, Dr. Arif Ghafoor, Professor,
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, Indiana and Dr. S.M. Junaid Zaidi, Rector of the COMSATS (Commission
on Science and Technology for Sustainable Development in the South) Institute of
Information Technology in Islamabad, Pakistan. The purpose of the workshop is to
exchange information between the US and Pakistani sides on advances in
information technology and to discuss R&amp;D needs that may be met through
cooperative research projects. The key areas chosen for this workshop include:
information and network security, communication and networking technology, IT-
based applications, and embedded systems and pervasive computing. Several
parallel sessions will be organized to make use of the expertise of expatriate
and other US-based leading researchers. The workshop will include plenary
sessions to introduce cutting edge research in each of the four identified
areas, and two panel sessions to discuss future research trends in IT. The
workshop will provide a platform for fostering research collaborations among the
researchers from US and Pakistan and initiate research and development projects
related to key IT research areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project
supports US scientists to participate in the second US-Pakistan workshop to
discuss an area of great importance to both countries, and to identify potential
collaborative research where the two sides can complement each other's
capabilities. Drs. Khokhar and Ghafoor are experienced researchers with strong
records of NSF-funded projects. They are also familiar with the science scene in
Pakistan. Dr. Zaidi is also an experienced scientist who leads a major
specialized institute for IT in Pakistan and who will have the backing of that
country's Ministry of Science and Technology. The project will increase
collaboration in science and technology with Pakistan in an area of great
importance to both countries. This project is being supported by the Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Computer Network
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;