* 0456472
* Self-Organization in Network Glasses
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Punit Boolchand, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 12/31/2009
* USD 492,000.00

Controlled laboratory experiments on network glasses have recently permitted
decoding the physical principles that underlie self-organization of disordered
systems. Of particular interest, is the discovery of an "intermediate phase",
which is bounded by the rigidity and stress transitions. This phase displays
most unusual physical behavior including glass transitions (Tg) that are almost
completely thermally reversing in character and not aging with time at T < Tg.
This award will focus on sulfide- and oxide-glasses, in which the nature of the
intermediate phases will be explored using Raman scattering and modulated
Differential Scanning Calorimetric experiments. These glasses are widely used in
photonic and electronic applications, and the discovery of such phases in these
systems will impact information storage and memory applications. Graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students will participate in this project,
receiving training in this field and also sharing in the excitement of
discoveries of new glassy phases. An exchange of ideas and knowledge among the
participants and colleagues at other US universities and abroad will be continue
to strengthen the research.

Certain liquids upon cooling form disordered solids that consist of networks of
specific building blocks like tetrahedra or pyramids. These solids are called
network glasses and silica is a familiar example. Under specific conditions
network glasses can self-organize to display intriguing physical properties such
as thermally reversing glass transitions and absence of time evolution in
structure at temperatures below the glass transition temperature. The atomic
structural arrangements that lead to self-organization of disordered networks
are of scientific interest, and will be examined using sophisticated light
scattering and thermal probes. This project will focus on sulfide- and oxide-
glasses, in which novel glassy phases are expected. These materials are most
widely used in photonic and electronic applications, and the discovery of such
phases in these systems could have profound consequences on their applications.
Two full time graduate students including a female student, two part-time
undergraduate students, and two high-school students working in summer recess
will be involved in the scientific discovery phase of this work.