* 0456744
* Adulthood alterations in pain behavior, stress neuroendocrinology, and brain cFos expression resulting from neonatal noxious stimuli
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,09/30/2008
* Wendy Sternberg, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* john godwin
* 09/30/2008
* USD 174,132.00

This project investigates the long-term consequences of high-intensity sensory
stimulation during the neonatal period in the mouse. The role of early sensory
input in guiding the development of sensory pathways is well known for some
sensory modalities (i.e., vision), but not as well understood for the various
submodalities of somatosensation (the body senses: touch, itch, vibration,
tickle, pain). This project uses the newborn mouse as a model organism, since it
is born in a highly immature state (the equivalent of a 15 week gestational
human). Applying sensory stimulation to such an immature system will illuminate
the processes by which external stimuli affect the developing nervous system. It
is expected that since the developing nervous system is highly malleable, then
sensory input during this stage will have long-term, maybe even permanent
effects. Subjects will be exposed to a noxious stimulus during the neonatal
period (within hours to days following birth). In adulthood, these same animals
will be tested on a variety of measures to determine how sensory pathways form
in response to the neonatal stimulus. Following re-exposure to a noxious
stimulus, brain tissue will be examined for presence of cFos-a marker of neural
activity. Blood levels of hormones involved in the stress response will be
assessed, and behavioral responses to re-exposure to the stimulus will also be
measured. This project also aims to identify the underlying genetic mediators of
sensory-induced alterations. Thus, the undergraduate students who are involved
in all portions of the project will be exposed to a wide range of
neuroscientific techniques, from genes to cells to behavior. The findings of
this research will contribute to an understanding of how the nervous system
develops in response to sensory stimulation early in life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;