* 0456570
* Two-dimensional Cell Motility Model
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Roger Lui, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/2006
* USD 70,000.00

Many animal cells have the ability to crawl or glide over&lt;br/&gt;long
distance on a surface. For decades, scientists have been&lt;br/&gt;trying to
understand the mechanics of such movement. This is&lt;br/&gt;important because
cell movement is fundamental to many important&lt;br/&gt;biological processes
such as the formation and development of an&lt;br/&gt;embryo, wound healing, and
proper functioning of the immune&lt;br/&gt;system. The investigator and
colleagues develop a mathematical&lt;br/&gt;model of cell movement based on well
established physical and&lt;br/&gt;biological principles. With such a model,
testable prediction&lt;br/&gt;about any particular aspect of cell movement that
is being&lt;br/&gt;modeled can be made. One can also examine the contribution
of&lt;br/&gt;each sub-process of cell movement by altering the
appropriate&lt;br/&gt;parameters in the model, something which is not possible
to do by&lt;br/&gt;experiments. A good mathematical model can help cell
biologists&lt;br/&gt;better understand the principles of cell movement which
will in&lt;br/&gt;turn help doctors and people in the medical field improve
their&lt;br/&gt;treatment of certain types of diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Existing models of cell motility are either one-dimensional,&lt;br/&gt;meaning
that they only focus on a vertical strip in the middle of&lt;br/&gt;the cell, or
they are spatially discrete models. A&lt;br/&gt;one-dimensional model is
inadequate because the cell can only&lt;br/&gt;have length but no shape. It is
also known that certain protein&lt;br/&gt;filaments, which are cross-linked to
form the cytoskeleton of the&lt;br/&gt;cell that is responsible for cell
movement, are oriented&lt;br/&gt;differently at different parts of the cell. A
spatially discrete&lt;br/&gt;model is difficult to analyze mathematically
because of the large&lt;br/&gt;number of equations involved. The model the
investigator and his&lt;br/&gt;colleagues develop is a two-dimensional continuum
model that&lt;br/&gt;requires more sophisticated analytical and
computational&lt;br/&gt;techniques. Methods of study involve biological
experiments to&lt;br/&gt;determine the movement of cell boundary, development of
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical model using mechanics principles, analytical
and&lt;br/&gt;numerical studies of the resulting equations, and comparisons
and&lt;br/&gt;reconciliations of the analytical, numerical and
experimental&lt;br/&gt;results.&lt;br/&gt;