* 0456490
* FRG:    Collaborative Research:    New Trends in Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Akos Magyar, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2009
* USD 171,294.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for
0456538 Lacey, 0456306 Iosevich, and 0456490 Magyar &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed activity will focus a set of topics of current interest in Harmonic
Analysis: the Kakeya conjecture, the Fourier restriction problem and Carleman
estimates, the smoothing conjecture for the wave equation, and Zygmund's
conjecture on the differentiation along Lipschitz families of lines. Equally
central are newer questions that are being identified and studied, including the
discrete analogues of classical operators, aspects of the Fuglede conjecture,
Fourier integral operators with degenerate canonical relations and new classes
of singular integrals in complex analysis. Past advances in these subjects have
drawn influences from subjects such as Combinatorics, Additive Combinatorics,
and Number Theory to name some prominent areas. In turn, these questions are
making contributions to these same areas. The coordination of the efforts that
this proposal will permit should accelerate advances on this broad range of
topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities
concern central questions that will result in new modes of analytical technique
that bear on questions of, for instance, behavior of waves in higher dimensions,
and different aspects of the subtle distinctions between discrete, i.e. digital,
and continuous objects. In addition, the projects will draw upon methods and
techniques from a range of different areas of mathematics. The breadth and
sophistication of the analytical methods in the subject sheds new light on the
interrelationships between these areas. It also can be an obstacle to continued
research. This project has as an important of focus the training of graduate
students and postdocs in these emerging areas of research, and the wide variety
of techniques used in their analysis. These efforts will foster a next
generation of mathematicians, critical to the nations scientific infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;