* 0456125
* Wireless Biosignal Recording and Stimulation System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Jack Judy, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 08/31/2009
* USD 483,240.00

This award supports development of a device that will enable study of the
neuronal activity of freely moving, behaving, and socializing rodents or other
small animals in natural environments. To date, attempts to develop custom
hardware devices for wireless neural sensing have led to systems with varied
advantages and drawbacks as the result of trade-offs between power consumption,
noise and cost. The use of commercial off the shelf technology requires a much
smaller and faster development effort than required for custom efforts, while
simultaneously providing state-of-the-art data-processing, networking, and
communication technology. But such systems are typically bulky and power
intensive. This effort supported by this award represents a compromise between
the use of custom designed sub-systems and the use of off-the-shelf components.
The PI expects to achieve a balance between low-noise and low-power signal
transmission, data communication, and networking performance, while providing
unprecedented local digital signal processing and bi-directional communications
capabilities. Specifically, the objective is the development of a wireless
neural sensing, stimulation, and communication platform capable of 1)
transmitting multiple channels of neural signals from, and 2) applying pre-
defined or feedback stimuli to any number of freely behaving and interacting
rodents in their natural environment. Efforts will be focused on 1) completing a
comprehensive web-based two-channel wireless EEG recording system, 2) enabling
programmed event-based remote stimulation, and 3) implementing ultra low-power
multi-channel single-unit recording capabilities for chronic experiments. The
proposed wireless neural recording and stimulation system will serve as a
foundation for novel, comprehensive, and minimally invasive devices permitting
study of brain function in an unprecedented manner. The approach used in this
research proposal could potentially serve as a model for future research
endeavors in that it initially leverages a new and revolutionary technology for
near-term goals, and proceeds to enhance this underlying technology to meet
longer-term goals. Students at all postsecondary levels will be involved in the
project, through both hands-on research training and participation in a class
dealing with micro electro-mechanical systems.