* 0456001
* Digital Engineering Archives
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* William Regli, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 06/30/2009
* USD 514,146.00

For many industries, engineering design and manufacturing data needs to be
preserved over 50-to-75 year lifespans. Traditional digital data management
techniques are usually dependent on the proprietary formats of commercial
software systems and cannot guarantee the readability and utility of data over
long periods. Hence, while 3D CAD modeling has become indispensable, the
engineering part print (i.e., the 2D drawing) still remains a principal method
of design knowledge archival. The rich knowledge in 3D CAD about features,
manufacturing processes and artifact behavior are simply lost in translation.
The research team proposes to develop a representation and algorithmic
techniques to archive 3D CAD objects. The approach is to augment shape-based
representations with formal models of engineering semantics and domain-driven
segmentation algorithms. The rationale is that low-level shape information is
repres ntationally straightforward, and easily preserved; whereas native CAD/CAM
formats are proprietary and notoriously hard to preserve, even across
incremental product versions. Engineering semantics will be based on emerging
W3C, Semantic Web, ISO and NIST standards formalisms that will need to be
extended to handle new datatypes specific to complex engineering artifacts.
These will be mathematical logics described in the non-proprietary syntax of
international standards, and thus also easier to preserve than proprietary
representations. Lastly, techniques from databases will be extended to extract
and populate these representations from existing design tools and engineering
documentation.

This approach form the basis of a Digital Archive Toolkit for Engineering
(DATE), a set of tools to be developed and tested in collaboration with the
government/industrial partner Honeywell FM&T. Working with data from the United
States Department of Energy, the PIs will work with the agency-wide Advanced
Design and Production Technologies Initiative (ADAPT) team to apply techniques
developed in this research to indexing and storage of engineering data used at
the Kansas City Plant (KCP). The objective is to extract data to create Digital
Engineering Archives, enable answers to meaningful engineering queries on
archives of 3D engineering knowledge, and support long-term engineering
knowledge preservation.

Intellectual Merits

The relationships among shape and form, structure and function, and behavior and
semantics are among the most fundamental questions studied by science and
engineering. It is precisely these relationships that must be captured in
Digital Engineering Archives. While these problems are large in scope, by
focusing on the vital domain of discrete part manufacturing., the proposed
project is poised to produce theoretical results, novel techniques, in addition
to prototype systems. The aggregate output of the proposed project includes
advancements in representation and retrieval algorithms, as well as
contributions in basic computer science and engineering design and
manufacturing. The scope of the research spans pattern recognition, knowledge
representation, database semantics, as well as CAD/CAM/CAPP/PDM/PLM.

Broader Impacts

This research bridges the print information gap by developing a dynamic, self-
describing and information-rich alternative to the part print to create Digital
Engineering Archives. The availability of such a format will enable the creation
of systems for archival, retrieval and reuse of engineering knowledge and
activities for design teams operating throughout the product life cycle, which
may be 10, 25, or 50 or more years. The proposed DATE system will have an
immediate impact on the ability of industry to create data archives. Lastly, the
team's collaboration with industrial and government partners position this
project to have a significant positive effect on emerging NIST, W3C and ISO
standards, and on commercial CAD/CAM/PDM/PLM software systems.

Educational Impact

The project aims to create a novel experience for its graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as for the investigators from industry,
government and academia. Leveraging Drexel's cooperative education programs
(both graduate and undergraduate), the investigators plan extensive personnel
exchanges with DOE, NIST and other agencies. Lastly, the team will develop
educational and tutorial materials to demonstrate to the engineering community
how to apply computer and information science to create and maintain Digital
Engineering Archives.