* 0456713
* Systematic Mathematical Strategies for Multi-Scale Stochastic Modeling and Uncertainty in Atmosphere/Ocean Science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2012
* Andrew Majda, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* James Curry
* 08/31/2012
* USD 931,657.00

One of the grand challenges of contemporary science is a comprehensive
predictive model for the atmosphere and coupled climate system. This is one of
the most difficult multi-scale problems in science today because there is an
incredible range of strongly interacting anisotropic nonlinear processes over
many spatio-temporal scales; contemporary comprehensive computer models, GCM's,
are currently incapable of adequately resolving or parametrizing many of these
interactions on time scales appropriate for seasonal prediction as well as
climate change projections. Thus, the multi-scale problems in atmosphere/ocean
dynamics serve as important prototypes for developing new systematic multi-scale
strategies which are valuable in other scientific disciplines ranging from
nanotechnology to macro-molecular dynamics to protein folding, etc. The societal
impacts for these efforts are also large; it has been estimated recently that a
one-month increase in lead time for El Nino prediction would save $100 billion
worldwide. Basic questions which drive climate research are the prediction of
the weather from 1 to 14 days, the prediction of climate variations on seasonal
to yearly time scales, and finally, climate-change projections on decadal and
centennial time scales as well as quantifying the uncertainty associated with
these predictions. One of the striking recent observational discoveries is the
profound impact of tropical variations on all of these problems. The primary
influence of the tropics occurs through the interaction and organization of
clouds into clusters, super-clusters, and planetary-scale dynamics, an
inherently fully nonlinear multi-scale process. For climate change, water vapor
is the most important greenhouse gas and the microphysical processes in clouds
are a key mechanism for radiative feedback. In fact, only a 4% change in average
cloudiness would overwhelm the effects of CO2 in climate change. Current
evidence suggests that a few global planetary teleconnection patterns, such as
the Pacific North America Oscillation, often summarize the weather and climate
impact of the tropics for the mid-latitude atmosphere. Since it will be
impossible to run resolved coupled atmosphere/ocean comprehensive numerical
models for climate change, reduced models involving these basic large scale
patterns are of central importance. Majda proposes to continue work on some of
the most important issues and stumbling blocks for medium-range climate
forecasting through the tools of modern applied mathematics, centering around
novel strategies for: 1) multi-scale interaction of clouds, convection, and
planetary waves in the tropics; 2) stochastic modeling of unresolved features
for both the atmosphere/ocean and for quantifying uncertainty and predictive
capability in complex systems through information theory. This will lead to new
strategies for deterministic and stochastic parametrization of unresolved scales
for the atmosphere and ocean, potentially significant low-order dynamic
stochastic models for these processes, and more rigorous quantification of
uncertainty in weather and climate-change predictions. Such research often has
additional potential benefit for other disciplines in science and engineering;
also novel issues for applied PDE's and numerical analysis are expected to
arise.