* 0456971
* FDSS:  Solar and Space Science Development at the Institute for Astronomy
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2011
* Jeffrey Kuhn, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 04/30/2011
* USD 643,400.00

The Institute for Astronomy (IfA) is heavily involved in the experimental and
observational investigation of the solar magnetosphere -- this includes the
photosphere, chromosphere and, especially with the recent completion of a
coronal magnetograph, the outer solar atmosphere. This group has a long history
of leading the community with solar magnetic field data. The most recent
demonstration of direct coronal magnetic field measurements with the Haleakala
SOLARC coronagraph facility on Maui is expected to yield new tests of models of
coronal heating, mass ejection, and the energetics and dynamics of the solar
wind. These are longstanding problems, only partially constrained by
measurements of the solar magnetic boundary at the photosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new ability to measure chromospheric and coronal
magnetic fields can significantly improve understanding of the physics of the
magnetic solar atmosphere and the solar-terrestrial interaction. Achieving this
depends on making stronger connections between these new observational tools and
coronal modeling activities. The IfA proposes to realize this by forming a new
program, in part, around an existing research group at the University of
Hawaii's Institute for Astronomy. It has recently made a significant commitment
toward solar and space science and is ready to bring this program to a critical
mass by hiring and supporting a faculty member to start a
computational/theoretical effort. This individual will join a receptive academic
environment with an abundance of local computational resources and related
theoretical and computational research expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IfA's new
faculty opportunity is ripe for individual success, and it restores an
established solar physics graduate education program to "critical mass." A new
graduate assistantship, a college recruiting/lectureship program, a Maui Coronal
Summer School, and a focused coronal science workshop in Hawaii will amplify the
impact of this new faculty member. This integrated program will make use of the
IfA's investment in an expert outreach and public information support staff.
Maui science activities currently benefit from interactions with the NSF-funded
Center for Adaptive Optics, and will be augmented by the anticipated
construction of the Advanced Technology Solar Telescope (ATST) on Maui within
the decade. With these new resources, IfA will enhance US graduate education
opportunities in solar and space science, surpassing the IfA in the late 80's
and early 90's, when it educated a significant fraction of the US solar physics
community.