* 0456719
* Novel Cyclophane Ligands for Late Transition Metal Olefin Polymerization Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Zhibin Guan, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Rabinovich
* 07/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Dr. Zhibin Guan, Department of Chemistry, University of California - Irvine, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
for the development of cyclophane-based late transition metal catalysts for
olefin polymerization. First, current and new cyclophane diimine ligands will be
optimized for Ni(II) and Pd(II) based olefin polymerization catalysis. This will
be done by incorporating electron-donating and withdrawing substituents into the
ligands, by changing the backbone structure of the cyclophane diimines; and by
introducing fluorinated phenyl rings. Next, Fe(II) and Co(II) complexes of
cyclophane tridendate ligands will be explored as olefin polymerization
catalysts. This part of the project aims to define any macrocyclic effects of
cyclophane ligands on tridendate late transition metal catalyst systems.
Finally, late transition metal complexes of the cyclophane ligands will be
tested for ethylene homopolymerization and copolymerizations with polar
comonomers. The polymerization properties of the complexes will be correlated to
the catalyst structures. The trends observed and insights gained will guide
further design of better olefin polymerization
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts from the proposed activity
include interdisciplinary training of students at multiple levels. Minority and
women graduate and undergraduate students will be employed on this project.
Additionally, it will impact the polyolefin industry, where the successful
development of a commercially viable late transition metal polymerization
catalyst would have a tremendous impact. &lt;br/&gt;