* 0456053
* SGER: Designing and developing mobile computing infrastructures and architectures to support people with cognitive disabilities and caregivers in authentic everyday tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2006
* Hal Eden, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2006
* USD 107,292.00

The PI and his colleagues, as members of the Cognitive Levers (CLever) research
team within the Center for Lifelong Learning and Design at the University of
Colorado at Boulder, have suggested that a suitable mobile architecture could
support activities for daily living for people with cognitive disabilities. The
PI argues that in order to design cost-effective, intelligent technologies to
connect caregivers and members of the target community, we must leverage
existing handheld and data network technologies and identify critical
technologies necessary to complement and address gaps in current mobile,
ubiquitous computing environments and platforms. The PI notes that the recent
commercial introduction of a new generation of mobile handheld devices that
combine Wi-Fi and wide-area cellular data technology provides a potentially
cost-effective platform upon which to build and evaluate prototype components.
In this exploratory project, the PI and his team will investigate the
feasibility of their ideas. They will design mobile architectures based on
theories of distributed intelligence ranging from "thin client" architectures to
peer-to-peer networks. They will obtain performance data from real-world systems
while carrying out authentic tasks, thereby obtaining specific content
specifications. They will investigate the limits of the targeted technologies
with respect to: connectivity between base and mobile stations, data
accessibility, and throughput; location-awareness; technical sufficiency of
commercial handheld devices; and overall architecture design. The PI expects
that project outcomes will enable him to develop grounded theories and effective
architectures for the use of new technologies in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The target community for this
research has traditionally been under-served by society. This exploratory
"stress test" of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) mobile technologies with
laboratory prototype components (MfA, MAPS, LifeLine), while performing real-
world tasks, in order to understand current capabilities, constraints, and
technical requirements, should catalyze rapid and innovative advances in the
design of a robust, mobile socio-technical environment to effectively support
people with cognitive disabilities and their caregivers in authentic everyday
living activities.