* 0456982
* Molecular Dynamics Exploration of the Effects of Dissolved Ionic Additives on Interfacial Region Structure and Heat and Mass Transfer in Thin Liquid Films
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Van Carey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 07/31/2009
* USD 209,204.00

Molecular Dynamics Exploration of the Effects of Dissolved Ionic Additives on
Interfacial Region Structure and Heat and Mass Transfer in Thin Liquid Films
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Van P. Carey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical Engineering
Department&lt;br/&gt;University of California, Berkeley,
CA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(NSF proposal
0456982)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will include development of two different types of molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations that will be used to explore the effects of dissolved
ionic species on the interfacial region structure and heat and mass transfer in
thin liquid water films. We will use the two different types of simulations to
explore the effects of ionic additives in two contexts: (1) in a free thin
liquid film between bulk phases, and (2) in a thin liquid film on a solid
surface. The proposed MD simulations will explore how the ions affect the
interfacial region structure, the interfacial tension, and the stability of
water films. They will also explore the previously observed variation of the
directional mass diffusion coefficients and the directional thermal
conductivities in the film. In these simulations, appropriate potential
functions for each species will be used to model force interactions among water
molecules, ions and wall atoms. MD simulations will be run with pure water and
dilute solutions of water and NaCl, and water and KCl for conditions spanning
wide ranges of solute mole fraction, film thickness and system pressure. The
solution simulation results will be extensively analyzed to determine how
variation of ion concentration affects interfacial region structure, near
interface properties, and film stability. This research will advance the state
of the art for MD simulation methods and it will provide a molecular level
understanding of how ions affect bubble merging processes and near-interface
transport and stability in liquid water films on solid surfaces. Because these
phenomena play central roles in many common boiling and condensation processes,
the results of these studies will contribute to technological advancements in
water quenching of cast metal parts, microevaporator design, and a number of
other applications in which thin film evaporation or condensation is important.
The exploration of transport in the interfacial region will clarify the
mechanism of the observed anisotropic mass diffusion and heat transfer. This
feature of transport in the interfacial region may be critically important in
the spread of surfactants over the interface during transient processes, and in
molecular assembly schemes in which construction occurs at a liquid-vapor
interface. The effects of ions on interfacial phenomena in water revealed by
this investigation will also contribute to the understanding of biological and
environmental processes at a liquid water interface. An undergraduate research
component of this research will aim to encourage underrepresented undergraduate
students to consider graduate studies in MD simulation methods, advanced
computing or nanoengineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;