* 0456569
* SGER: Impact of Hurricane Charley on Residential and Commercial Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Rajan Sen, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 04/30/2005
* USD 5,040.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As average American homes have become larger in
size, their shapes have deviated from rectangular boxes with simple roofs to
irregular plan forms necessitating complex roof configurations. The performance
of these newer buildings was severely tested by Hurricane Charley, the first
Category 4 hurricane to hit Florida in 12 years. A preliminary post-Charley
survey found that roof damage in newer homes was in many instances limited to
missing tiles or shingles. This damage therefore provides a qualitative map of
the wind pressure distribution and its intensity in irregular structures under
hurricane force winds. Such data from actual buildings is invaluable for
calibrating numerical and experimental analyses of irregular
structures.&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this study is to compile wind damage data
systematically and expeditiously before it is irretrievably lost. The focus of
the data collection will be (1) roofs of selected irregular structures with
missing tiles or shingles as discussed, (2) open structures such as gas stations
and carports - the failure of these structures under category 1 wind loads (e.g.
due to Hurricane Charley and more recently Hurricane Frances as they traversed
across Polk County) suggests possible deficiencies in code provisions that may
require rectification through model testing and (3) floor slabs of failed
commercial buildings to determine if they assisted footings in supporting uplift
loads as suggested by testing and analysis. Evidence from failed structures will
lead to more effective design, construction and retrofit. The information
gathered will enable future calibration of computational models and/or wind
tunnel testing for determining wind pressure coefficients in irregular, low-rise
buildings. Emphasis will be placed on obtaining quality and complete data for
the selected structures.&lt;br/&gt;