* 0456926
* Thematic Year on Geometry of String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2006
* Melanie Becker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Cooper
* 02/28/2006
* USD 15,000.00

"Funding request to help organize a workshop on on the Geometry of String Theory
at the Fields Institute" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fields Institute
is running an intensive program on the Geometry of String Theory from February
through July of 2005. The proposal seeks funding of $15,000 from the NSF to
support young American physicists who wish to participate. The workshop will be
during the second semester of a year-long program on the geometry of string
theory. There will be a concentration on physical aspects of the theory in this
period and a serious attempt to develop real collaboration between
mathematicians and physicists. The program will be devoted to mathematical
subjects motivated by string theory and to recent developments in string theory
and related physical fields which are of strong mathematical interest. The aim
of the program is to foster new progress in the continuing drive towards
understanding the foundations of string/M-theory, and in the wealth of new ideas
involving D-branes, BPS states and various dualities which are of great
mathematical importance. Further, it will foster interactions between such areas
of mathematics as derived categories, elliptic cohomology, geometric Langlands
correspondence, quantum cohomology, differential geometry varieties with special
holonomy and of special Lagrangian varieties. &lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly funded between Physics and the Office of International Science and
Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;