* 0456681
* Electroweak Interactions at Very High Energies:   Precision Tests of the Standard Model and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2009
* Doreen Wackeroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 09/30/2009
* USD 160,000.00

The PIs intend to investigate possible deviations from the Standard model in the
electroweak interactions of top quarks and Higgs bosons, and to develop improved
theoretical calculations and computational tools which are needed to perform
precision studies of SM (Standard model) and SUSY particles at the Fermilab
Tevatron, the CERN Large Hadron collider (LHC), and a future e +e_ Linear
Collider. In order to extract precise physics information from these
experiments, theoretical predictions must match or exceed the experimental
accuracy. In light of the anticipated experimental accuracy, current predictions
must be improved. This requires first the calculation of radiative corrections
and then their implementation in Monte Carlo event generators for realistic
simulations. The proposed activities will contribute to an improved
understanding of the properties of elementary particles and their interactions.
The tools developed will be made publicly available and will help the
experimental high-energy physics community to fully exploit the potential of
present and future collider experiments for testing the SM and searching for
signals of new physics. This project will provide an excellent training ground
for students at both the undergraduate and graduate level, teaching them skills
valuable beyond the scope of particle physics research. The proposed activities
will be pursued in collaboration with scientists worldwide, partly in context of
the American Linear Collider Physics Group, and will further US international
joint scientific efforts.

