* 0456781
* Banach Space Structures of Non-commutative L^p-spaces and Non-commutative Martingale Inequalities
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2008
* Narcisse Randrianantoanina, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2008
* USD 104,336.00

This research project will focus on problems dealing with Banach space theory
and its connections with operator algebras and operator theory. The main
directions to be considered are (1) aspects of non-commutative spaces of
p-integrable functions/operators, (2) non-commutative Hardy spaces, and (3) non-
commutative martingale inequalities. If p is equal to 1, the non-commutative
space of integrable operators is the predual of von Neumann algebra and reflects
many important properties of the underlying algebras. The basic permanence
question in this direction of research is whether or not a given property can be
lifted from a given function space to its non-commutative counterpart. An
important direction to be considered is the study of different structural
properties of reflexive subspaces of preduals of von Neumann algebras. For
instance, it is still unknown if such spaces have the fixed point property for
non expansive maps. For the case of Hardy spaces, the primary goal is to develop
and extend tools from harmonic analysis to the non-commutative settings. In a
somewhat different direction the ongoing research on non-commutative martingales
will be considered. One of the main goals is to find the appropriate
quantization of different classical inequalities, and apply these results to
C*-algebras and von Neumann algebras, as well as to some other related areas.



This research represents work of an interdisciplinary nature on mathematical
analysis. Banach space theory, which is the main topic of this proposal, studies
notions of distances on infinite dimensional vector spaces. It provides general
framework for several fields of mathematics. The theory of function spaces
played a crucial role in the development of Banach space theory for several
decades. The current project studies a relatively new concept of non-commutative
analogue of function spaces in which functions are replaced by operators. These
spaces includes C*-algebras, preduals of von Neumann algebras among many others.
C*-algebras turn out to be one of the most important structures in mathematics.
They have significant applications to other parts of sciences (for examples,
geometry, mathematical physics and quantum mechanics),so it is important to
consider them from many different point of view. Non-commutative probability
provides one possible framework for a probabilistic viewpoint in quantum
mechanics.

