* 0456399
* U.S.-Japan  Seminar: Simulations of Complex Behavior from Simple Models
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2009
* David Landau, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 09/30/2009
* USD 28,050.00

0456399&lt;br/&gt;Landau&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan joint workshop for
scientists on simulations of complex behavior from simple models to be held in
Kannapali, Hawaii from June 26-29, 2005. The co-organizers are Professor David
Landau at the University of Georgia in Athens and Professor Yutaka Okabe at the
Tokyo Metropolitan University in Japan. Computer simulations in statistical
physics have resulted in impressive gains in knowledge in diverse areas of
physics. With the advent of parallel computing platforms, it has become possible
to simulate quite large systems and we can now seriously consider ways to span
many orders of magnitude in length scale by using complementary algorithms.
There are many problems in physics where the model of interest is not very
complicated but the resultant behavior is extremely complex and progress demands
extraordinary measures. Questions still remain about whether or not certain
models even have phase transitions to ordered states. Therefore, the goal of the
workshop is to focus on understanding the problems with long time scales and
complex structures which occur in diverse systems and to examine ways of
overcoming these difficulties. The topics of interest range from the
determination of critical exponents in different spin models to the nature of
phase transitions in complex systems, such as glasses, and the description of
groundstates in complex systems such as spin glasses and folded protein models.
There will also be emphasis on development of algorithms for both classical and
quantum models to deal with the long time scales including those which occur for
nucleation at very low temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers
have complementary scientific expertise in the field. This enables them to
evaluate and attract the best science researchers to participate. Devising
effective strategies that would make computer simulation of these physical
systems practical could lead to significant advances in our study of protein
folding, glasses, growth, and various mathematical models that have presented a
challenge over the years. There is also a high probability of stimulating the
development of new algorithms and stimulating new science. The workshop
organizers have made a special effort to involve postdocs, graduate students and
underrepresented groups as both participants and observers. The exchange of
ideas and data with Japanese experts in the field will enable U.S. participants
to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative
projects. Following the seminar the organizers plan to establish a workshop web
page. Conference proceedings will be published on this web site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;