* 0456176
* Theoretical Studies of Aqueous Solvation of Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/31/2004,03/31/2006
* Toshiko Ichiye, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2006
* USD 254,320.00

The long-term goal of this research, funded by the Molecular Biophysics Program
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and
Computational Program in the Division of Chemistry, is to understand the
influence of water on the structure and function of proteins. To accomplish
this, Dr. Ichiye is developing fast and accurate treatments of solvent for
computer simulations of biological macromolecules. This project focuses on the
development of the soft, sticky dipole (SSD) potential energy model of water.
The single-site SSD model is a considerable advance over three-site models
commonly used for biological simulations because it has better structural,
dielectrical and dynamical properties and yet is four times faster in molecular
dynamics simulations. The SSD model represents a water molecule as a Lennard-
Jones sphere, a point dipole, and a tetrahedral "sticky" hydrogen bond
potential. Therefore, the interaction energy between two water molecules depends
only on the position and orientation of each molecule in the SSD model, whereas
it depend on the positions of the oxygen and the two hydrogens of each molecule
in the three-site models. The aims in developing the model are (1) to
investigate its pure water properties further, (2) to improve the water-solute
interaction, (3) to implement it into a molecular mechanics computer program for
biological macromolecules, and (4) to add electronic polarizability. The
scientific aims are (1) to characterize water in and around rubredoxin and other
iron-sulfur proteins, particularly near the metal site, and (2) to determine the
physical origins of the anomalies in the temperature-dependence of water density
and in the dynamics of supercooled water. Since these issues require very long
simulation times and may depend crucially on the hydrogen bond potential, SSD is
ideal for these studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of the SSD model
will impact many areas of research. For the scientific community as a whole, the
development of fast but accurate models of water for computer simulations is
important for understanding the complex behavior of water as well as for greatly
improving the speed and accuracy of simulations involving solutes (including
biological macromolecules) in aqueous solution. In this research, the accurate
characterization of the structure and dynamics of water near the metal sites of
iron-sulfur proteins is crucial because it strongly affects their electron
transfer properties. Specifically, computer simulations will be used to
investigate whether water entering the protein via "water gates" serves as a
mechanism for controlling electron transfer specificity in these
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;