* 0457022
* Regular Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Michaela Vancliff, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 07/31/2010
* USD 102,000.00

This award supports the research of Michaela Vancliff to work in&lt;br/&gt;non-
commutative algebra, with special emphasis on problems arising &lt;br/&gt;from
the theory of regular algebras and non-commutative algebraic
&lt;br/&gt;geometry. She is interested in the graded-module category viewed as
&lt;br/&gt;a geometric space, with certain graded modules playing the role of
&lt;br/&gt;geometric objects. The linear geometric modules (point modules, line
&lt;br/&gt;modules, etc) are parametrized by so-called linear schemes. Vancliff
&lt;br/&gt;plans to study how the structure and role of higher-dimensional
linear &lt;br/&gt;schemes generalize the structure and role of point schemes.
She intends &lt;br/&gt;to produce algebro-geometric techniques that allow the
easy construction &lt;br/&gt;of regular algebras of global dimension four that
have finitely many &lt;br/&gt;points and a one-parameter family of line modules;
such techniques would &lt;br/&gt;allow researchers in the field to easily create
examples on which to &lt;br/&gt;test their conjectures. An underlying theme of
her research is to &lt;br/&gt;classify the line schemes that arise for "generic"
quadratic regular &lt;br/&gt;algebras of global dimension four. Vancliff is also
interested in &lt;br/&gt;connections between this type of geometry and that of
various &lt;br/&gt;Poisson-geometric structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems
of polynomial-style equations and their solutions play a &lt;br/&gt;critical
role in almost every scientific field, such as statistical &lt;br/&gt;mechanics,
elementary-particle physics, quantum mechanics, robotics,
&lt;br/&gt;crystallography, networking, etc. Often, the solutions cannot be
found &lt;br/&gt;by experimentation, and often they are not numbers but are
functions &lt;br/&gt;(e.g., differential operators or matrices), and so, in
general, they do &lt;br/&gt;not commute. The science of seeking methods that
find all solutions to &lt;br/&gt;any system of polynomial-style equations in
non-commuting variables is &lt;br/&gt;called non-commutative algebra. To find
the solutions, the main idea is as &lt;br/&gt;follows. One associates to such a
system of equations a certain algebra; &lt;br/&gt;one that encodes all the
properties of the original equations. Associated&lt;br/&gt;to this algebra are
modules, and these encode all the properties of the &lt;br/&gt;original
solutions. Hence, in order to find all the solutions, one should &lt;br/&gt;find
all the modules for the associated algebra. In many of the
&lt;br/&gt;applications, the algebras that arise in this way tend to share
certain &lt;br/&gt;properties; they are called regular algebras and are the main
focus of &lt;br/&gt;Vancliff's projects. One of the goals of non-commutative
algebraic geometry,&lt;br/&gt;the subfield in which Vancliff works, is to use
geometric techniques to &lt;br/&gt;find certain modules (point modules, line
modules, etc) of the regular &lt;br/&gt;algebra, and then to use those modules
to find the modules giving the &lt;br/&gt;solutions to the original system of
equations. Vancliff's underlying goal &lt;br/&gt;is to improve on these
geometric techniques and to understand better how &lt;br/&gt;they relate to the
structure of the category of modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;