* 0457379
* Development of Modeling and Optimization Tools for Hybrid Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Lorenz Biegler, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2009
* USD 32,200.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lorenz Biegler &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number :
0457379&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Carnegie Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Development of Modeling and Optimization Tools for Hybrid
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimal design under unknown information is a key task in
process systems engineering. This project considers formulations that
incorporate two types of unknown information, uncertainty in the modeling
information and variability in the operation of the process. We will apply these
formulations to the modeling and optimization of dynamic hybrid systems. Such
systems occur widely in nature (particular in biological, chemical and
mechanical applications) and are also essential components of economic planning
models. For optimization formulations, these discontinuous decisions are
represented through mixed integer nonlinear programs (MINLPs), or mathematical
programs with complementarity constraints (MPCC). Our research will consider
both MINLP and MPCC problems over a broad set of application domains and we
intend to develop new optimization strategies. These research results will be
applied to broad set of applications including systems biology and drug design,
planning and scheduling models for enterprise wide optimization, applications of
hybrid models in mechanical and process engineering systems. Finally, the
results of this research will allow consideration of challenging applications
too large to be considered with existing optimization strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the project are:&lt;br/&gt;i. creation of collaboration between the Carnegie
Mellon University, Koc University (Turkey), and Middle East Technical University
(Turkey)&lt;br/&gt;ii. establishment of a bioinformatics related research
activity in the PSE group at Carnegie Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;iii.
incorporation of the modeling and optimization methods in the graduate courses
at the participating universities&lt;br/&gt;iv. participation of undergraduate
students in hybrid systems research will be accomplished through term projects
in the courses (see .Educational Plan. section)&lt;br/&gt;v. models and
optimization algorithms developed in the project and the results will be made
publicly available through publications, presentations and through a web page
specifically designed for this project&lt;br/&gt;vi. a concerted effort to
include underrepresented groups and minorities into our research program will be
a key component of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;