* 0457374
* Studies in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2008
* Bruce Barnett, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* MARVIN GOLDBERG
* 03/31/2008
* USD 1,675,000.00

Funds are requested to support a program of experimental particle physics
research at the world's highest energy hadron colliders. The program involves
the continuing collaboration in the CDF experiment at the Fermilab Tevatron and
the CMS experiment at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC). The CDF experiment
is currently in a data-taking phase and is expected to run for a number of
years. The CMS experiment is being prepared to begin operation in 2007. The
proposed program has considerable intellectual merit. The scientific goals of
the program are to determine the source of spontaneous symmetry breaking and to
make precise heavy quark measurements that constrain physics beyond the Standard
Model. The proposed program is beginning at the lower luminosity and energy at
the Tevatron where the short term goals are to study heavy quark physics. Many
theoretical mechanisms of spontaneous symmetry breaking include states that
preferentially decay into heavy quarks or other long-lived states. If the
luminosity of the Tevatron increases significantly, the search for new states
related to spontaneous symmetry breaking may become feasible and will rely on
techniques associated with heavy flavor physics. Current theoretical ideas
suggest that mechanisms of spontaneous symmetry breaking should manifest
themselves at the LHC. For hardware, the JHU group has chosen to contribute to
the silicon-based vertex tracking of both experiments. The silicon technology
permits the identification of long-lived states by searching for secondary
vertices displaced from the primary vertex. JHU has contributed to the hardware,
software, commissioning, and calibration of silicon strip vertex detectors for
CDF. Similar contributions are proposed for the forward pixel tracking system of
CMS, particularly in the areas of sensor development, system design,
infrastructure, and software. JHU has created an N-tiered database for CDF that
will have direct application to CMS and other experiments. A number of studies
of heavy quark states with the moderate statistics are currently available at
CDF. Results of these analyses are the first step in continuing studies that may
eventually give new insight into the origin of the matter dominance in the
universe and may contribute to the understanding of the origin of mass. The
impact of the proposed research program reaches beyond particle physics. The
proposed work on active pixel detector technology has application to
instrumentation used at synchrotron light sources which study materials and
biological systems. The pixel simulation code developed by the JHU group may
have applications in astronomy in the understanding and optimization of infrared
detectors used in satellite-borne telescopes. The proposed work on distributed
databases has strong overlap with work being done by JHU colleagues for several
large astronomy projects. Distributed databases are another internet-based
technology that could have far-reaching application in all sectors of the
society. In addition, the proposed research has a strong educational component.
It provides direct support and training for a number of graduate and
undergraduate students. JHU hosts a QuarkNet center which has a current
membership of 11 Baltimore area high school teachers. There is a plan to work on
a user friendly web interface that will permit high school students to submit
particle physics queries to the Open Science Grid. The JHU QuarkNet Center has
initiated an annual regional Physics Fair.