* 0457504
* Topics in Dilation Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2008
* Scott McCullough, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2008
* USD 51,564.00

The Sz.-Nagy Dilation Theorem, which models a contraction operator on Hilbert
space as the adjoint of an isometry restricted to an invariant subspace has had
a profound influence on operator theory and its applications. Indeed, dilation
theorems, which represents an operator (or algebra of operators) on Hilbert
space from a specialized class as a coherent part of a nice operator (or algebra
from the class are an integral part of operator theory and connect to a broad
range of mathematics and have significant applications in physics, systems
theory, and engineering. This project pursues three related lines of
investigation. Namely, dilation theoretic aspects of multi-variable operator
theory in both the commutative and non-commutative setting and single-variable
operator theory on multiply connected domains. There are two objectives in the
non-commutative case. First to establish that convexity in this setting must
take a very simple form; and second to begin the concomitant development of a
theory of non-commutative real algebraic geometry. The study of the dilation
theory and completely positive maps associated to multiply connected domains has
a long tradition in operator theory and an aim of this project is study a
problem known as rational dilations for domains of genus three or larger.(A disc
with g discs removed is a domain of genus g.) This work is expected to make
connections with the theory of theta functions and Riemann surfaces.
successfully used in the genus two case include the theory of theta functions,
Riemann surfaces. The work on commutative multi-variable operator theory, more
accurately described as the study of non-self-adjoint operator algebras (with
some added structure), has as an objective the extension of familiar operator
theoretic results for $H^\infty$ of the unit disc.



Operator theory has a history of rich interplay with engineering and physics as
well as other vital areas of mathematics including complex function theory and
algebraic geometry. Originally developed as a tool to study integral and
differential equations arising in physics, operator theory, operator algebras,
and operator systems play an important role in modern quantum physics and
fundamentals of operator theory are now basic technology in systems theory which
in turn has important applications in image processing and control theory - the
mathematics behind automatic controllers such as autopilots. The proposed work
builds on operatortheoretic ideas with a view toward applications to systems
theory, control theory, operator algebras, and function theory. The
investigation also connects with non-commutative algebraic geometry and Linear
Matrix Inequalities or LMIs. Many engineering problems can be formulated as
matrix inequalities in which the variables are noncommutative (xy is not the
same as yx). Moreover, often convexity is either present, as is the case with
LMIs, or desirable. This project will pursue the theme that convex MIs can be
converted to LMIs.