* 0457552
* FDSS: A New Tenure-Track Solar Physicist at University of Colorado (CU)-Boulder: Catalyst for Change
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2005,12/31/2011
* Susan Avery, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 12/31/2011
* USD 1,000,280.00

The University of Colorado at Boulder (CU/Boulder) proposes to hire a new
tenure-track faculty member in Solar Physics, to complement Boulder's strong
community in solar and space physics both at CU and at institutions across the
Boulder Valley (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration/Space
Environment Center (NOAA/SEC), National Center for Atmospheric Research/High
Altitude Observatory (NCAR/HAO), Southwest Research Institute (SwRI), etc).
Currently, despite the large number of solar physicists in the Boulder
community, there is no tenure track faculty member actively working in solar
physics at CU, significantly inhibiting the growth of CU graduate programs in
this space physics discipline. The potential addition of a faculty line in solar
physics comes at an opportune time of overall transformation of the solar and
space physics graduate and upper-division undergraduate programs on the
CU/Boulder campus, including the development of a new integrative first-year
graduate course in solar and space physics and new cross-departmental graduate
courses. This proposal would enhance these endeavors, as well as support a named
graduate student fellowship and an undergraduate research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the space industry is a mature and
essential part of the global economy and the commercial and governmental
interests of the United States, it is essential that the US cultivate the talent
needed to thrive and excel in this arena. This proposal would develop new talent
for the US work force through both enhanced graduate and undergraduate
education, an imperative identified in the recent NRC Decadal Survey on space
physics. Space weather and the concomitant threats it poses to our technological
infrastructure present important societal impacts. The Laboratory for
Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP) at CU/Boulder, the research home of the new
faculty hire, has a leading role in knowledge transfer and empirical modeling as
part of the National Science Foundation (NSF)-sponsored Center for Integrated
Space weather Modeling (CISM). LASP performs this work in close cooperation with
NCAR and NOAA/SEC, pursuing efforts to consolidate and integrate results from
many international research programs and campaigns. The strengthening of solar
and space physics at CU/Boulder will directly enhance LASP's ongoing Education
and Public Outreach program in space weather. This EPO program is gaining
national recognition for its space physics curriculum enhancements, teacher
workshops, distance learning programming, and its new planetarium show entitled
"Space Storm."