* 0457194
* Determination of the mass of the Electron anti-neutrino via beta decay
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Manfred Fink, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 08/31/2009
* USD 178,593.00

Summary of NEXTEX, the Neutrino mass EXperiment at
TEXas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to determine the mass of the
electron neutrino from observation of the end point of the beta-decay spectrum
of molecular tritium. The current limit on neutrino mass from this technique is
around 2 eV/c2, but this result appears to be dominated by systematic
uncertainties. The mass is expected to be at least an order of magnitude less
than this value, possibly around 0.2 eV/c2. NEXTEX proposes to make this end
point observation using purely electrostatic analysis of the electrons produced
in the beta decays, unlike the previous measurements and KATRIN, the experiment
that is expected to provide the next major step in accuracy, all of which
utilized magnetic analysis of the electrons resulting from the beta decay.
Additional features of the NEXTEX apparatus include use of an electron gun to
calibrate the apparatus to better than 1 eV via observation of the electron
diffraction pattern produced at its detector location. The proposed accuracy of
NEXTEX is better than 0.8 eV/c2 for the mass of the electron neutrino. Thus
NEXTEX is not expected to achieve the accuracy of KATRIN, which is designed to
provide an accuracy of 0.2 eV/c2. However, NEXTEX may well produce a measurement
sooner than can KATRIN, and it may produce important identifications of
systematic uncertainties that are difficult to anticipate until the measurements
are extended below present levels of accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NEXTEX is a
collaboration of 6 universities, and is headed by the group at the University of
Texas. Thus it involves several graduate students in its efforts. Its broader
impacts certainly include the impact it will have on fundamental physics by
providing a new limit on the mass of the electron neutrino as obtained from
direct measurement.&lt;br/&gt;