* 0457602
* Nanopattern Manufacture By The Sintering Of Self-Assembled Nanoparticle Arrays; Sintering Studies of Lines, Rafts, and Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Martin Harmer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 04/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

This grant provides funding for a new nano-manufacturing method to form
nanowires and complex nanopatterns. The method involves the controlled sintering
(firing) of self-assembled arrays of ligand stabilized metal and ceramic
nanoparticles. The aim is to establish a basic understanding of how (i) particle
size, (ii) particle array configuration, (iii) particle composition (iv)
substrate identity, and (v) ligand destabilization method affect the nature of
the of the nanowire or nanopattern formed. Three basic nanoparticle types Au, Ag
and g-Fe2O3, each fabricated with a well-defined range of different sizes
(2-15nm), will be used as fundamental building blocks in this project. These
constituents will then be self-assembled into single component raft and line
structures, as well as some novel composite metamaterial structures. Experiments
will involve in-situ observations of the sintering process in a transmission
electron microscope as well as observations of the room temperature stability of
the nanoparticle arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most successful approaches to
nanoscale manipulation and patterning have been based on electron beam
lithography and scanning probe microscopy techniques. Unfortunately these
methods are relatively expensive, serial in nature, and are not readily
applicable to mass production of nanopatterns and nanowires. If this approach is
successful, it will create an ability to reproducibly manufacture such
nanostructures on a larger scale by simple and inexpensive chemical methods and
is therefore of great practical importance, especially if the promised potential
benefits of nanotechnology are to be taken up by industry and exploited in the
next generation of consumer electronics, chemical sensing devices and magnetic
recording media. The new nanofabrication techniques under investigation in this
program have the potential to fulfill these latter criteria provided that the
sintering processes occurring between individual nanoparticles in these self-
assembled arrays can be controlled and understood. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;