* 0457041
* Collaborative Research:  Constraint-based Compliant Mechanism Design using Virtual Reality as a Design Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Judy Vance, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 07/31/2010
* USD 174,546.00

This objective of this collaborative research project is so that researchers at
Iowa State University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology can look at
ways to improve the design and manufacturing of compliant mechanisms through the
use of virtual reality. Unlike the traditional rigid-link mechanisms, compliant
mechanisms achieve motion guidance via the compliance and deformation of the
mechanism's members. Design of compliant mechanisms currently occurs through the
work of two distinctly different research communities: the mechanism design
community, which bases designs on numerical simulation and optimization, e.g.
topology synthesis, of basic design parameters, and the precision machine design
community, where design engineers rely largely upon constraint-based methods
that are heavily dependant upon the experience of the designer. Virtual reality
will be used to provide a three-dimensional immersive design environment where
compliant mechanism design can be achieved using mathematical rigor coupled with
a designer's intuitive understanding of mechanism mechanics to design three-
dimensional compliant mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will change the
way students, scientists, and engineers think about, conceptualize, and engineer
compliant mechanisms for precision instruments, MEMS, NEMS, compliant robotics
and low-cost mechanisms for consumer products, by establishing an engineering
framework for design of compliant mechanisms based on constraint-based compliant
mechanism design theory and virtual reality. Virtual reality, combined with
powerful and rational constraint-based design methods, will provide a natural
three-dimensional design environment where engineers can rapidly explore the
design space to generate constraint-based design concepts (topology), evaluate
the concepts and perform detailed design. The resulting design framework will
allow a broader group of engineers to design complex compliant mechanisms,
giving them new options to draw upon when searching for design solutions to
critical problems, resulting in novel mechanism solutions for manufacturing and
product design.