* 0457662
* Migration in the Arctic:    Subsistence, Jobs, and Well-Being in Urban and Rural Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2011
* Matthew Berman, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2011
* USD 530,174.00

ABSTRACT ARC #0457662

This project studies patterns of migration of North American arctic indigenous
people between rural communities, larger regional centers, and urban areas over
the past several decades. It has four primary research objectives: (1) develop
improved methods for analyzing migration decisions of individuals participating
in mixed subsistence and cash economies; (2) apply these methods to improve
understanding of Inuit migration decisions in a comparative multi-decadal study
of Alaska and arctic Canada; (3) develop and make available to other researchers
metadata for research and policy applications; and (4) involve arctic local
governments in policy-relevant research.

The PIs address questions about the causes and consequences of migration such as
the roles of subsistence opportunities and community quality of life amenities,
gender differences, and national policies on migration decisions. Comparing the
Inupiat regions in Alaska to the Nunavut Territory of Canada, the researchers
ask whether Canadian Inuit are less mobile than Alaska Inupiat; and if so, to
what extent can this be attributed to differences in policies in the two
nations? They also investigate the long-term consequences of migration
decisions: is mobility on balance improving living conditions in arctic
communities, especially the poorest places, or is it draining leadership to
larger settlements and exacerbating inequalities?

Working with local participating organizations, the researchers are developing
research protocols for analyzing microdata collected from the late 1970s to the
present, including the US Census, the Survey of Living Conditions in the Arctic,
North Slope Borough Censuses, Statistics Canada's Aboriginal People's Survey,
and other household survey data from Nunavut and Alaska. A key step in the
research is the creation of a new large-sample household-level dataset from 1990
and 2000 Decennial Census Long Form data, in cooperation with the US Census
Center for Economic Studies.