* 0457481
* Variation of Selmer Groups of Elliptic Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Karl Rubin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2010
* USD 265,200.00

&lt;br/&gt;Elliptic curves are increasingly important not only in number theory
&lt;br/&gt;and arithmetic algebraic geometry, but also in cryptography and
related &lt;br/&gt;applications. Some of the most interesting and important open
questions &lt;br/&gt;about elliptic curves are the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer
conjecture and &lt;br/&gt;other questions about ranks, Selmer groups, and
L-functions. In this &lt;br/&gt;project the investigator and his colleagues plan
to study how the rank &lt;br/&gt;of an elliptic curve varies in certain families
of number fields, &lt;br/&gt;especially the subfields of Iwasawa towers and the
family of all &lt;br/&gt;quadratic fields. The investigation will make use of
many different &lt;br/&gt;techniques, including algebraic, p-adic, and analytic
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elliptic curves play a central role in many parts of
mathematics &lt;br/&gt;including its most applied areas. For example, elliptic
curves are used &lt;br/&gt;in algorithms to encrypt data for transmission, and
for efficient &lt;br/&gt;digital signatures. In its most basic form, an elliptic
curve is a &lt;br/&gt;special kind of polynomial equation in two variables.
Historically &lt;br/&gt;number theorists are interested in finding solutions of
these equations &lt;br/&gt;in which the variables take values which are either
whole numbers, or &lt;br/&gt;fractions. The rank of an elliptic curve is a basic
invariant which &lt;br/&gt;measures the size of the set of solutions. The
investigator and his &lt;br/&gt;coworkers study ranks of elliptic curves and
their interrelations with &lt;br/&gt;other mathematical objects and concepts.
These questions are related to &lt;br/&gt;the cryptographic applications of
elliptic curves, which come about by &lt;br/&gt;considering solutions in which
the variables take values in finite &lt;br/&gt;fields.&lt;br/&gt;