* 0457412
* Collaborative Research: A Design Methodology for Operational Flexibility
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Seyed M. R. Iravani, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 03/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This grant provides funding for the creation of a methodology for modeling
&lt;br/&gt;and mathematical computation to quantify operational flexibility in
service &lt;br/&gt;and manufacturing supply chains. It emphasizes the
flexibility attained &lt;br/&gt;when sources of production (e.g., workers,
machines, plants, etc.) are &lt;br/&gt;multi-functional. Examples of this
include workers with multiple skills, &lt;br/&gt;machines with flexible or
reconfigurable capabilities, and supply chains &lt;br/&gt;with flexible sourcing
and distribution options. By having multi-functional &lt;br/&gt;servers
(sources), capacity can be dynamically allocated in response to the
&lt;br/&gt;realization of uncertain demand. Taking queueing networks as models
of the &lt;br/&gt;production systems, approximate deterministic metrics of
flexibility are &lt;br/&gt;used to accurately predict the best design from
various alternatives. &lt;br/&gt;Mathematical programming, queueing theory,
Markov Decision Processes, and &lt;br/&gt;discrete event systems simulation are
employed. The research illuminates &lt;br/&gt;the connections between general
queueing networks with flexible servers and &lt;br/&gt;the properties found in
approximate, deterministic network models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the results of this research will lead to improvements in &lt;br/&gt;the design
of service and manufacturing operations and supply chains that
&lt;br/&gt;deliver high-performance efficiencies and service levels despite
uncertain &lt;br/&gt;changes in technology, heightened consumer expectations,
decreased vertical &lt;br/&gt;integration of the supply chain, and intensified
global competition. The &lt;br/&gt;primary objectives of this research are to
(1) develop effective methods &lt;br/&gt;for quantifying flexibility, (2)
develop principles and methodology to &lt;br/&gt;better select a roster of
flexible workers for a shift (or work period) &lt;br/&gt;that results in a
robustly productive team, and (3) invent a methodology to &lt;br/&gt;assist in
the design of robust multi-echelon supply chains. The anticipated
&lt;br/&gt;results of this research are: (1) managerial insights that deepen the
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of how to design production systems and worker/staffing
&lt;br/&gt;schedules that are truly flexible and robust and (2) tractable
&lt;br/&gt;analytical/numerical models and methods for the analysis and design
of &lt;br/&gt;multi-echelon supply chains. Upon implementation, the results will
help &lt;br/&gt;ordinary people through increased quality of service in everyday
&lt;br/&gt;transactions, workers through increased career development and
training, &lt;br/&gt;and businesses through improved management practices and
competitive &lt;br/&gt;operations.&lt;br/&gt;