* 0457126
* Ultracold Rydberg Atoms and Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Edward Eyler, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Wendell Talbot Hill
* 05/31/2010
* USD 477,240.00

This award is a renewal of one portion of a group grant that involved several
research projects involving ultracold molecules, photoassociative spectroscopy,
and ultracold Rydberg atoms and plasmas. This funding will continue the
ultracold Rydberg project. Ultracold Rydberg gases and plasmas can be strongly-
coupled systems. This results in novel dynamical behavior, including
interconversion of ultracold plasmas and cold Rydberg gases, that forms one
focus of the research. The PI will also focus on the physics of the Rydberg-
Rydberg interactions themselves, especially studies of novel molecular
interactions such as pairwise photoassociation, ultra-long-range "macrodimers,"
and weakly bound "trilobite" molecules comprising one Rydberg atom and one
ground-state atom. Nonlinear effects can play an unusually prominent role in
cold Rydberg gases, because of their high density combined with their extreme
sensitivity to external fields. The PI will undertake studies of superradiance
and superfluorescence, building on preliminary results that appear to show
strong density-dependent effects. The PI will also undertake studies of Rydberg
states of molecules, as opposed to ultra-long-range molecules comprised of
Rydberg atoms. On the broader impacts, components of the program that will serve
to integrate this research with graduate and undergraduate education include
regular group meetings, mentoring, workshops, participation in the Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program, participation in the European
Community Research Training Network (ECRTN) on Cold Molecules, and numerous
collaborations. In these components the investigators will continue to seek
participation of underrepresented groups.