* 0457577
* FDSS: Faculty Development in Space Weather Research:  A Systems Perspective
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2012
* Menas Kafatos, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 02/29/2012
* USD 872,293.00

George Mason University (GMU) has initiated a new program within the School of
Computational Sciences (SCS) centered on space weather. In order to implement
and go forward with this program, three new tenure-track faculty positions in
space weather are anticipated that will be joint with both the SCS and the
Department of Physics and Astronomy (DPA). This proposal is for support for one
of the positions. Given the already strong solar physics faculty at SCS, highest
priority for the NSF-supported position will be given to a magnetospheric
scientist. The new faculty member will work with the senior scientists at GMU to
implement a novel curriculum focusing on an end-to-end systems approach to space
weather. Students will be trained to have a working knowledge of the Sun,
heliosphere, magnetosphere, and upper atmosphere/ionosphere, and how societal
activities are affected by changes in the system. Research carried out by the
faculty and students will focus on this approach, which is envisioned to lead to
new knowledge about how the Sun-Earth system works and how to forecast
consequences of space weather. In keeping with the missions of the SCS and the
DPA, there will be a strong emphasis on the interdisciplinary nature of the
space weather program and its applications to other fields. There will be a
dedicated focus on exposing undergraduate students in physics and astronomy to
space weather, on establishing a PhD track in space weather (as an option within
the existing PhD programs), and on developing a strong education and outreach
program in space weather. Graduates will meet the growing need for specialists
in space weather brought on through the implementation of the National Space
Weather Plan by various Government agencies, private industry, and other
universities. Existing partnerships between GMU and nearby Federal and
industrial laboratories will be strengthened by the new space weather program.