* 0457273
* A 1000km3 Ultra-High Energy Neutrino Acoustic Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2005,04/30/2010
* Giorgio Gratta, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2010
* USD 309,360.00

In recent years scientists have expanded the horizon of astronomy by observing
the Universe first with photons of increasingly smaller wavelengths and then by
resorting to particles other than photons. The latest additions to our toolkit
are neutrinos, neutral particles with a tiny mass, more than 500,000 times
lighter than electrons. While the small mass of neutrinos make them already
rather "exotic", it is now possible that ultra-high-energy neutrinos raining
down to Earth from the outer space will help us understanding some catastrophic
events in the universe. We do know that particles (possibly protons) of kinetic
energies 1018 eV and above do occur in cosmic radiation and, in fact, some
scientists claim to have observed cosmic rays with energies above 1020 eV. This
is a tremendous energy for a single elementary particle, equivalent to the
kinetic energy of a medium-sized book falling to the floor from a desk! As a
comparison our most powerful particle accelerator can only accelerate protons to
1012 eV. We do not fully understand what kind of process can produce such high
energy particles but, if also neutrinos of such high energies were to be
produced we would have an important clue. The signals from such energetic
particles would be dramatic enough to be recorded in conventional particle
detector however the rate at which such energetic neutrinos would rain on Earth
is expected to be so low that thousands of cubic kilometers of active material
would be needed to have the chance of detecting some. A suitable detector cannot
be built with nuts and bolts but it has to take advantage of an existing body of
material! Ocean water is very common on the Earth surface and our group, with
NSF support, is installing a system that will demonstrate the possibility of
detecting ultra-high-energy neutrinos in cosmic radiation by the acoustic noise
they are expected to produce when they interact and stop in sea water. Indeed
their tremendous kinetic energy is expected to be converted into heat that would
make the sea-water expand, producing a peculiar sound. The sound will be
detected, in our initial study, by an array of hydrophones (underwater
microphones) located off the coast of Florida and used by the US Navy for naval
exercises. We have an agreement with the Navy that will allow us to install a
special data acquisition system that will allow us to find the tiny pulses
characteristic of the neutrino interaction in the large sea background caused by
human activities and different sort of marine creatures. &lt;br/&gt;This project
was initiated almost exclusively with undergraduate students. The initial
feasibility study was done by Stanford Undergraduate Shaffique Adam, now at
Cornell. The first data taking at the Navy array and the relative data analysis
was performed by Stanford undergraduate Justin Vandenbroucke who is now working
on the NSF Amanda/Ice Cube detectors in Antarctica as a Berkeley graduate
student. A Stanford graduate student, Naoko Kurahashi, is leading the
installation of the present system, while another Stanford undergraduate, Jason
Kerwin, is building parts of a calibration device that we hope to use in the
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;