* 0457034
* Studies of the Highest Energy Cosmic Rays with the Auger Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2008
* USD 470,000.00

This proposal requests support for an Ohio State University (OSU) group to work
on the Pierre Auger Observatory (PAO). The PAO is an international project aimed
at the study of the highest energy cosmic rays, beyond 10^19 eV. These highest
energy particles in the Universe are very rare, and the elucidation of the
mystery of their origin is one of the key challenges in modern astrophysics.
This mystery is further confounded by an apparent disagreement between the AGASA
surface array and the HiRes air fluorescence experiments concerning the
existence of a cutoff due to energy loss in interactions with the cosmic
microwave background radiation, as proposed by Greisen(1966) and by Zatzepin and
Kuz'min(1966).

The southern PAO site, located in western Argentina, is now the largest air
shower array ever constructed, with over 450 surface detectors operating and
half of the fluorescence telescopes installed. The OSU group has played a vital
role in the design, integration, commissioning, and management of the surface
detector electronics chain. The PI serves as the surface detector electronics
task leader in the project's management structure. Members of the group have
spent considerable time in the field commissioning the engineering array and
pre-production detectors, and have participated in the development and debugging
of much of the software used in operating the surface array. They plan to
continue their activities in support of detector installation, commissioning,
and operation, and their participation in analysis of the Auger data.

They have been active in engaging the public and providing opportunities for
understanding of the fascinating science involved, by conducting tours of the
facilities both in the U.S. and in Argentina for schoolchildren and others.