* 0457381
* Solid Oxide Membrane Electrolysis with Rotating Cathode (SOMERC), a Low-Cost Process for High Purity Titanium
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2006
* Uday Pal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 03/31/2006
* USD 160,000.00

The objective of this research is to assess the feasibility of a new process
called "Solid Oxide Membrane Electrolysis with Rotating Cathode (SOMERC)" for
making titanium metal from titanium dioxide at low cost. The approach of this
research is to develop two innovative design features to avoid the two
properties of titanium, which make it expensive. By producing solid metal, it
avoids working with the extremely reactive liquid titanium; and the solid oxide
membrane on the anode avoids a problem called ion cycling which reduces the
efficiency of producing certain metals such as titanium, chromium and tantalum.
This proof of concept grant will fund experiments to determine the suitability
of the solid oxide membrane as the anode for titanium production, and computer
simulations to determine whether the rotating cathode will produce dense solid
metal as desired. If these studies succeed, then the SOMERC process should work
as designed.

Titanium is a high-strength low-density metal with outstanding corrosion
resistance used in demanding applications from aerospace to chemical industry
equipment to offshore oil drilling platforms. Unfortunately, it is much more
expensive than other engineering metals such as steel (including stainless
steel), aluminum and magnesium alloys. As the fourth most abundant metal in the
earth's crust, with oxide chemical bonding energy considerably lower than that
of aluminum and magnesium, titanium has great potential to be produced at low
cost. If successful, SOMERC will help to fulfill that potential, forcing
industry to re-think the role of titanium in applications from automobiles to
consumer appliances and others limited only by the imagination of engineers.
Furthermore, this project will also provide an example of low-cost
environmentally benign process development for engineering education. And
independent of its commercial success, the science behind SOMERC will form the
basis of educational case studies in electrochemistry and process engineering