* 0457224
* GOALI: Fast, Quantitatve Interrogation of Adavanced Internal Combustion Engine Technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Margaret Wooldridge, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 08/31/2010
* USD 240,005.00

GOALI: DFB Laser Sensors for Fast, Quantitative Interrogation of Harsh
Combustion Systems&lt;br/&gt;M.S. Wooldridge, University of Michigan and S.T.
Wooldridge, Ford Motor Company&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced combustion strategies have considerable
potential to dramatically improve combustion efficiencies while simultaneously
reducing pollutant emissions. Realization of this potential requires parallel
advances in interrogation and sensing methods to provide feedback on the
projected conditions within the combustion chamber and to provide metrics for
assessing successful technologies. This project focuses on development and
application of a laser-based sensing method for interrogation of combustion
systems where the high temperatures, pressures and rapid transients present
considerable challenges for conventional experimental approaches. Specifically,
this work will use distributed feedback diode lasers as emission sources for
absorption spectroscopy to measure species important in internal combustion (IC)
engines. Novel frequency modulation and wavelength multiplexing will be used to
improve temporal resolution and detection limits. The diagnostic will be
developed and applied to a optical engine facility, where a partnership with
Ford Motor Company will ensure rapid dissemination of the methods to industrial
research and development facilities. Difficulties associated with engine
measurements will be addressed in the course of this work using the
characteristics of the resonant and off-resonant absorption features.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements proposed in this work include absolute
quantitative in-cylinder species concentrations with good temporal resolution
continuously acquired throughout an engine cycle, without cycle-to-cycle
averaging. The collection of data such as these is a vital next step in IC
engine research and development. Direct outcomes of the proposed research
include important advancements in solid-state lasers and absorption spectroscopy
along with a new valuable tool for combustion studies that can be applied to a
broad range of systems. Increased understanding of the physical and chemical
mechanisms important in advanced IC engine combustion systems will significantly
aid in the development of advanced engine technologies. The broader impacts
therefore include the potential to design and produce IC engines with better
fuel economy while simultaneously decreasing pollutant emissions. This project
is co-funded by the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) program and the Combustion and Plasma Systems
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;