* 0457100
* RUI: Radioactive Krypton Background Evaluation by Atom Counting
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 03/31/2009
* USD 130,485.00

This proposal addresses the development of a new technique, based on the Atom
Trap Trace Analysis (ATTA) method used for radioactive dating with rare Kr
isotopes, to measure the Kr content of other rare gases at levels as low as
3x10^(-14). A new generation of detectors based on liquid rare gases offers a
promising avenue for exciting new discoveries. These detectors include the XENON
dark matter search project, and the XMASS and CLEAN neutrino detection projects,
all of which rely on the use of liquid xenon or neon as a scintillation medium
to detect infrequent events at low energies. In all of these systems, the beta
decay of krypton-85 is a significant and problematic source of background
events. 85Kr is chemically inert, and has a half-life of 10.76 years, making it
extremely difficult to separate from other rare gases. The XENON detector will
require Kr/Xe abundances of at most one part in 10^10, and the XMASS and CLEAN
detectors will require Kr/Xe or Kr/Ne of at most one part in 10^14. This level
of purity cannot be guaranteed with conventional commercial techniques.

In the ATTA method, a sample of the gas to be analyzed is introduced to an
apparatus that uses laser cooling techniques to cool and trap Kr atoms in a
metastable state from an atomic beam. Single trapped atoms can be counted with
high signal-to-noise by detecting the laser fluorescence of the trapped atoms
with a sensitive photodetector, directly measuring the trap loading rate. The Kr
abundance can be determined by comparing the loading rate for an ultra-pure
sample to that of a sample with known Kr content.

Broader Impact The proposed measurements will aid in the XENON, CLEAN and XMASS
efforts by helping characterize the background levels in these new detectors.
Additionally, the ATTA technique may be of some commercial interest to
manufacturers of research grade gases. The technique can be extended to detect
elements other than Kr, and to measure impurity gases at levels well below those
possible with conventional techniques. This may enable the manufacture of gases
of higher purity than is currently possible, which would be useful to
researchers in many fields.