* 0457003
* Number Theory and Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* George Andrews, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 115,645.00

Project Summary for George Andrews&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The first topic covered
in this propsoal is Partitions and&lt;br/&gt; Probability. Here it is proposed
to ground the study begun by&lt;br/&gt; Holroyd, Liggett, and Romik in the
theory of partitions with&lt;br/&gt; the hope of getting (1) better asymptotics,
(2) broader&lt;br/&gt; applications, and (3) further connections with
Ramanujan's&lt;br/&gt; mock theta functions. The second topic, Entire
Functions&lt;br/&gt; and the Rogers-Ramanujan Identities, examines the
further&lt;br/&gt; implications that arise from two truly amazing
formulas&lt;br/&gt; that lay buried in Ramanujan's Lost Notebook. The
third&lt;br/&gt; topic, Engel Transformations, builds upon some &lt;br/&gt; of
the original amazing expansion theorems due to A. and&lt;br/&gt; J. Knopfmacher.
This algorithm should be useful in any&lt;br/&gt; mathematical subject
(including statistical mechanics)&lt;br/&gt; where q-series expansions play a
substantial role. The&lt;br/&gt; fourth topic, The Okada Conjecture, is one that
has been open&lt;br/&gt; for many years. Recently in joint work with Paule and
Schneider,&lt;br/&gt; the PI gave a new proof of the q = 1 case of this
conjecture.&lt;br/&gt; This new proof clearly suggests that one should be able
to &lt;br/&gt; extend it to general q. The fifth topic, Ramanujan and&lt;br/&gt;
Partial Fractions, was suggested by prior attempts to better&lt;br/&gt;
understand some of the more recondite formulas in Ramanujan's&lt;br/&gt; Lost
Notebook. Great progress has been made in improving&lt;br/&gt; previous work; it
is hoped that these methods may be further developed&lt;br/&gt; to elucidate a
general theory of mock theta functions. Section&lt;br/&gt; 6, the final section,
concerns the intersection of the PI's research&lt;br/&gt; with his efforts to
improve teacher education. Put succinctly,&lt;br/&gt; it is clear that the
theory of compositions (ordered partitions)&lt;br/&gt; could play a much more
substantial role in primary and &lt;br/&gt; secondary
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is devoted to problems
in partitions and q-series,&lt;br/&gt; especially ones that simultaneously (1)
advance the central&lt;br/&gt; theory of this branch of mathematics and (2) have
substantial&lt;br/&gt; potential for application in other branches of
mathematics and&lt;br/&gt; mathematical sciences. The section on partitions and
probability&lt;br/&gt; especially epitomizes this philosophy. Applications of
this&lt;br/&gt; topic have already been made to cellular automata. The
work&lt;br/&gt; on Engel Transformations studies an algorithm wherein there
are&lt;br/&gt; potential applications to problems in statistical physics. Work
on&lt;br/&gt; entire functions, partial fractions and the Okada
conejcture&lt;br/&gt; should develop methods with substantial applications
beyond the&lt;br/&gt; current focus. Section 6, the final section, concerns
the&lt;br/&gt; intersection of research with efforts to improve teacher
education. &lt;br/&gt; The theory of compositions (ordered partitions) could
well &lt;br/&gt; play a useful auxiliary role in primary and
secondary&lt;br/&gt; education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;