* 0457163
* Strange Form Factors and a Low Energy Standard Model Test
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Mark Pitt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 07/31/2009
* USD 282,000.00

This grant supports research that seeks the answer to two fundamental questions
about matter. The first is what role does the sea of strange quark-antiquark
pairs in the nucleon play in the determination of its electromagnetic
properties? We are participating in the G0 experiment at Thomas Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility to address this issue. The experiment measures the
parity-violating asymmetry in the scattering of polarized electrons from the
proton and deuteron over a wide range of momentum transfers; &lt;br/&gt;this
will allow for the strange electric and magnetic form factors to be separately
extracted. This experiment will be in a data-taking and analysis phase during
this grant period. The second question is whether or not there is any new
physics beyond the Standard Model of electroweak physics. This question will be
addressed by the Qweak experiment at TJNAF, which will measure the proton's
neutral weak charge via parity-violating electon scattering at very low momentum
transfer. The proton's weak charge has a well-defined prediction in the Standard
Model; a precise measurement of it is sensitive to many poplular scenarios for
extending the Standard Model. This experiment will be in a construction and
early data-taking phase during the period of this grant. Our group will design
and construct three pieces of hardware &lt;br/&gt;for the Qweak experiment - a
set of drift chambers, a luminosity monitor, and a mini-torus magnet. These
projects involve many hardware and software tasks that will contribute to the
education of a postdoctoral &lt;br/&gt;fellow and graduate and undergraduate
students working on the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;