* 0457663
* A Novel Approach for the Development of Accurate ab inito Potential Energy Surfaces for Atomistic Simulations of MEMS Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Lionel Raff, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2009
* USD 411,316.00

The objective of the proposed research is to present an integrated approach for
conducting simulations at the atomistic level using ab initio quantum mechanical
potential-energy surfaces and force fields computed at high-level with extended
basis sets. The approach involves (1) electronic structure calculations (using
GAUSSIAN 2003 software) of non-equilibrium clusters within the cut-off radius of
a material, (2) sampling of the subset of the system configuration space that is
important in the dynamics using MD methods augmented with novelty sampling
procedures, and (3) accurate interpolation between the computed points using
neural network (NN) with early stopping and regularization methods employed to
improve network performance. The accuracy of the method will be tested and
validated in wide range of manufacturing processing including nanometric
cutting, tribology, and material testing. This approach will be extended this to
other applications involving carbon nanotubes and synthesis of microcrystalline
diamond by chemical vapor deposition (CVD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular
dynamics (MD) and Monte Carlo (MC) simulations can be applied for modeling a
wide range of manufacturing processes including ultraprecision machining,
grinding, and polishing as well as materials testing, and tribology. The method
proposed is a generalized method in that it can be applied for a wide range of
fields in engineering as well as in basic chemistry, physics, biology, and other
scientific fields of endeavor. This problem will be addressed by an
interdisciplinary group of researchers from chemistry, electrical engineering,
and mechanical engineering, math and materials science background working with
graduate and undergraduate (through NSF REU program) students from these
disciplines. Research conducted will be fully integrated with the graduate level
education. We intend to interact with industry and national laboratories
involved in this area. Attempts will be made to recruit U.S. born women,
minority, and physically impaired students to work on this project. &lt;br/&gt;