* 0457004
* Experimental Particle Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2008
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 03/31/2008
* USD 426,000.00

This proposal requests support for a group from Northeastern University to
enable software development, phenomenological studies, and data analysis for the
Pierre Auger Observatory (PAO). The PAO, currently collecting its first dataset
in Malargue, Argentina, is the largest air-shower array ever constructed. Over
the next several years, PAO will collect an unprecedented statistical sample of
cosmic rays with energies above 10^19 eV. Consisting of both a ground array and
fluorescence detectors, PAO will be in a unique position to confirm or refute
HiRes's observation of the GZK cutoff at around 6x10^19 eV and resolve the
discrepancy between previous ground array and fluorescence detector spectral
results at these energies. The PAO will also obtain high-statistics arrival
direction skymaps for particles at these energies, allowing for significantly
improved sensitivity in the search for sources of ultra-high energy cosmic rays
in the southern celestial hemisphere. The group also plans searches for
signatures of supersymmetry and quantum gravity in cosmic ray interactions. In
the Broader Impacts area, this group has started development of a program called
the School Cosmic Ray Outreach Detector (SCROD), which has the eventual aim of
deploying cosmic ray detectors at area high schools. No funding support is
requested for SCROD, beyond the time of the Northeastern University PAO staff.
Funding for individual detectors is being sought from other sources.