* 0457515
* Climate Implications of the Messinian Desiccation of the Mediterranean Basin: General Circulation Model (GCM) Simulations and Process Model Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2005,10/31/2009
* Daniel Kirk-Davidoff, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 10/31/2009
* USD 312,205.00

This award provides funds to model the Messinian desiccation using a suite of
climate models, including a single column model, simplified stationary wave
model, and general circulation model. During the Messinian period of the Miocene
Epoch about 5.5 million years ago (Ma), tectonic activity near the present
Straits of Gibraltar resulted in the isolation of the Mediterranean Sea. At the
height of this isolation, evaporation of the Mediterranean Sea appears to have
reduced the sea level within the Mediterranean basin by 1500 meters to 2000
meters. This resulted in abundant salt deposits around the Mediterranean basin,
and in the erosion of deep canyons by the major rivers flowing into the
Mediterranean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher maintains that neither the
impact of a deep, extensive subaerial basin on the general circulation of the
atmosphere, nor the physical process by which the desiccation occurred has been
treated using a sophisticated atmospheric model. As a consequence, the
researcher aims to produce a physically consistent reconstruction of the
climatic conditions within a deep basin and an assessment of the impact of the
existence of such a basin on the regional climate. This impact will be examined
by direct physical interaction of the deep basin with the atmospheric
circulation, and by changes to transports of water vapor and dust and salt from
the desiccation of the Mediterranean Sea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
include the use of a new flexible-grid spectral element dynamical core developed
for the NCAR Community Climate System Model (CCSM) atmospheric module. The use
of this new core, as well as the standard CCSM atmospheric module for a modeling
study of topography so radically different from present Mediterranean
topography, will involve the models under surface boundary conditions far from
the standard climate in which they were developed. This may help expose hidden
weaknesses, thereby allowing improvements in model design. This project provides
an opportunity to model a singular event in Earth history that exposed an entire
sea basin to evaporation. This could lead to some unusual findings and will
provide a unique opportunity in research for a graduate student.