* 0457440
* Nanoscale Magnetism and Unconventional Quantum Phases and Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Leon Balents, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2009
* USD 300,000.00

This grant involves two broad research projects in theoretical condensed matter
physics: modeling and control of spin transport in nanostructures, and
unconventional collective states of quantum matter in strongly correlated
materials. Both areas are very active experimentally, and present important
puzzles and challenges to existing theory. The spintronics project has several
specific goals. A proper hydrodynamic theory of spin transport will be
developed, with microscopic derivations of transport coefficients. Specific
problems are to determine the structure of spin-charge coupling terms, their
dependence upon various scattering processes, and experimental means of
measuring these effects. Another project is spin relaxation in ferromagnetic
diluted magnetic semiconductor materials, and how this enters the appropriate
hydrodynamics. Finally, the non-hydrodynamic regime of single quantum spins will
be considered, including their coherence effects and relaxation mechanisms. This
research benefits from, and complements, existing experimental expertise in
spintronics at UCSB. The project on unconventional phases and transitions is
motivated by the realization in recent work that simple reasonable models can
exhibit phases and quantum critical points completely outside the usual
paradigms. Thus this project is aimed both at applying the emerging new
conceptual framework to recent and long-standing puzzles in experimentally
interesting materials, and, to a lessor extent, at extending and systematizing
the framework itself. Some of the experimental phenomena to be studied are Mott
charge ordering transitions, charge and spin frustration in spinels and rare
earth intermetallics and their connection to heavy fermion behavior, and spin
liquid states in organic and inorganic triangular lattice magnets. These
problems will be addressed by a variety of analytical (field theory,
renormalization group, gauge theory, bosonization) and numerical (exact
diagonalization, variation wavefunction) techniques. The PI is familiar with a
wide variety of such approaches, and has made substantial contributions in these
fields prior to this grant. Intellectual Merit: These projects represent two
different frontiers of condensed matter physics. Control and measurement of spin
is undergoing an experimental revolution in techniques (e.g. time-resolved
optical pump-probe spectroscopy, strain engineering of spin-orbit interactions,
etc.) and materials (diluted magnetic semiconductors, digital magnetic
structures). New mechanisms of collective quantum order and emergent behavior
are reinvigorating the theoretical investigation of old outstanding problems -
and suggesting new ones - in strongly correlated materials. Both fields are thus
ripe for bringing new theoretical ideas into application, and thereby advancing
the fundamental knowledge base of condensed matter physics. Broader Impacts:
First and foremost, this work is designed to motivate and explain experiments
and properties of materials. Moreover, the hydrodynamic models to be developed
in the spintronics portion of the proposal in fact describe macroscopic
transport phenomena: they are the spin analogs of Ohm's law for charge
conduction. Detailed models of this type are clearly crucial for any
applications. Educationally, graduate students and postdocs will be trained in
these forefront areas of condensed matter theory, and new course materials will
be developed to communicate the excitement of the fields to new students. A
comprehensive web site with colloquial and graduate student level explanations
of the research will be developed to further communicate to a broader audience.

