* 0457555
* Design, Assembly and Electrochemical Characterization of Asymmetric Carbon Nanotube Supercapacitors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Bingqing Wei, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2008
* USD 318,812.00

This research is focused on the coupling of new concepts of asymmetric
supercapacitor design with well defined and well aligned carbon nanotube arrays
to design unique electrode materials in the supercapacitors. Utilizing the
remarkable properties of Carbon Nanotubes the PI will develop a range of Carbon
Nanotube-based supercapacitors both in symmetric and asymmetric configurations.
Different design configurations such as coaxial cable type and parallel plate
will be explored with nanotubes. Experiments to determine and understand the
relationships among synthesis, microstructure and geometric architectures of
Carbon Nanotubes, and their electrochemical performance as supercapacitor
electrodes will be elucidated. Also, predictive model and experimental
evaluation for supercapacitance in super-long single-walled Carbon Nanotube
strands will be performed. Synthesis and electrochemical characterization of
CNT-metal oxide composite and nanoporous carbon electrode supercapacitors will
also be done in order to compare the performance with the pristine Carbon
Nanotube electrode supercapacitors. The newly designed and fabricated Carbon
Nanotube asymmetric supercapacitors are expected to show high energy density and
high power density, as well as long cycle life.&lt;br/&gt;The success of the
proposed project will enable an integration of nanotechnology with power storage
system, which has a broad impact on integration of nanotechnology with
electronics. This integrated technology will offer superior and reliable
solution in replacing heavy and short-life battery. The outcome of the proposed
project will offer the potential for high power switching at high frequency and
can form the basis of a miniaturized device that can be used by any electronics
such as on-chip power systems. Further, the successful optimization of the
supercapacitors with carbonaceous materials as electrodes at smaller scale, will
lead to the directions on the possible realization of the power source for zero-
emission electric vehicle applications. &lt;br/&gt;