* 0457565
* Collaborative Research:  Web-Available Chvatal-Gomory Rank Determination and Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2007
* Craig Tovey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 05/31/2007
* USD 70,596.00

This research project aims to develop algorithms and corresponding software
tools to generate inequalities of low Chvatal-Gomory rank for integer programs.
The algorithms will test inequalities to determine if they are of Chvatal-Gomory
rank 0, 1, 2, or 3, and they will optimize over all rank 1 and 2 inequalities.
Mixed integer optimization including polyhedral analysis and lattice-based
approaches will be used as the central techniques to generate rank 1
inequalities and determine ranks 1 and 2. For rank 2 generation and rank 3
determination, a branch-and-price method will be explored with novel cut
generation heuristics for warm starts. This work is part of a broader research
program to understand and enhance the surprising effectiveness of small subsets
of valid inequalities in integer programming. It will also advance understanding
of Chvatal-Gomory rank and branch-and-price.

The algorithms will be implemented using open-source computational optimization
tools and will be made available for download under an open-source license. It
is anticipated that they will provide a significant infrastructure component for
integer programming theory and practice. They will help automate the generation
of useful valid cuts, assess the potential of a formulation with rank 1 and rank
2 cuts, and help generalize specific cuts to classes of valid inequalities by
providing their CG derivations. Making these general tools web-available will
broaden the set of practitioners and researchers who can use sophisticated
cutting plane methods effectively. This will contribute to more rapid solutions
to integer programming problems in practice and may allow larger problems to be
solved than is currently possible.