* 0457317
* String Theory, Duality and Dynamics with N=1 Supersymmetry
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Mina Aganagic, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,006.00

ABSTRACT PHY -0457317 PI: Mina Aganagic Institution: UC Berkeley Title: String
Theory, Duality and Dynamics with N =1Supersymmetry

The research the PI proposes focuses on dynamics of string theory with N =1
supersymmetry. It is believed by many that supersymmetry will be discovered at
LHC or other experiments in the near future. If so, making contact with Nature
will involve understanding string theory with N = 1 supersymmetry. With this
amount of supersymmetry, string theory has immensely rich dynamics, which
contains many clues into what the fundamental formulation of string theory
should be. Yet, the dynamics is constrained enough to be tractable.The PI
proposes research which addresses fundamental questions regarding various
particular N = 1 string theories, as well as the global space of N = 1 string
theories. She will exploit a tool known as ?topological string theory?. This
theory is very closely related to the physical string - in fact, it gives the
same answers for a large class of questions. Yet, it is simplified enough that
progress can me made on otherwise intractable problems. The PI proposes to
develop novel topological theories to widen the class of questions that can thus
be approached. The PI will also use the topological string as a direct tool for
developing a non-perturbative formulation of string theory.



