* 0457356
* SGER: Genetic Characterization of Meiotic Restitution in Wheat
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Xiwen Cai, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2006
* USD 142,735.00

Meiotic restitution, including first division restitution and second
division&lt;br/&gt;restitution, leads to unreduced gametes and thus
polyploidization in plant species. The mechanism and genetic control of meiotic
restitution are not well understood, mainly due to the complexity of the
trait.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to make a breakthrough in
revealing the cytological and genetic basis of first division restitution
through the application of novel research strategies. We will partition first
division restitution into individual meiotic events and identify the genes
conditioning the specific meiotic events. This will be done by characterizing
the behavior of both chromosomes and spindles during meiosis in the haploids of
the durum wheat cultivar 'Langdon' (Triticum turgidum, 2n=4x=28, AABB)
exhibiting first division restitution under haploid conditions, the wild
tetraploid wheat accession 'Israel-A' (T. dicoccoides, 2n=4x=28, AABB) without
first division restitution, and the entire set of 14 Langdon-Israel A disomic
substitution lines. Outcomes will include cytological characterization of first
division restitution in Langdon cultivar, identification of the chromosome(s)
carrying the first division restitution genes, and investigation of individual
meiotic events specified by the first division restitution genes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First division restitution is an aberrant meiotic process
related to the origin and evolution of polyploid species. Knowledge generated
from this project will facilitate manipulation of meiotic events and ploidy
levels for various genetic studies and genetic improvement of plants, such as
doubled haploid production and development of man-made polyploid species.
Furthermore, we will integrate the research activities and results from this
project into teaching and training. This will assist students in better
understanding the basics of genetics-gene transmission and variation of ploidy
levels in plant species.&lt;br/&gt;