* 0457413
* Exploration and Control of Transverse Jet Shear Layer Instabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Robert Kelly, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 06/30/2009
* USD 311,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0457413&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: A.
KARAGOZIAN&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA-LOS ANGELES
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EXPLORATION AND CONTROL OF TRANSVERSE JET SHEAR
LAYER INSTABILITIES &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this study
involve an examination of the fundamental evolution of near field shear layer
instabilities and the development of approaches in the control of such
instabilities for the jet in crossflow, or transverse jet. This flow is related
to many practical applications such as cooling in turbomachinery and jet engine
combustors within which effective control could lead to significant improvements
in efficiency and reductions in pollutant emissions. As the crossflow velocity
increases and the jet transitions from the "free jet" to the "transverse jet",
remarkable alterations in the spectral character of the instability have been
observed under a prior NSF grant. The nature of this change in the stability
characteristics suggests that at critical values of blowing ratio, there is a
transition in the transverse jet from being convectively unstable to absolutely
unstable or self-excited. Such stability characteristics may explain the
transverse jet's ability to mix with surrounding gases in a superior manner to
that of the free jet. These differences in the stability characteristics of the
jet in crossflow suggest a strategic approach for future control studies in
optimizing transverse jet penetration, mixing, and spread. This program will
characterize the nature of these instabilities more completely, for a wide range
of jet and crossflow conditions, through experiments, theory, and numerical
simulations. The role of helical modes in the jet stability will also be
explored and exploited in this control methodology. Feedback and feed-forward
control will feature prominently in the temporal waveform shaping that is
critical to this jet control approach, and will involve extensive testing and
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program has significant broader
impacts, including involvement of undergraduate researchers. Outreach
presentations and demonstrations will continue to be provided for local high
school and, in the future, middle school students, with special focus on Girl
Scout troops and students at public schools. Opportunities for local high school
students to gain laboratory experiences in the summer will be provided. Cutbacks
in funding by the state of California to the public schools' MESA (Mathematics
Engineering Science Achievement) programs has made it even more important for
universities such as UCLA to extend outreach programs to public middle schools
and high schools as a means of encouraging the development of future engineers
and scientists. The proposed project will afford an appropriate mechanism for
this outreach to take place.&lt;br/&gt;