* 0457444
* Representation Theory of Infinite Dimensional Lie Aglebras and Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2011
* Igor Frenkel, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 428,745.00

REPRESENTATION THEORY OF INFINITE DIMENSIONAL LIE&lt;br/&gt;ALGEBRAS AND QUANTUM
FIELD THEORY&lt;br/&gt;IGOR FRENKEL&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is
dedicated to the development of three interrelated areas in
the&lt;br/&gt;representation theory of infinite dimensional Lie algebras and
their applications to&lt;br/&gt;quantum field theory (QFT). The first part of
the proposal is focused on the vertex&lt;br/&gt;operator algebra structure of a
modification of regular representations of affine Lie&lt;br/&gt;algebras. The
author plans to prove, in particular, his conjecture that the
zeroth&lt;br/&gt;semi-infinite cohomology of the reduced vertex operator algebra
yields the famous&lt;br/&gt;Verlinde algebra of the Wess-Zumino-Novikov-Witten
model of 2 dimensional QFT.&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the proposal consists
of a cohomological and K-theoretic realization&lt;br/&gt;of various algebraic
constructions of the first part by means of 4 dimensional&lt;br/&gt;classical
Yang-Mills theory. The author proposes to use the geometric
construction&lt;br/&gt;due to Nakajima of representations of affine Lie algebras
based on Yang-Mills&lt;br/&gt;instantons on asymptotically locally Euclidean
spaces, and also a new geometric&lt;br/&gt;construction related to the first one
by the level-rank duality discovered by the&lt;br/&gt;author in the algebraic
context in his earlier work. Finally, the third part is dedicated&lt;br/&gt;to a
new direction in the representation theory of 3 dimensional
convolution&lt;br/&gt;and current algebras presently developed by the author. It
is based on a new noncommutative&lt;br/&gt;geometry of quantum Minkowski space-
time recently introduced by&lt;br/&gt;Jardim and the author in their study of a
noncommutative version of the Yang-&lt;br/&gt;Mills theory. The three parts of
the proposal are related to each other in that they&lt;br/&gt;constitute a new
program: a representation theoretic approach to 4 dimensional&lt;br/&gt;QFT.
This is a far reaching extension of the representation theoretic approach
to&lt;br/&gt;2 dimensional QFT previously developed by the author and other
mathematicians&lt;br/&gt;and mathematical physicists.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is
devoted to problems at the frontiers of modern representation&lt;br/&gt;theory:
the field of mathematics that studies symmetries and their
realizations.&lt;br/&gt;By its nature representation theory underlies and
unifies the structures of diverse&lt;br/&gt;areas in mathematics and physics,
and in the past 25 years the author has made a&lt;br/&gt;number of important
contributions to this field. The present proposal contains a&lt;br/&gt;new
program of development for the representation theory of infinite
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;symmetries which is especially relevant to the most
advanced part of the existing&lt;br/&gt;theoretical physics that is supported by
experimental physics; namely, 4 dimensional&lt;br/&gt;quantum field theory.
Progress in this direction will enrich our understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the
fundamental mathematical structures that lie at the foundation of the
physical&lt;br/&gt;universe.&lt;br/&gt;