* 0457610
* Non-Linear Optical Waveguide Devices for Nanophotonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2005,09/30/2008
* Bruce Wessels, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 09/30/2008
* USD 240,000.00

0457610&lt;br/&gt;Wessels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Communication
and computer systems face increasing requirements for delivery of more data at
faster rates. Thin film optical devices and circuits have been proposed for
these systems for both their potential wideband width operation and integration
capabilities. Potential applications include optical switches, modulators,
tunable filters, beam steering and frequency conversion. For wide bandwidth
optical devices, materials with large optical non-linearities are needed.
Ferroelectric oxides offer considerable advantages due to their large optical
non-linearities and photo and thermal stability. With the recent development of
low-loss epitaxial ferroelectric thin films and electro-optic modulators, the PI
is now in the position to realize a number of high bandwidth devices suitable
for optical signal processing. In the proposed research non-linear optical
waveguide devices will be developed. Of particular interest are ultra-wideband
thin film electro-optic modulators. This work builds on the recent demonstration
of thin film ferroelectrics with electro-optic coefficients of more than an
order of magnitude greater than lithium niobate, the current standard. Thin film
strip-loaded waveguide devices will be fabricated for ultra-wideband frequency
operation (&gt;100 GHz). In order to operate at low voltage, and wide bandwidth,
ferroelectric oxides with large electro-optic coefficients are required. To
minimize bandwidth limitations due to velocity mismatch between the microwaves
and optical waves, thin film composite structures will be utilized. Photonic
crystal devices will be fabricated from the non-linear oxide waveguides. Of
particular interest are 1-D and 2-D photonic crystal modulators and optical
switches. Factors limiting bandwidth will be determined through modeling and
testing. Chip-scale integration of several devices with a single platform will
be pursued using the thin film ferroelectric technology. By using epitaxial
ferroelectric oxide thin films with high optical non-linearities, significant
improvements in bandwidth, operating voltage, and size are expected compared to
conventional devices. It is anticipated that these devices should have excellent
photo and thermal stability. Devices will be fabricated using vapor phase
epitaxial deposition, and both conventional and e-beam lithography.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The broad impact is the potential
realization of ultra-wide bandwidth, small size, optical devices and circuits
for optical communications and signal processing. Use of thin film techniques
potentially enables chip-scale integration of waveguides, modulators, ring
resonators and switches using a single platform such as silicon. The program
will involve training of undergraduates, graduates and postdoctoral fellows.
Industrial outreach through related STTR programs and industrial internships
will be pursued.&lt;br/&gt;