* 0457200
* Gravitation physics and relativistic astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Eanna Flanagan, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2008
* USD 340,000.00

This award funds theoretical research in several different topics in
relativistic astrophysics and general relativity, with a focus on sources of
gravitational radiation that might be detected by the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) and by the proposed space based detector,
the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA). The principal topics are: (A) the
development and implementation of methods to compute the gravitational signals
from stars or small black holes inspiralling into large spinning black holes;
(B) the development of approximation methods to allow highly accurate
computations of the gravitational interactions of systems of several bodies,
which will be relevant for future tests of general relativity in the Solar
System and elsewhere; and (C) computing the experimental constraints on various
alternative theories of gravity that have been proposed as explanations for the
recently observed acceleration of the expansion of the Universe. The broader
impacts of this award are as follows. Education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students will be integrated into the research program. The breadth
of the research program will be especially beneficial to the graduate students.
The training of female graduate students will contribute to gender diversity in
the field of relativity (3 of the 7 graduate students the principal investigator
has worked with are female). The work on development of computational methods
for gravitational waveforms will eventually have a significant impact on
gravitational wave astronomy, by enabling the detection and analysis of
gravitational wave signals. The principal investigator is taking part in the
Speakers Program of the World Year of Physics Speakers Program being organized
by the Topical Group in Gravitation of the American Physical Society. As part of
this program the principal investigator will give lectures on general relativity
to undergraduate institutions. In addition the principal investigator
occasionally gives lectures to undergraduate physics majors in small colleges,
for example this year at Ithaca College.