* 0457107
* Prototype Advanced LIGO Diagnostics and Optical Components: In Situ Measurement and Control of Thermo-optical Effects
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* David Tanner, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2009
* USD 345,000.00

Advanced LIGO will use high power lasers to detect gravitational waves from a
variety of astrophysical objects in the universe. In order to operate the
Advanced LIGO detectors at sufficiently high laser powers, the laser beam must
pass through optical components, including simple elements mirrors and lenses as
well as more complicated elements such as Faraday isolators and electro-optic
modulators. Because nothing is perfectly transmitting, infinitesimal amounts of
the laser beam are absorbed and heat the component. This heating reacts back
upon the laser beam and changes its properties in a way that is detrimental to
the operation of the detector. This research will develop methods to detect
these tiny distortions. In addition, optical components will be developed that
are immune to the optical distortions that accompany laser beam absorption. This
research will enable gravitational wave detectors to operate with a sensitivity
sufficient to potentially detect gravitational waves from many classes of
astrophysical sources. The detection of gravitational waves will open an
entirely new window on the universe, and allow astrophysicists to look at exotic
objects such as black holes in ways that are impossible with any observational
technique. This research will also add to the technology base of high power
laser systems as well as foster international scientific collaborations.