* 0457069
* Highest Energy Cosmic Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* James Cronin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2008
* USD 875,000.00

This is a proposal to continue the participation of the University of Chicago
(UC) in the Pierre Auger Observatory (PAO). The observatory is designed to study
the origin and nature of cosmic rays with energies greater than 10^19 eV by
measuring their energy, their composition, and the distribution of arrival
directions over the entire sky with large statistics and careful control of
systematic effects. The Southern PAO, under construction in Argentina, is the
first hybrid detector that combines the two best-developed techniques of
measuring showers caused by ultra-high energy cosmic rays (UHECR). The
observatory detects shower particles that reach the surface with a surface array
and the longitudinal development of the shower through the fluorescence produced
in the atmosphere. This combination is essential for accurate energy
measurements and reliable composition studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal represents the merging of two NSF-supported groups at UC. Cronin has
been instrumental in the formation of the international collaboration of the 15
countries now building the observatory. Olinto has focused on the theoretical
aspects of the origin of these highest energy particles as well as the strengths
and limitations of the air shower techniques. The integration of the two groups
into a single effort will benefit both the research goals and the training of
students by involving them in all aspects of science: from the construction and
operation of the PAO to the analysis and interpretation of its data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: The discovery of the origin of the highest
energy particles will impact both astrophysics and particle physics. The
fundamental questions involved in the study of UHECR have drawn the attention of
a large scientific community eagerly awaiting the results. The Southern PAO has
had a major impact on public education and outreach throughout the participating
countries across the globe: from Argentina to Vietnam. In collaboration with the
Adler Planetarium/UC effort in astrophysics visualization, this proposal
enlarges the public reach and strengthens the depth of physics and astrophysics
content of the education and public outreach effort by developing 3D and 2D
visualizations of the highest energy showers, their detection methods, and
possible cosmic origins. &lt;br/&gt;