* 0457473
* Percentile-Based Risk Management Approaches in Discrete Decision-Making Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2009
* Pavlo Krokhmal, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 07/31/2009
* USD 320,000.00

The objective of this project is development of theoretically sound framework
for management of risks and uncertainties in discrete decision-making problems.
Recent progress in the area of risk management and analysis allows for robust
and efficient control of uncertainties in complex large-scale systems. This
progress has been achieved mainly in the scope of financial applications with
establishment of new types of risk measures. Development of theoretical and
algorithmic framework for the Conditional Value-at-Risk measure and the theory
of deviation measures constitutes the original contribution of the PIs in this
domain. Among the fields, where the ideas and methodology of modern risk theory
are not yet widely established, but, undoubtedly, will contribute dramatically
to the overall robustness of decisions and policies, are such fast growing areas
as supply-chain management, telecommunications, anti-terrorist applications, to
name a few. The dominant models in these areas have essentially discrete nature,
and possess an array of features that have not been properly reflected in the
current state-of-the-art risk theory, yet are critical for adequate handling of
risks and uncertainties in these problems. The ultimate goal of this research
effort is to develop new risk models and algorithms that will facilitate the use
of advanced risk management techniques in a broad spectrum of discrete decision-
making problems under uncertainties. In particular, it is planned to employ
specially constructed percentile-type coherent measures and deviation measures
for development of risk models for discrete optimization problems. Specific
application areas will include telecommunication and supply-chain networks.