* 0457002
* Quantum Chaos and Electromagnetic Chaos
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Srinivas Sridhar, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Robert Dunford
* 03/31/2009
* USD 425,349.00

Left-handed Metamaterials (LHM) are artificially constructed media that exhibit
negative index of refraction for incident electromagnetic waves and that have
been recently realized at microwave frequencies. Research on LHM including the
PI's reports published in Nature and Physical Review Letters, has been selected
by the journal Science as one of the breakthroughs of the year 2003.

The PI has established a state-of-the-art program that combines microwave
experiments, quasi-classical analytical and numerical simulation capabilities.
These capabilities will be used to explore new phenomena and applications
arising from negative refraction in LHM. The group will design and fabricate LHM
either from composite metamaterials (Type I) or photonic crystals (Type II). LHM
drastically affect the spectra and eigenfunctions of cavities partially filled
by them, and may lead to new applications in microcavity lasing. New approaches
to imaging using negative refraction will be explored, including sub-wavelength
resolution due to amplification of evanescent waves. Flat lenses and Superlenses
made of a slab of LHM, which aim to achieve near perfect image reconstruction by
both propagating and evanescent waves, will be fabricated and studied. New
optical elements using negative refraction will be developed, such as plano-
concave lenses for focusing distant objects. In these media, coherent scattering
leads to image formation even though the classical or ray optics limit is
chaotic. The general principles of image reconstruction using negative
refraction will be developed and established. The laboratory scale microwave
experiments will be scaled down to nanometer lengths to study imaging using
photonic crystals and chaotic scattering at optical frequencies.

Graduate and undergraduate students and post-doctoral fellows will be trained in
areas of cutting edge research. The concepts of quantum chaos and negative
refraction will be incorporated into the educational curriculum. The results
will be disseminated by publications and presentations. A web site will be
created to disseminate the principal results to the wider public.