* 0457557
* Microfluidic Devices:    Effect of Elasticity and Surfactants on Drop Deformation and Break Up
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2008
* Nivedita Gupta, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 07/31/2008
* USD 96,000.00

ABSTRACT - 0457557&lt;br/&gt;University of New
Hampshire&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to advance the
understanding of two phase viscoelastic flows in microfluidic devices and to
develop means to engineer new microdevices. Tremendous progress has been made in
the development of microfluidic devices in the last decade with applications
such as a "lab-on-a-chip", ink-jet printer heads, cell sorters, DNA sequencers,
and blood-testing systems. Microdroplets are being used in microfluidic devices
as actuators, chemical microreactors, drug delivery devices, and bioterror
detection tools. However, a limited number of experimental studies exist to date
on the deformation and break up of drops and bubbles in microfluidic devices.
Typical applications of two-phase systems in microdevices involve viscoelastic
fluids such as DNA solutions, blood, serum, and inks and suspensions with
surfactants added as stabilizers. The stretching of polymer chains present in
viscoelastic fluids causes large normal stresses to develop at strongly
deforming interfaces affecting the dynamics of drops. Surfactant molecules
adsorbed at the interface can redistribute along the interface leading to a
local reduction in surface tension. This may result in highly curved interfaces
and reduced tangential velocities due to the induced Marangoni stresses. The
dynamics of a fluid particle in the presence of elastic and surfactant effects
can be very complex and has been studied to a very limited extent even at a
macroscale. The major research objectives of this study are: (1) to identify
parameters governing the drop size and distribution of drops forming in a
rectangular microchannel; (2) to determine the drop velocity and deformation for
a drop translating in a rectangular microchannel; (3) to determine the effect of
elastic stresses on the drop size and distribution in the drop formation and
terminal velocity of a drop translating in a microchannel, and (4) determine the
effect of mass transfer kinetics of surfactants on the deformation and pinch-off
dynamics of drops in the microchannel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The research objectives will be accomplished by performing a comprehensive
experimental and numerical study of viscoelastic drops and bubbles in
microdevices in the presence of surfactants. Microfluidic devices will be
fabricated using soft lithography techniques in the PI's research laboratory.
Two classes of experiments will be completed: (a) the deformation of a single
drop/bubble translating in a straight channel in the presence of surfactants
and/or elasticity and (b) the deformation and subsequent break up of
viscoelastic drops/bubbles generated in a microdroplet generator with
surfactants. A three-dimensional numerical model will be developed to predict
the shape and velocity of a drop forming or translating in a microchannel using
a hybrid volume-of-fluid method. The front-tracking scheme which explicitly
tracks the interface predicts the interfacial topography and stresses accurately
allowing simulations of drops with low density and viscosity ratios. The ability
to predict the shapes and distributions of viscoelastic drops in microfluidic
devices opens up exciting possibilities for the development of novel
microdevices which use two-phase viscoelastic biofluids, suspensions, and
polymer blends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to advancing
the field of interfacial phenomena in microfluidic devices, this research will
lead to a new elective course in the Chemical Engineering undergraduate/graduate
curriculum on 'Microfluidics: Theory and Applications'. The course will draw
material from the PI's own research and will provide the students with hands-on
experience in her laboratory. This project will create the first facility for
soft lithography at the University of New Hampshire. The PI, being a woman and a
minority engineer herself, will encourage the involvement of women and members
of minority groups in her research and in the field of science and engineering
in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;