* 0457070
* Order and Chaos in Classical and Quantum Mechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* John Delos, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Houghton Pratt
* 08/31/2009
* USD 270,000.00

Research is proposed on semiclassical methods for calculating the behavior of
quantum&lt;br/&gt;systems whose classical counterparts are chaotic. The primary
focus will be on breakup of an&lt;br/&gt;excited complex. Of particular interest
is the study of the ionization of atoms in electric and&lt;br/&gt;magnetic
fields. If an atom is excited by a single-photon process from a strongly bound
state by&lt;br/&gt;a short-pulse laser, A + hv = A*, and then the excited state
decays, A* = A+ + e-, it is possible to&lt;br/&gt;measure the time between the
laser pulse and the appearance of an electron at a detector.
Such&lt;br/&gt;measured "time spectra" do not show exponential decay; instead,
electrons appear at the detector&lt;br/&gt;in a train of pulses. These pulses
are related to classical orbits of the electron. Calculations&lt;br/&gt;based
upon classical mechanics indicate that these chaotic pulse-trains are described
by a kind of&lt;br/&gt;fractal. We are analyzing the structure of such fractals
and making predictions of results of&lt;br/&gt;future experiments.&lt;br/&gt;In
addition we will continue to apply closed-orbit theory to atomic spectra. There
are&lt;br/&gt;new experimental measurements in several laboratories, and we will
help to provide theoretical&lt;br/&gt;interpretation of these
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;