* 0457277
* FDSS:   Physics of the Ionosphere and Magnetosphere - Bridging the Gap between Solar and Terrestrial Research and Education
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2011
* Louis Lanzerotti, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,000,376.00

This project will provide for the addition of a junior, tenure-track faculty
position in experimental ground-based ionosphere/magnetosphere research and
education in the Center for Solar-Terrestrial Research (CSTR) in the Department
of Physics at the New Jersey Institute of Technology. The New Jersey Institute
of Technology (NJIT) is a comprehensive, public, technological university in an
urban setting in the center of Newark, New Jersey. By virtue of its setting and
of the population of New Jersey, NJIT has a diverse student body, making for a
stimulating educational environment. CSTR is an leader in ground-based solar
physics, operating the Big Bear Solar Observatory and the Owens Valley Solar
Array in California. The CSTR is led by four faculty members who concentrate on
experimental ground-based solar physics research and education, and by a
distinguished research professor with wide experience in solar-terrestrial
physics. To further enhance space plasma physics within the Center the
university will also add a new position in computational modeling of space
plasmas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent (2003) Decadal Survey of Solar and
Space Physics (National Research Council, 2003) gives high priority to a
recommended NSF program, the "Small Instrument Distributed Ground-Based Network"
(hereafter called DASI, for "Distributed Array of Small Instruments"). There are
numerous frontier areas in space plasma research that can be addressed with
appropriate networks of ground-based instrumentation. It is expected that the
junior faculty person selected for this position at NJIT will become a leading
educator and participant in this national program.