* 0457456
* Ultra-high-energy cosmic rays from topological defects
* MPS,PHY
* 11/15/2005,10/31/2008
* Ken Olum, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Cooper
* 10/31/2008
* USD 60,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The source of the highest energy cosmic rays, with energies above
10^19 eV, is an enigma. It is hard to see how conventional acceleration
mechanisms (such as active galactic nuclei) can reach these energies.
Furthermore, protons of such high energies are little affected by magnetic
fields, and thus their arrival directions point back to their sources, but no
generally agreed-upon sources are seen in those directions. This puzzle
motivates the study of nontraditional sources. Topological defects, such as
domain walls, strings, and monopoles, may have been produced by phase
transitions in the early universe. Cosmic strings may also arise from
superstring theory. Because such objects naturally have a very high energy
scale, it is possible for them to release very massive particles which decay to
produce the observed cosmic rays. It is also possible for some topological
defects to move very rapidly and to produce very strong magnetic fields, and
thus to act as acceleration sources. This project will calculate, by analysis
and computer simulation, the expected cosmic ray fluxes from the various
topological defect sources, for comparison with existing observational data and
the results of new experiments, in particular the Auger observatory, now in
operation in Argentina. The most exciting possible outcome of this work would be
an explanation of observed events in terms of a specific source model. But even
a negative result would lead to important bounds on topological defect models.
In either case, we would learn important information about early-universe
cosmology and fundamental physics at the highest energy scales
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;