* 0457197
* Geometric Function Theory in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2008
* Jean-Pierre Rosay, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2008
* USD 98,880.00

The main part of the proposal by the P.I.is to continue his work (in
collaboration with Prof. S. Ivashkovich) on almost complex manifolds. Almost
complex manifolds are not an un-motivated generalization of complex manifolds.
After the work of Gromov, their relevance became unquestionable, with deep
applications to geometry and in particular to symplectic geometry. On one hand
they allow a remarkable flexibility that complex manifolds lack, on the other
hand they sometimes provide a much clearer approach to problems in several
complex variables. Recent work in the area, in particular by Ivashkovich and the
P.I., and by Nefton Pali, shows that truly basic questions still need
investigation. The P.I. intends to work on analytic questions, e.g. the
Kobayashi-Royden metric or the construction of pluri-subharmonic functions by
the method of Poletsky. The geometric role of pluri-subharmonic functions on
almost complex manifolds has been well illustrated recently in the works of
Gaussier-Sukhov and of Ivashkovich and the P.I. Related to the above there are
several questions that the P.I. intends to work on, especially the Cartan Lemma
for holomorphic matrices with uniform bounds. The problem was so far solved only
recently and only in complex dimension 1 by the P.I. and Prof B. Berndtsson,
using a refined maximum principle. This proposal is on the Complex Analysis side
but at the confluence of several active areas of Mathematics. Some geometry is
involved, differential inequalities play an important role. The field in which
the P.I. works is mainly the theory of several complex variables. Many ``real
problems'' receive their best explanation by using complex methods, even if the
initial problem does not seem to call for using complex numbers. It goes back to
the origin, for solving algebraic equations, but it continued for example in the
theory of Fourier integrals (that are taught in engineering classes), and it
continues in the most recent developments. Complex analysis has deep and rich
connections to the theory of ordinary or partial differential equations, which
allows the study of physical phenomena (at the macroscopic level). It applies to
the study of dynamical systems. Complex Analysis has also various links to
Geometry which is more directed to a qualitative (rather than quantitative)
description of natural phenomena. It is in this meaningful context that the P.I.
proposes to work.

