* 0457566
* SGER:  Geochemical Analysis of S-bearing Species Using Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy (DOAS) and Infrared Imaging at Cerro Negro's Fumarole Field
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2007
* Iain Watson, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2007
* USD 52,382.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research is to explore the use of cutting edge
instrumentation at the active site of Cerro Negro volcano, Nicaragua. The redox
relationship between H2S/SO2 and H2/H2O has been highlighted several times in
the literature as vital in determining the speciation of gaseous emissions, and
likely reflects the subsurface environment. This study is to undertake further
development of the DOAS (Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy) system
currently beginning to proliferate in SO2 emission rate experiments in active
volcanoes. As part of this field experiment, the team will combine DOAS
measurements with thermal infrared imaging to allow mapping the fumarole field
of this volcano for temperature and sulfur redox variations. The relationship
between exit temperature and oxidation state has the potential to yield new
knowledge on how interaction between magmatic gases and groundwater occurs at
Cerro Negro. This new methodology will be validated using direct measurements of
concentration of gas species and temperature fluctuations at this volcanically
active site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal involves young researchers from
three different institutions within the US and Canada, two of whom are from
underrepresented groups (female minorities). It involves the training of a
female minority student by leading experts in a field environment, while
enhancing interaction between young faculty, industry and Nicaraguan scientists,
allowing linkages and partnerships to be forged that are likely to promote
further interaction, both within the universities and internationally. Local
scientists, and the student, will be trained to use several new instruments over
the three week field experiment, during which time much could potentially be
discovered about a young, and unusual volcanic setting. At the conclusion of the
field campaign, the mini-UV spectrometer will be left with the trained
Nicaraguan scientists to use in future volcano-monitoring efforts in Nicaragua.
The results from the experiment will be disseminated through both publication
and the Internet in a timely manner. The potential benefits to society include
developing the ability to remotely monitor outgassing in an automated fashion,
more insight into subsurface processes and the potential hazard mitigation these
advances provide. The involvement of local scientist is crucial as they will be
responsible for generating educational products for the local populace, who can
still remember the evacuations of the mid 1990s. This proposal also begins what
can hopefully become a fruitful relationship with an industry partner.
&lt;br/&gt;