* 0457563
* Joint Workshop on Hands-Free Speech Communication and Microphone Arrays
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2005
* John Tesoriero, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/2005
* USD 20,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Joint Workshop on Hands-Free Speech Communication and Microphone
Arrays (HSCMA2005) will be held on March 17-18, 2005, at Rutgers University in
Piscataway NJ, USA (immediately before the 2005 ICASSP in Philadelphia PA). This
workshop is devoted to reviewing the current state-of-the-art as well as recent
advances in signal processing related to the problem of hands-free speech
communications. It will bring together researchers and practitioners from
universities and companies working in the fields of robust speech recognition,
speech enhancement, microphone arrays, and MIMO (multiple-input multiple-
output) acoustic signal processing. In order to facilitate interaction between
different research communities, this workshop combines two earlier established
workshops: Microphone Arrays and Hands- Free Speech Communications. The
Microphone Array Workshop held typically every other year for the past 10 years
has been growing in participation and diversity in subject matter coverage, but
focused mainly on the problem of hands-free communications. The Hands-Free
Speech Communication Workshop organized in Japan three years ago, focused mainly
on back-end processing for automatic speech recognition of hands-free speech.
This workshop will act to synergistically combine front-end MIMO acoustic signal
processing with back-end automatic speech recognition processing. The workshop
organizers believe that by bringing these two disparate research groups together
will lead to synergistic advances in the field of hands-free speech
communication. The workshop will feature keynote addresses by leading
researchers, panel discussion of future research directions, and contributed
technical papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests facility and
travel support for students. We would like to keep the registration cost of the
workshop low to allow many folks to easily participate. In order to accomplish
this, we have decided to host the conference at the CAIP center at the Rutgers
University. We request support for the cost of the organizational staff and
university facilities required for the workshop. We also request support for
students from US institutions who are authors or coauthors of a paper to be
presented, who without travel subsidies would not be able to
attend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop website will provide further details
URL: www.hscma2005.org&lt;br/&gt;