* 0457359
* Analysis and Rheological Measurements of Suspensions of Magnetic Nanoparticles in Oscillating/Rotating Magnetic Fields
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2005,10/31/2008
* Carlos Rinaldi-Ramos, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 10/31/2008
* USD 40,000.00

ABSTRACT - 0457359 University of Puerto Rico - Mayaguez

A combined research and education effort in fluid mechanics in general and the
response of magneticallyactive complex fluids in particular is proposed.
Research tasks consist of coordinated experimental and theoretical studies of
the AC magnetic field response of ferrofluids, permanently magnetized
nanoparticles suspended in viscoelastic fluids, magnetorheological fluids, and
magnetorheological fluid composites. Specific problems to be considered include
flows and torques due to uniform rotating magnetic fields applied to the fluid
in a cylindrical container and in a coaxial cylinder geometry, DC/AC fields
along the axis of plateplate and cone-plate geometries, and uniform rotating
fields in the plane of the plate in the plate-plate and cone-plate situations.
For ferrofluids, the equations of ferrohydrodynamics will be solved using
perturbation methods in the linear magnetization limit and using numerical
methods in the nonlinear magnetization regime. Planned experiments will test the
results of these analyses using modified rheometers and viscosimeters to measure
the torques on container walls and using Ultrasonic Doppler Velocimetry to
measure the induced flow fields. Finally, analyses of ferrohydrodynamic flow
stability for the planar Poiseuille/Couette flow in the presence of
oscillating/rotating uniform magnetic field and for the coaxial cylinder Couette
geometry with applied oscillating axial field are proposed, with the latter
being verified experimentally as part of the project. Educational efforts are
focused on invigorating undergraduate and graduate courses on fluid mechanics
and transport phenomena with recent developments in Chemical Engineering,
including results from the proposed research, and problems and examples of
phenomena and processing of non-Newtonian fluids, and utilization of finite
element techniques to model complex problems, thereby addressing the pressing
need to update our core curriculum.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research aims to fill gaps in the magnetically-
active complex fluids literature where coordinated experimental and theoretical
studies of fluid response to applied AC fields would be of value to further
understanding and application development. The fluids to be studied are
interesting from a fundamental perspective as they may sustain electromagnetic
body couples, consequently resulting in asymmetric states of stress and the need
to consider internal angular momentum conservation. From a practical
perspective, the knowledge gained through the proposed research will serve to
advance applications of these magnetically active complex fluids subjected to
applied AC fields, including magnetic fluid hyperthermia and magnetic
nanoparticle based nanosensors. Educational efforts to renovate the
undergraduate fluid mechanics and graduate transport phenomena courses with
results from the proposed research will satisfy the growing need to renovate the
core Chemical Engineering curriculum to address the challenges to be faced by
future generations.

Broader Impact: Performing the proposed research and education tasks at the
University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez campus, a non-PhD granting (as per NSF
definitions) Hispanic Serving Institution, provides special opportunities to
advance various broader impact priority areas for NSF. The UPRM graduates an
average of 110 BS and 10 MS Chemical Engineers each year, practically all of
which are Hispanic US citizens and 68% of which are female. A significant
fraction of our undergraduate students are active in research both at UPRM and
in summer programs (such as NSF REU) in the US. Many of these students
subsequently attend Universities in the US to pursue graduate degrees.
Furthermore, with the recent establishment of a doctoral program in ChE, the
UPRM has the potential of further advancing the participation of Hispanics in
doctoral-level research and education in the Nation. To achieve these goals and
to better serve these students, the proposed education tasks aim to renovate
core curricula and create new courses with material related to the proposed
research and addressing challenges to be faced by future generations. In
addition, the PI will mentor undergraduate and graduate students performing the
proposed research. The proposed research aims to analyze and test magnetically
active complex fluids with the objective of furthering our understanding of
these systems as well as developing next-generation instrumentation to study
their behavior. Finally, the results of the research and educational tasks
proposed will be disseminated through the relevant research and educational
literature, as well as through National and International meetings

