* 0457543
* Novel Circuits for the Design of Low Cost Millimeter Wave Phased Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2005,10/31/2008
* Amir Mortazawi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andreas Weisshaar
* 10/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

0457543&lt;br/&gt;Mortazawi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronically scanned antennas
have broad applications for both commercial and military segments, including
advanced radars, cellular base stations, satellite communications, and
automotive collision avoidance radars. The phased array systems can scan the
beam electronically at a fast rate, but require complex integration of many
circuits, including many expensive solid-state, MEMS or ferrite based phase
&lt;br/&gt;shifters, control lines, and power distribution networks. The
resulting systems are complex, bulky and have high losses. One of the critical
elements for electronically scanned phased array antennas is a phase shifter. It
typically contributes to a significant amount of the cost of producing a phased
array antenna and it is not uncommon for the cost of the phase shifters to
represent nearly half of the cost of the entire electronically scanned array.
This excessive cost has limited the deployment of electronically scanned
antennas and restricted their use to expensive and specialized systems, such as
military radars and certain commercial systems such as cellular telephone base
stations. Any substantial reduction in the cost of phased array systems will
allow much wider deployment of them in commercial arena. In response to the
above technology needs, we propose to develop simple and low cost circuit
architectures for the design of millimeter-wave phased arrays with reduced
complexity and cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of the Proposed
Research &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One important application that can take advantage
of low cost millimeter-wave phased arrays is automotive collision avoidance
radar or adaptive cruise control technology. Building a radar for road use has
been technically feasible for many years however as mentioned the core issue is
how to make one for a tiny fraction of the costs usually involved in making
complex phased array radars. Millimeter-wave &lt;br/&gt;adaptive cruise control
is now an option only on luxury models, such as the Mercedes S-class and Jaguar
XKE. The challenge is to reduce the cost/complexity of these systems so that
they find their way into ordinary cars. Based on the U.S. Department of
Transportation's report, during the year 2000 in the United States, 42,000
deaths were reported due to car crashes. The number of injuries that year
reached 3 million. Nine out of ten of those crashes were caused through human
error. Through the 1998 Intelligent Vehicle Initiative, the U.S. Department of
Transportation identified eight areas where intelligent systems could "improve"
or "impact" safety. Among the eight identified areas, four are based on various
collision avoidance sensors. Indeed broad application of collision avoidance
radars will significantly improve the road safety. These circuits will
eventually be taught in class room teaching to help students better understand
the interaction of multiple tunable circuit components in a distributed network
for much added functionality. Many commercial systems can benefit from low cost
phased arrays. The dissemination of research will be based on journal
publications, conference/workshop presentations will and the Radiation
&lt;br/&gt;and Solid-State Laboratories biweekly seminars at UoM that are well
attended by both graduate as well as undergraduates. Special effort will be
placed in attracting underrepresented students through the University of
Michigan UROP (Undergraduate Research Opportunities) and Maria Sara Parker
Programs specifically designed to provide research experiences to undergraduate
and graduate female and minority &lt;br/&gt;students. Currently PI employs one
female undergraduate under Maria Sara Parker Program at UoM. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Research
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a new class of circuits that
combine RF power distribution and phase shifters into one entity. The proposed
research is expected to have a significant impact on the design of low cost,
simple and efficient networks for the design of phased array antennas. Other
applications of such circuits include tunable filters at microwave and
millimeter-wave frequencies for the design of multifunction
&lt;br/&gt;transceivers. These systems have applications in various areas of
electronic communications including smart antennas, radars, mobile multimedia
services, automotive collision avoidance systems and active high power filters.
Furthermore applications provided by satellites will also benefit from these
developments due to the limitations on size, weight and cost.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;