* 0457168
* Open Problems in the Theory of Mathematical Billiards
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Nandor Simanyi, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 84,873.00

This project is devoted to a special class of chaotic dynamical systems, namely
hyperbolic (and focusing, or `elliptic') mathematical billiards. In the
hyperbolic case they are the prototype examples of non-uniformly hyperbolic
dynamical systems with singularities. Such systems have been playing an
important role in the rigorous mathematical foundation of statistical physics,
so that the study and establishing their strong mixing properties is getting
more and more physical relevance. The first part of the proposal focuses on a
fundamental conjecture regarding this family of dynamical systems, namely the so
called `Boltzmann-Sinai Ergodic Hypothesis', which states that any finite system
of (totally elastic) hard spheres moving on a flat torus is fully hyperbolic and
ergodic, of course, on the level set of its trivial first integrals. The proof
of this conjecture (in its full generality) has been so far notoriously
withstanding any attack against it. The first major part of the present proposal
directly targets this conjecture. The second part is a blueprint for further
research in this direction by generalizing the original Boltzmann-Sinai
Hypothesis to cylindric billiards, and billiards in physically more relevant
containers, i.e. rectangular boxes, convex domains, etc. The third part
addresses a question posed by M. Herman, which asks if the scattering
(hyperbolic) effect of the hard ball dynamics eventually prevails over the
focusing effect of the convex boundary, if the motion takes place in a compact,
convex domain. In the fourth part the fundamental complexity problems are
targeted for the $n$-step singularity sets of higher dimensional, strictly
dispersive, non-uniformly hyperbolic billiards. The answers to those questions
are pivotal in further studies of the fine statistical properties of such
systems. Part five poses some basic questions and problems concerning the
ergodic properties of high-dimensional billiards, in which the hard core
interaction potential is replaced by a smooth, rotational symmetric one.
Finally, the closing part aims at some open problems in the theory of planar
billiards.

The theory of dynamical systems studies the time-evolution of complicated,multi-
component systems, like particle systems in statistical physics, reaction
kinetics from chemistry, the behavior of the atmosphere (hence the relevance in
weather forecasting), population dynamics, developments on the stock market,
etc. By nature, this theory is closely related to - and is partly arising from -
the theory of differential equations and stochastic processes. An interesting
feature of the theory of dynamical systems is that it helps us better understand
such crucial phenomena in the time evolution of the above mentioned systems, as
the high sensitivity of the solution to the initial conditions, sometimes
referred to as chaos, or chaotic behavior. My present proposal targets the
investigation and better understanding of a popular and important class of
mostly chaotically behaving mathematical models, namely the so called
mathematical billiards. They got their name after the fact that they model the
physical motion of ball shaped particles interacting with each other via elastic
collisions.