* 0457533
* Disordered 3He and Glassy Systems at mK Temperatures
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Jeevak Parpia, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2010
* USD 520,000.00

This individual investigator award supports an experimental program to
investigate disorder in diverse systems at low temperatures. The two systems
that will be studied are (i) superfluid 3He in aerogel, where the aerogel
introduces correlated disorder and (ii) silica glass at low temperatures where
the sound velocity and dissipation provide sensitive probes for the validity of
the "standard tunneling model" of disorder in glasses. The project will examine
the phase diagram of superfluid 3He for hysteresis in the occurrence of the "A"
and "B" phases, for pinning, and for anisotropy in a variety of magnetic fields
using ultrasensitive torsion pendulum devices. 4He will also be used to further
reduce the volume accessible to the 3He (eventually into isolated "bubble-like"
regions, while preserving superfluidity. The experiments on silica glass will
use high Q resonators to focus on the very low temperature behavior (below 5mK)
where there may be evidence of interactions between tunneling sites, as well as
probe the non-linear behavior of these systems. These demanding experiments,
which involve cutting edge instrumentation and development of new techniques,
provide a challenging environment where graduate and undergraduate students
acquire skills (the ability to innovate, initiate, design and carry out) as well
as become familiar with analytic and display tools to prepare them for careers
in the nation's scientific and technological infrastructure. The research
program will also incorporate an undergraduate (year-round) as well as involve a
high-school teacher in the research program during the summer. %%%%%

3He (unlike all other elements) is in an inherently quantum-mechanical system
that does not solidify (unless it is highly compressed) even down to absolute
zero. It is one of the purest materials that can be prepared by any means, since
at these temperatures, impurities simply freeze out during the procedures
required to obtain the liquid state. Eventually 3He attains a highly ordered
state - superfluidity, which is different from that attained in most
superconductors and its sister isotope 4He. The magnetism of the superfluid
atoms means that the atoms pair up together and undergo orbital motion
exhibiting different phases or "flavors". All of this behavior is affected by
introducing aerogel, a highly dilute glass (also termed solidified smoke) whose
structure is so small that it penetrates into the superfluid pairs, altering the
occurrence (and perhaps even the character) of the "flavors" of superfluid that
appear. The research will look for changes under a variety of conditions,
including when the helium is confined to small "bubbles". A second area probes
our understanding of the properties of a standard glass at low temperatures,
where one imagines that order is imposed by the absence of thermal excitations.
However, the glass exhibits quantum characteristics, where atoms tunnel from one
configuration to another, affecting the sound propagation qualities. By carrying
out precise measurements on these systems the research will add to our
understanding of the role of disorder under less extreme conditions. Besides
adding to the understanding of quantum systems, this research provides a
demanding experimental environment that educates and trains graduate and
undergraduate students (and will also create a positive impact by involving a
science teacher into the summer research program) for successful careers in the
nation's scientific and technological infrastructure.