* 0457585
* Mileura Wide-Field Array Science and Technology Demonstrator
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2006,09/30/2011
* Alan Whitney, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Cooperative Agreement
* Vernon Pankonin
* 09/30/2011
* USD 5,890,245.00

Lonsdale&lt;br/&gt;AST 0457585&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will be used to
apply the design of low frequency radio astronomy technologies, developed at MIT
under a previous NSF grant, to the construction of the Mileura Widefield Array-
Low Frequency Demonstrator (MWA-LFD). The MWA-LFD is a collaboration of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Harvard-Smithsonian Center for
Astrophysics (CfA), the Australian University Consortium, the Australian
Telescope National Facility (ATNF), and the Western Australia government. The
MWA-LFD will be located at the Mileura radio quiet site in the Western
Australian desert. This scientifically capable array, consisting of 500 phased-
array antennas feeding sophisticated digital signal processing systems, will
have high sensitivity, broad 80-300 MHz frequency coverage, very high spectral
and temporal resolution, electronic pointing agility and multi-beaming
capability. Most importantly, it will feature an inherently very wide ~30
degrees instantaneous field of view. This combination of properties allows the
demonstration array to perform cutting-edge science experiments with much better
sensitivity than any existing instrument. This science capability will be
available two years after the start of funding, and the last two years of the
program will focus on science investigations with the
array.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science goals of the MWA-LFD are in three main
areas of investigation. The highest priority is to detect and characterize
redshifted neutral atomic hydrogen (HI) signals from the cosmological Epoch of
Reionization. The array will be capable of measuring the power spectrum of
fluctuations, as well as imaging structures created by Stromgren spheres around
quasars at redshifts with z~6.5, providing the first view of the cosmic dark
ages. and early structure formation in the Universe. Second, the wide field
capabilities of the array will be exploited to perform a blind search for
transient sources of radio emission which is 6 orders of magnitude more
sensitive than any previous work in this frequency range. Third, the array will
be used to probe the heliosphere with unprecedented precision using
interplanetary scintillation (IPS) and Faraday rotation techniques. The Faraday
rotation holds the unique promise of constraining the orientation of the
magnetic field in coronal mass ejection (CME) events, which is essential for
predicting the impact of solar storms on the earth. Several other scientific
topics, such as pulsar studies, solar bursts, the local structure of the
interstellar medium, and radio recombination lines, can also be effectively
addressed with the array.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MWA-LFD will demonstrate a
broad range of technologies and techniques that are essential for the future
feasibility and performance of full-scale wide field arrays that are currently
in a conceptual stage of development. The MWA-LFD is relevant to cyber-
infrastructure and cyber-science initiatives in the development of an
astronomical telescope with no moving parts, all "actions" are handled
electronically, and in the demonstration of new data handling techniques,
involving massive, near real-time processing and preliminary analysis, followed
by data compression. The application of the MWA-LFD to heliospheric measurements
will make an important contribution to the National Space Weather Program, and
thus will have valuable societal benefits. The project will be executed by
multiple national and international partners, which offer opportunities for
student exchange, and promotion of international scientific relations. The grant
will train postdoctoral researchers and graduate students, and will engage
undergraduate students and teachers in the project at no cost to the grant,
through existing Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) and Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) programs at MIT and the Harvard-Smithsonian
Center for Astrophysics (CfA). There will be extensive outreach activities to
local area schools and communities. &lt;br/&gt;