* 0457574
* Combinatorics and Number Theory III
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2009
* Wen-Ching Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2009
* USD 105,000.00

Title: Combinatorics and Number Theory III&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Wen-Ching
Winnie Li, Penn State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
contains two projects, in number theory and its&lt;br/&gt;applications to
combinatorics. The first project concerns&lt;br/&gt;modular forms for
noncongruence groups and their connections to forms&lt;br/&gt;for congruence
groups. The arithmetic of the forms for noncongruence groups &lt;br/&gt;is
little understood. Based on their numerical data, Atkin and Swinnerton-
Dyer&lt;br/&gt; (ASD) suggest very interesting congruence relations to be
satisfied by a basis of cusp forms for a noncongruence group. A recent joint
work by the PI,&lt;br/&gt;Long and Yang gives the first two-dimensional example
establishing the ASD&lt;br/&gt;congruence relations between forms for
noncongruence and congruence groups. &lt;br/&gt;To move forward, the PI plans to
systematically study the structure of the &lt;br/&gt;cusp forms for
noncongruence groups, to explore their relationship&lt;br/&gt;with forms for
congruence groups, and to tackle the conjecture that &lt;br/&gt;algebraic cusp
forms genuinely living on noncongruence groups are distinguished&lt;br/&gt;by
their Fourier coefficients having unbounded denominators. The second is on
&lt;br/&gt;the interplay between automorphic forms and Ramanujan hypergraphs,
and &lt;br/&gt;connections between hypergraphs and LDPC codes. Ramanujan
hypergraphs are &lt;br/&gt;higher dimensional analogue of Ramanujan graphs,
which are known to have broad &lt;br/&gt;applications. The PI proposes to study
whether the rich interplay between &lt;br/&gt;combinatorics and number theory,
which exists for Ramanujan graphs, extends to &lt;br/&gt;Ramanujan hypergraphs.
On the applied side, the PI plans to construct good &lt;br/&gt;LDPC codes using
Ramanujan hypergraphs, and to generalize her joint work with &lt;br/&gt;Koetter,
Vontobel, and Walker on characterizing pseudo-codewords for LDPC
&lt;br/&gt;codes from attached to graphs to attached to
hypergraphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been the PI's long term research goal
to do fundamental research in &lt;br/&gt;number theory and to seek applications
of number theory to graph theory and &lt;br/&gt;coding theory, especially to
solve real world problems. The study of interplay &lt;br/&gt;between these areas
has turned out to be quite fruitful. The PI has applied &lt;br/&gt;deep results
in number theory to construct efficient communication networks; &lt;br/&gt;and
conversely, investigations in graph theory inspired very interesting
&lt;br/&gt;and unexpected results in number theory. This proposal is a
continuation of&lt;br/&gt; the PI's effort to pursue the same general theme. The
first&lt;br/&gt;project of the proposal lies in basic research, to understand
the arithmetics&lt;br/&gt;of modular forms for noncongruence subgroups. The
second project is to explore &lt;br/&gt; the interplay in arithmetic and
connections between automorphic forms and &lt;br/&gt;Ramanujan hypergraphs,
extending PI's previous success on Ramanujan graphs. &lt;br/&gt;A potential
application is to LDPC codes. The very efficient encoding and
&lt;br/&gt;decoding algorithms for LDPC codes together with their extensive
&lt;br/&gt;applications make them very hot research topic in coding theory. A
primary &lt;br/&gt;goal of the second project is to construct good LDPC codes
using Ramanujan &lt;br/&gt;hypergraphs, and to understand the "wrongly" decoded
words arising from &lt;br/&gt;the rapid decoding algorithm. A conference is
planned in 2007 to disseminate &lt;br/&gt;the results of this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;