* 0457183
* "Population Dynamics of Ammonium-Oxidizing Bacteria in Estuarine Sediments"
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2007
* Anne Bernhard, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2007
* USD 42,500.00

Salt marshes and estuaries are two of the most productive ecosystems in the
world. The high productivity of these systems is intimately linked to
biogeochemical cycles, and nitrogen, in particular, plays a critical role, since
many marine systems are nitrogen limited. One of the major links in the nitrogen
cycle is carried out by a group of specialized bacteria, the ammonia-oxidizing
bacteria (AOB). AOB convert ammonium to nitrite, which is then further oxidized
to nitrate by nitrite oxidizing bacteria. Nitrate provides the substrate for
denitrification, which can lead to the ultimate removal of nitrogen from the
system. The goal of this project (which is a postdoctoral starter grant that
follows a fellowship to the PI) is to estimate the abundance of AOB in the salt
marsh and adjacent estuary at the Plum Island Sound, MA, LTER site in relation
to changes in activity and other environmental parameters, such as ammonium,
oxygen, and salinity. Previous work at the site indicated that the AOB
communities change from more diverse and variable communities at the freshwater
end of the estuary to less diverse, but more stable communities at the marine
end. For the current award, the Dr. Bernhard will develop real-time PCR assays
targeting the 16S rRNA genes of the two major estuarine AOB groups,
Nitrosomonas-related AOB and Nitrosospira-like AOB. A second objective is to
track changes in the abundance of the two major AOB groups over spatial and
temporal scales using real-time PCR and to correlate these changes with
nitrification activity and environmental variables. This study will further the
development and application of advanced technology for investigating
ecologically important microbial population dynamics in environmental systems.
Additionally, the work will actively involve undergraduates, providing
invaluable opportunities to train undergraduates in field and laboratory
techniques in microbial ecology. Some of these field and laboratory techniques
will also be incorporated into two courses at Connecticut College (Coastal
Marine Biology and Microbial Ecology), thus impacting many more students.