* 0457176
* Collaborative Research:    Pediatric Vaccine Formulary Optimization and Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2009
* Sheldon Jacobson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 07/31/2009
* USD 248,192.00

Childhood vaccination has become the single greatest defense against infectious
diseases among children in the United States. Moreover, biotechnology
breakthroughs are making it possible for vaccine manufacturers to develop
vaccine antigens for numerous diseases. One unforeseen consequence of such
innovations is that the recommended childhood immunization schedule (as set
forth by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices) has become
sufficiently crowded that the prospect of adding additional vaccines to this
schedule may not be well received by either health-care providers or
parents/guardians. Moreover, health-care decision-makers are being faced with an
overwhelming number of choices, with no methodological basis for comparing and
evaluating their different vaccine selection options. To address these issues,
operations research models and algorithms will formulated to capture the key
features of the recommended childhood immunization schedule, as well as the
restrictions and requirements as set forth in the national recommended childhood
immunization schedule. These decision-making tools will provide health-care
administrators with a means to address a variety of important pediatric
immunization problems, including the vaccine completion problem, the limited
budget problem, and the parent/guardian balking problem.

If successful, the models and algorithms developed under this research will
provide rigorous formulations for describing a wide variety of pediatric
immunization issues. The new models and algorithms obtained will be used to
obtain fundamental insights into the public health policies surrounding
pediatric immunization and the challenges that must be overcome for health-care
decision-makers to be equipped to deal with them. The results of this research
will also provide quantitative tools for comparing and evaluating pediatric
vaccine formularies necessary to satisfy the recommended childhood immunization
schedule. These tools will not only be of value in assessing the current state
of pediatric immunization, but also have the potential to be applied to
determine the ideal set of new vaccine combinations that should be developed,
and to measure the tractability of new immunization policies and requirements
for health-care decision-makers. The results of this effort may then lead to
higher immunization rates, given the set of vaccine choices available. This
research will be conducted in collaboration with personnel within the National
Immunization Program at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

