* 0457660
* GOALI:   Investigating the Defect Structures in Superconducting Materials for  Power and Electronic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2010
* Nigel Browning, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2010
* USD 262,197.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of high-Tc superconductivity
in the mid-80s held the promise of new, efficient, powerful, and sensitive
electronic devices and power transmission wires. However, the sheer complexity
of the materials issues related to these perovskite ceramics has so far severely
limited the realization of this technology. Of particular importance for all
applications involving superconductors are the properties of grain boundaries
and other structural defects. In this program, the aim is to use advanced
methods of structural and electronic characterization in state-of-the-art
transmission electron microscopes to first understand and then potentially
remove the deleterious properties of these defects. This work involves a strong
collaboration with the US leader in superconductor technology, American
Superconductor, and includes significant training of graduate students in both
the most advanced characterization methods and their application to industrial
research and development. An additional benefit of this program will be the
establishment of a remote access collaboratory, allowing the microscope methods
to be used off-site for research by anyone in the US and in particular, for
outreach programs administered through the established Nanomaterials for the
Environment, Agriculture and Technology (NEAT) initiative at UC-
Davis.&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;In this program, it is proposed
to investigate the structure-property relationships at grain boundaries in
several high-Tc systems using a combination of atomic resolution Z-contrast
imaging and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) in the scanning
transmission electron microscope (STEM). These correlated techniques have been
shown previously to provide accurate information on the link between structure,
composition, and the local carrier concentration (which is related to the
transition temperature, Tc, and the critical current, Jc). The current research
program will take the experiments an important step further by utilizing unique
experimental facilities (aberration corrected microscopes, monochromated
microscopes and in-situ stages) to perform the atomic scale measurements both at
elevated and lowered temperatures (i.e. below Tc) and in an ambient environment.
These experiments will allow the effect of temperature (processing) history on
the boundary properties to be characterized in the superconducting state. The
program aims to work on three classes of materials at various stages of
commercial development; primarily YBaCuO coated conductors, and also BiSrCaCuO
wires and MgB2. Each of these systems presents their own experimental challenge,
that range from determining the carrier interactions at grain boundaries to
understanding the formation of the superconducting phases during heat
treatments. Combining these studies into a correlated program with American
Superconductor will develop a complete understanding of superconducting
phenomena and allow these developments to be rapidly incorporated into new
materials processing routes. &lt;br/&gt;