* 0457452
* Fuel Decomposition and Aromatic Formation Pathways for the Hydrocarbons Contained in Liquid Combustion Fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Lisa Pfefferle, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 04/30/2008
* USD 242,000.00

CTS-0457452 AWARD ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FUEL DECOMPOSITION AND AROMATIC
FORMATION PATHWAYS FOR THE HYDROCARBONS CONTAINED IN LIQUID COMBUSTION
FUELS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soot nanoparticle and aromatic hydrocarbon emissions
from combustors are harmful to the global environment and pose public health
risks. An understanding of the chemical mechanisms of fuel decomposition and
aromatic hydrocarbon formation in flames is important for a rational approach to
reduce these emissions. Although such chemistry has been studied extensively for
small hydrocarbons, little is known for the larger hydrocarbons that constitute
most liquid combustion fuels. This proposal presents a novel approach, based on
experimental measurements in flames where a small amount of the species to be
studied is added to a well characterized methane flame. This allows the
chemistry of these large hydrocarbons to be studied directly. In earlier work we
validated this methodology and applied it to C5 to C7 hydrocarbons; the results
showed that i) large hydrocarbons can access pathways not available to the well-
studied smaller hydrocarbons and ii) these pathways can control soot
nanoparticle production. The goal of this proposed research is to elucidate fuel
decomposition and aromatic hydrocarbon formation for hydrocarbons present in
typical liquid fuels. Our chemical species measurement techniques are rapid and
on-line so detailed species maps can be obtained for a wide range of fuel
components in a reasonable time. This wide range of data allows us to exploit
the differences in the species profiles in developing reaction mechanism tests.
Results will be analyzed by extracting decomposition rates from the dopant
profiles, examining the correlation between aromatics and their possible
precursors, and by computational simulation. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Our work
sets the stage for cleaner engine design by expanding the database for the
chemical reactivity of large hydrocarbons and by providing rational correlation
and extrapolation data for the effect of fuel structure on reactivity. We have
provided detailed experimental results from our current studies to numerous
groups around the world who have used them to test computational models. The
databases generated during the proposed research will be available for direct
downloading over the internet. The conclusions from this analysis will
facilitate the development of quantitative computer models that can predict
nanoparticle formation in practical combustors and of strategies for reducing
soot emissions from practical combustors. Undergraduate students have been a key
component in our research and will perform course laboratory modules related to
this project. &lt;br/&gt;