* 0457445
* Default Risk Management in Supply Chains: Reduced-Form vs. Structural Default Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Volodymyr Babich, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2008
* USD 139,998.00

The grant provides funding for the development of stochastic models and
numerical tools which will be used to analyze the ramification of default risk
on supply chains and to design resilient supply chains. This research is
multidisciplinary, relying on the results from supply chain management,
inventory management, industrial economics, finance, and financial engineering;
and employing optimization, game theory, and stochastic modeling tools. In the
course of the research, the models in which defaults are driven by random
processes exogenous to the supply chain (reduced-form models) and the models in
which defaults depend on the actions of firms in the supply chain (structural
models) will be contrasted. To assess the importance of supplier competition,
models with the fixed wholesale prices and the negotiated prices will be
considered. The solution for the optimization problem of the manufacturer and
the equilibrium solution of the games among suppliers and between suppliers and
the manufacturer will be computed and the effects of the various model
parameters, in particular, the distribution of the supplier defaults, on the
equilibrium solution will be analyzed. The results of the research will be
incorporated in the curriculum of graduate and undergraduate courses at the
University of Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, if successful, will
help to answer the following questions: what operational and financial controls
can managers employ to mitigate the effects of default risk in supply chains?;
how effective are these controls and how their performance is affected by the
competition among firms, asymmetric information, and dynamic environment?; what
are the side effects of risk-management policies on the firms incentives and the
competition? Design and management of resilient supply chains in the
competitive, dynamic environments is a new research area and the proposed
research may kindle further interest in this area in the academic community and
stimulate additional research. This multidisciplinary study could also provide
new prospective on the research conducted in each of the component
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;