* 0457264
* Development of Technologies for Sub-Quantum-Noise-Limited Gravitational-wave Interferometers
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Stanley Whitcomb, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2009
* USD 800,000.00

Gravitational-wave interferometers measure optical signals generated by motion
of the interferometer mirrors due to a passing gravitational wave (GW). Since
the GW-induced motion is extremely small, quantum mechanical noise on the laser
light can pose a serious limitation to the detector sensitivity. This quantum
noise arises from two effects: (i) uncertainty in the number of photons at the
interferometer output due to quantum mechanical fluctuations (known as shot
noise); and (ii) light pressure which exerts forces that move the mirrors of the
interferometer (known as radiation pressure noise or back action noise). The
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle sets a minimum for the product of the shot
noise and back action noise, but it also allows the minimum shot noise to be
lowered below the standard level, provided the back action noise is increased,
or vice versa. This process is sometimes called "squeezing" because the noise
from one process is "squeezed" into the other. For example, previous experiments
have shown how laser light can be squeezed by making its amplitude fluctuations
small, but giving greater uncertainty in its phase.

Experiments will be carried out to generate and study squeezed states of light
that are suitable for injection into a gravitational-wave interferometer. The
effort will concentrate on the aspects of squeezed light most important for
improving the sensitivity of future GW interferometers: vacuum squeezing at
lower frequencies than have previously been explored. Two methods are being
developed in parallel: (i) use of nonlinear optical media, such as crystals of
lithium niobate, where the output light is squeezed due to correlations created
by interaction of light beams in the crystal; and (ii) use of the coupling
between the motion of a low-mass mechanical oscillator and intense laser light,
which causes the light to be squeezed because the motion of the oscillator
induced by forces due to amplitude fluctuations of the light couples to the
phase of the light. The goal with both these experiments is to yield up to 6 dB
of vacuum squeezing at a few hundred Hertz. In addition to improved sensitivity
for gravitational wave detectors, the long-term technical advances necessary to
achieve this goal will have applications in quantum optics, quantum information,
(sub-)nanoscale mechanical systems and precision measurement.