* 0457370
* SGER: Exploratory Methods for Nanowire Fabrication on Insulating Substrates
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2007
* John Harb, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2007
* USD 112,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: John N. Harb, Matthew R. Linford and Dean R.
Wheeler&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Brigham Young University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 0457370&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanodevices
and nanocircuits require a myriad of electrical interconnections and there are
significant and pressing problems related to the design, fabrication, and
attachment of wires between and to these nanodevices. As the limits of optical
lithography are approached, new classes of methods for fabricating suitable
interconnects need to be explored. These methods must be economical and robust;
that is, they must depend on chemistries and patterning methods that require
relatively few process steps and are scalable to manufacturing situations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This exploratory project will assess the feasibility and
potential utility of three different methods for nanowire fabrication on
insulating substrates. These include electrochemomechanical patterning (ECMP),
electrochemical lithography (ECL), and metallization of DNA templates (MDT). All
three methods involve local chemical modification of a surface to create
conducting paths in the desired pattern. The methods differ in the specific way
that the local surface chemistry is modified (chemomechanically,
electrochemically, or through molecular synthesis and placement). Chemical
modification as a patterning strategy has the potential to reduce the number of
process steps required for fabrication while increasing resolution. It is
expected that such methods will have an impact on future generations of
microelectronic devices, as well as immediate application in the laboratory for
development of new types of devices that incorporate a host of new
nanomaterials. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work include the
significance of this research for the emerging field of nanoelectronics, and the
opportunity for both graduate and undergraduate students to work on cutting-
edge, high-impact research in a multidisciplinary environment that involves
chemical engineers, chemists, and physicists. &lt;br/&gt;