* 0457491
* Collaborative Research: Operator Algebras and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Dorin Dutkay, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2006
* USD 74,999.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;In their current joint papers, the two PIs have already
developed&lt;br/&gt;certain geometric tools which hold promise in a number of
pure and applied&lt;br/&gt;areas: In the proposal, they outline six main
problems from operator&lt;br/&gt;theory/operator algebras, iterated function
systems (IFS), and more generally&lt;br/&gt;from geometric self-similarity of
nonlinear iteration systems. Specifically,&lt;br/&gt;they wish to use operator-
algebraic and dynamical-systems tools in the&lt;br/&gt;construction of bases in
the settings of IFS's, and of wavelets in the context of fractals, and in
particular, for Julia sets. They expect that their results will be of
computational significance, as they are constructive and naturally allow for
matrix iteration schemes. They are modelled on the more familiar wavelet
algorithms which have already proved successful in signal and image processing.
--The PIs will continue their collaboration with graduate students at both
universities, and Jorgensen will continue to mentor new Ph.D. students, and to
direct two Ph.D. theses in each of the three years. These students are already
in the pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We believe that the solution of our
proposed problems will be significant not only in the area of operator algebras,
but also in neighboring fields, such as harmonic analysis, wavelets, dynamcal
systems, and signal processing. This is borne out by the track record of our
collaboration up to date, and by our collaborations with these other areas of
mathematics and its applications. In particular, Jorgensen is getting started
with a current and active collaboration with engineering at the University of
Iowa. This project with engineering involves two engineering professors and a
team of engineering graduate students, and it is a natural outgrowth of the work
the the two PI's already have under way. The graduate students that Jorgensen
has mentored and directed in the past have included a good proportion of women
and under-represented minorities, and this is certainly to be continued with
this particular project if funded. --Further, the co-PIs will continue to travel
to conferences, to organize workshops for their students, and to visit our
respective universities. An added element of attraction with the collaboration
is the closeness of Rutgers to Princeton. The two co-PIs will be able to benefit
from contacts to Ingrid Daubechies's wavelet team in Princeton. Such contacts
have already been explored in the PIs' participation in an NSF wavelet FRG,
which is just now ending. These contacts in fact have served as preparation for
our current research plans.&lt;br/&gt;