* 0457291
* Painleve Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Aimo Hinkkanen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2009
* USD 92,633.00

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this project is to study a number of fundamental problems for the
Painleve differential equations. These equations are second order nonlinear
differential equations whose solutions do not have so-called movable
singularities and cannot be expressed in terms of elementary or special
functions. Their importance arises from the connections of the Painleve property
to integrability theory, as well as from the numerous applications of the
solutions, the Painleve transcendents. In this project, the principal
investigator will study the following aspects of Painleve-related analysis:
order of growth of single-valued meromorphic solutions; value distribution and
branching of solutions to Painleve equations; and Painleve-type equations which
admit movable branch points but only those whose multiplicity is bounded by a
preassigned constant. Work performed under this proposal will lead to a greater
understanding of and concrete results for this class of differential equations.

Painleve equations are of great importance in pure and applied mathematics as
well as in the applications of mathematics to other sciences and to engineering.
Within mathematics, Painleve equations are being applied in differential
geometry, random matrix models, and integrability. The following are examples of
areas of current activity outside mathematics in which Painleve equations have
been found useful and have arisen in a natural way: the Ising model in physics,
statistical mechanics in elasticity, correlation functions in an antiferromagnet
model, quantum field theory and topological field theory, general relativity and
cosmology, supersymmetry gauge theories in physics, resonant oscillations in
shallow water, Hele-Shaw problems in viscous fluids, plasma physics,
superconductivity, nonlinear optics and fiber optics, polymers,
polyelectrolytes, and colloids. This list alone provides a clear indication of
the empowering impact of mathematics in science and engineering, and of the
value that theoretical understanding and precise problem solving in mathematics
can contribute to modeling and theory building in other sciences. This project
will provide additional knowledge and methods to this area of wide
applicability.