* 0457058
* Collaborative Research:  Manufacturing of Mesoscopic 3D Articulated Devices Using Robomold Tooling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Satyandra Gupta, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2009
* USD 229,356.00

The objective of this research is to develop a novel multi-stage molding process
for creating a new class of articulated devices that have mesoscopic features
essential to the miniaturization of products in a cost-competitive manner. The
approach that will be employed consists of several steps. First, interfacial
adhesion phenomena encountered during the multi-stage molding process will be
characterized and their relationship to process variables will be established.
This knowledge will be utilized to explore alternative ways to limit adhesion at
interfaces and hence create articulated joints by easily separating discrete
components without breaking them. Second, viability of various cavity shape
change methods and ejection mechanisms will be assessed for realizing mesoscopic
joints using multi-stage molding. This knowledge will be utilized to optimize
tooling configurations for making mesoscopic articulated devices. Finally, an
improved understanding of the influence that process parameters for microscale
electrical discharge machining have on the resulting surface characteristics and
dimensional accuracies will be developed. This knowledge will be utilized to
create mold inserts to be used in the new molding process that will be essential
to defining the limitations on the size of the mesoscopic features.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is expected to have the following broader
impacts. First, for mesoscopic articulated devices that can be manufactured
using the new molding process, the process can be easily scaled down in size and
scaled up in production quantity. Hence, this research is expected to enable new
possibilities for miniaturizing products. Second, the new molding process will
significantly reduce assembly operations and make manufacturing significantly
less labor-intensive. Therefore manufacturing of mesoscopic devices can be done
quickly and easily inside the US in a cost-competitive manner. Therefore the
proposed research effort will enhance the competitiveness of the US
manufacturing sector. Finally, the research results will be integrated in the
manufacturing curriculum to educate a new generation of engineers ready to
exploit emerging manufacturing technologies to create new products.&lt;br/&gt;