* 0457631
* FDSS:  Faculty Position in Solar Physics at the University of Arizona
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2005,06/30/2013
* Mark Giampapa, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

The PI proposes to help establish a full tenure-track faculty position in solar
physics in the Department of Planetary Sciences and the Lunar and Planetary
Laboratory (DPS/LPL) at the University of Arizona, where a research group
working in the general areas of theoretical heliospheric plasma physics and
energetic-particle physics already exists. The goal is to integrate solar
physics as an academic and research discipline into the University. This
initiative will explicitly include close cooperation and collaboration with the
National Solar Observatory staff (two of whom are co-investigators), to take
advantage of NSO personnel and facilities already in place. The intent is to
attract an individual faculty member of the highest quality and to make solar
physics a vibrant and important component of the University, as well as to
benefit the broader solar physics community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
addition to the DPS/LPL faculty will extend the research and teaching of the
Department into new areas, while at the same time building on existing
strengths. It is expected that the combination of solar physics with
heliospheric and planetary science will produce synergies with areas such as
atmospheric sciences, Earth sciences, and cosmochemistry at the University. The
addition of solar physics to the educational program of the University of
Arizona will have direct effects. The world-class research and teaching at the
University and the proximity of the NSO will attract excellent students to do
graduate work in solar physics. Significant numbers of undergraduate students
will be introduced to the current state of our knowledge of the Sun. The
University will initiate a program of summer schools, conferences, and outreach
programs in solar physics, which will bring the program to the attention of the
broader public and science community. The activity will be located in the
culturally diverse Southwest of the United States, where the University will
reach out to students in a wide variety of ethnic groups and cultures, while
encouraging them to consider science education and research as a career.
&lt;br/&gt;