* 0457486
* Improving the Quality of Web Material Production Through a Higher-Order Stress and Stability Model
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Jonathan Wickert, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2008
* USD 292,930.00

The objective of this research project is to develop an improved understanding
of the stresses and defects that occur when metal, paper, and polymer materials
are manufactured and wound into large rolls or coils. The research approach has
two tasks: developing a higher-order mathematical model for the state of stress
within a wound roll, and conducting laboratory experiments to measure stresses
and conditions for the onset of such failure modes as v-buckling, sag collapse,
and starring. The research specifically addresses non-linear material
characteristics, stress variations in the roll's radial and width-wise
directions, viscoelastic properties, slippage due to loss of layer-to-layer
friction, and such process improvements as tension scheduling and the design of
packing rollers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research project will improve the production of wide continuous sheets of metal,
paper, and polymer materials, which are sometimes referred to as "webs." Because
of high winding tension and complex material characteristics, wound rolls can
become unstable, buckle, or even collapse entirely. The research will advance
knowledge relating to the constitutive characteristics of web materials and
rolls. The key sources of disturbances that drive the formation of defects in
wound rolls will be identified. Potential applications of the work may include
the manufacture of aluminum sheet stock used in beverage containers, and the
production of polymer base films that are used in computer data cartridges.
Industrial practitioners may be able to apply the findings to wind web materials
in a manner that minimizes damage to the underlying roll, that decreases scrap
rates, and that improves the quality of their product.