* 0457435
* Design and Applications of Super-Electrophilic Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Dean Roddick, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 05/31/2009
* USD 422,000.00

Professor Dean Roddick of the University of Wyoming Chemistry Department is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
for his inorganic chemistry studies on the synthesis of new
perfluoroalkylphosphine (PFAP) supported metal cations, molecular ions that
combine cationic metal centers, strongly-accepting ligands, and coordinative
unsaturation to form "superelectrophiles", systems where metal electrophilicity
is maximized. This PFAP metal coordination chemistry has provided a wide array
of acceptor metal complexes that are electronically similar to carbonyl
analogues. The combination of PFAP ligands with cationic or polycationic metal
ions provides strongly electrophilic stable coordination complexes,
"superelectrophiles", with applicability to challenging problems in coordination
chemistry and catalysis, and practical applications in organic synthesis and the
production of commodity chemicals and pharmaceuticals. Research in PFAP platinum
coordination chemistry has resulted in the strongest (and least coordinating)
superacid system known.

This research will focus on the chemistry of new perfluoroalkylphosphine (PFAP)
supported metal cations. Such metal-mediated electrophilic catalyst molecular
species have practical applications in organic synthesis and the production of
commodity chemicals and pharmaceuticals. The development of new classes of
powerful metal electrophiles is relevant to alkane functionalization and
conversion chemistry, with implications for a future chemical industry based on
methane as a primary feedstock. Postdocs, graduate students and undergraduate
students will receive multifaceted training in inorganic and organometallic
synthesis and characterization.