* 0457138
* RUI:    Truncated Multivariable Moment Problems &amp; Applications:  An Operator Theoretic Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Lawrence Fialkow, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 116,085.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research concerns an operator-theoretic
approach to multivariable moment problems. The prototypical problem that we
study is the Multivariable Truncated Moment Problem: Given a finite
d-dimensional real sequence, we seek concrete necessary and sufficient
conditions so that there exists a positive Borel measure on d-dimensional
Euclidean space for which the given data represent successive power moments of
the measure. To study the existence of such a representing measure, we associate
to the data a finite moment matrix. It is known that a finitely atomic
representing measure exists if and only if the moment matrix admits an extension
to an infinite, finite-rank, positive moment matrix. Representing measures with
the fewest atoms correspond to extensions of minimal rank. We seek to establish
concrete necessary and sufficient conditions for such extensions, and also to
develop algorithms for explicitly computing representing measures corresponding
to extensions. In the case when the moment matrix is singular, we study the
following conjecture: there exists a representing measure if and only if the
moment matrix is positive, recursively generated, and the rank of the matrix is
at most equal to the size of the algebraic variety natuarally associated to the
data. This conjecture is true for moment problems on planar curves of degree one
or two, so we study the conjecture for curves of higher degree. This research
also concerns estimates of the minimal rank in the above-mentioned extensions;
such estimates are related to the convergence of certain polynomial optimization
algorithms and also to the size of minimal cubature rules in Numerical
Analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The aim of this research is to develop new
existence and uniqueness criteria for finitely atomic representing measures in
multivariable truncated moment problems (with data corresponding to successive
power moments up to a fixed finite degree). Truncated moment problems play
essential roles in aspects of such fields as Operator Theory (subnormality of
weighted shifts), Interpolation Theory (classical Nevanlinna-Pick theory),
Numerical Analysis (multivariable cubature rules), Control Theory (signal
processing), and Optimization Theory (polynomial optimization over a region).
The principal focus of this research is an approach to multivariable truncated
moment problems based on an extension theory for the moment matrix associated to
the moment data. When this matrix admits an infinite, positive, finite rank
moment matrix extension, this approach yields an explicit formula for a finitely
atomic representing measure. The primary goal of this research is to determine
concrete criteria on the moment data which permit the desired extension. This
research also concerns the development of algorithms to implement these
criteria. One principal application will be to develop new minimal cubature
rules for measures on classical domains such as the disk and triangle; another
application concerns the convergence of polynomial optimization algorithms.
Broader impacts will include undergraduate training and research projects for
science students from underrepresented minorities, and the use of computing,
particularly simulations, as an experimental methodology in mathematics and
computer science courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;