* 0457056
* Middle Mekong Archaeological Project, Phase I:  Reconnaissance Survey in Northern Laos
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2007
* Joyce White, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 20,000.00

With support from the high risk program of the Archaeology Program of the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Joyce White and an international team of
colleagues will conduct the first fieldwork season in Laos of the Middle Mekong
Archaeological Project (MMAP). The team brings together U.S., British, Lao, and
Thai archaeologists and geographers who will undertake a reconnaissance survey
of three left bank tributaries of the Mekong River in Luang Prabang province.
The objective is to find sites likely dating to the middle Holocene, roughly
6000-2000 BC calibrated, in order to begin acquiring data to test alternative
models for the appearance of agriculture in mainland Southeast Asia. The timing,
mechanisms, and ramifications of the emergence of early agriculture in Southeast
Asia are hotly debated by archaeologists studying Asian prehistory. Multi-
disciplinary arguments over the roles of migration from northern latitudes as
opposed to indigenous developments engage disciplines ranging from historical
linguistics, palaeopalynology, human, animal, and crop genetics, as well as
traditional archaeology. MMAP seeks to redress the fact that existing
archaeological data from the middle Holocene in mainland Southeast Asia, during
which the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture in this region
occurred, are currently too poor in quantity and quality to scientifically
evaluate alternative scenarios under discussion. Determination of the timing and
nature of the development of early agriculture in Southeast Asia has
implications not only for the culture history of one region, but also for the
validity of the proposal that modern day global distributions of languages and
populations represent expansions from a few regions where some scholars propose
that agriculture originated. Scholars with this "Gardens of Eden" view see
Southeast Asian languages, populations, and agriculture originating from the
Yangtze basin where the earliest domesticated rice has been found. However,
existing evidence from demography, plant genetics, and human biology in mainland
Southeast Asia may not support the proposal. Knowing if the original
agricultural societies in Southeast Asia came from an extraregional expansion
driven by the development of rice cultivation, autochthonous developments of
plant cultivation perhaps of multiple crops, or some combination of processes is
important not just for evaluation of the Gardens of Eden proposal. Knowing if a
rice-focused cropping system as opposed to a multi-species horticultural
cropping system characterized Southeast Asia's original agricultural regime is
fundamental to understanding the region's distinctive social, economic,
political, and environmental trajectories. Geographic factors indicate that
there is no better location in all of Southeast Asia to seek evidence for
changes in middle Holocene subsistence regimes than Luang Prabang province.
Luang Prabang is upstream from Ban Chiang cultural tradition sites in northeast
Thailand where the earliest agricultural societies so far identified in the
middle Mekong basin lie. Luang Prabang province is also on the western side of a
divide whose eastern side in Vietnam witnessed subsistence changes during the
middle Holocene that the Vietnamese claim involved exploitation of domesticated
livestock. The MMAP exploratory survey will provide data to help plan future
archaeological investigation in Laos involving excavation and intensive survey.
This research will impact society and knowledge at a variety of levels. Laos is
virtually an archaeological terra incognita, yet encompasses the inner core of
mainland Southeast Asia. Little research has been done since the colonial period
before World War II because of ongoing regional conflicts and the country's
political isolation since the Vietnam War. Thus Laos holds a keystone for
knowledge of human past for a major part of Asia as questions have arisen from
research in neighboring countries such as Thailand during the past 30 years.
Laos is a very poor country, which only recently received normalized trade
status with the United States. Thus joint projects between the Lao Department of
Museums and Archaeology (DOMA) and US universities can have major repercussions
for training of local archaeologists, development of infrastructure for
archaeological research and museology, and transfer of information technology
and archaeological method, theory, and knowledge to local cultural resource
managers.