* 0457622
* Research in Support of LIGO Binary Inspiral Search and Detector Characterization
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2009
* USD 140,000.00

One of the objectives of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory
(LIGO) is to&lt;br/&gt;detect gravitational waves from exotic astrophysical
sources including binary systems consisting of neutron stars and/or black holes.
Such systems are expected, in terms of general relativity, to send out
gravitational waves as they approach coalescence. The LIGO Scientific
Collaboration's Inspiral Analysis Group has set upper limits for the rate of
coalescence of such systems using data from LIGO's first two science runs, and
hopes to be able to detect them in future runs. This award supports aspects of
the work needed to fully analyze LIGO data. One of these is the study of glitch
(i.e. instrumental noise spike) propagation through the LIGO interferometer, the
couplings between different channels of the LIGO instrument, and finding the
channels where environmental glitches or glitches in auxiliary interferometer
channels are correlated sufficiently closely with the gravity wave channel to
serve as vetoes for times when triggers may have been recorded by the inspiral
templates. Tools that will be used include the glitch monitor PTmon that has
been tested extensively against simulations, Matlab scripts, and the LIGO tools'
package Diagnostic Test Tools that displays data frames, filtered if desired.
The same tools will be used in conjunction with studies of the strongest
inspiral triggers that are not vetoed. The detective work involved is exciting
but very time-consuming. It will be ideal for undergraduates, and offer them the
opportunity of making a real contribution to a major scientific
project.&lt;br/&gt;This award will also support the running of the inspiral
analysis code to assess the triggers produced from preliminary samplings of the
data to select parameters and thresholds that eliminate most of the triggers
without risk of removing a real inspiral signal. Automating the process of
vetoing inspiral event candidates that are really due to instrumental glitches
is a high priority for the Inspiral Analysis Group and will be a part of this
project. The ability to distinguish between instrumental glitches and true
gravitational wave signals is a key component to the search for gravitational
waves by LIGO.