* 0457289
* Direct Probing and Modeling of Adsorbed Layers of Surfactant/Lipid/Protein Mixtures at Air/Water Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Elias Franses, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 01/31/2007
* USD 160,000.00

ABSTRACT - 0457289 Purdue University

Project Summary

The health related project examines how to measure, characterize, and control
the extent and rate of adsorption of surfactants, lipids, and proteins at
air/water interfaces by understanding the fundamental phenomena and mechanisms.
Such adsorption determines the equilibrium and dynamic surface tension, which
affects free surface flows involving bubbles, drops, and liquid jets. The
dynamic surface tension at constant and pulsating area condition is measured and
modeled. Unique features include: (i) direct probing of the interfacial layers
of aqueous solutions or dispersions of surfactants, lipids, proteins, and their
mixtures with quantitative ellipsometry and infrared spectroscopy; (ii) control
of adsorption of insoluble lipids by controlling the method of lipid dispersion
preparation; (iii) understanding of competitive adsorption of lipids and serum
proteins (albumin or fibrinogen); (iv) models of micellar dissolution and
diffusion, and their effect on adsorption dynamics; and (v) studies of rates and
mechanisms by which lipids reach the surface where they produce very low dynamic
surface tensions (less then 10 mN/m during surface compression); and (vi)
studies of rates and mechanisms by which lipids can exclude or expel soluble
proteins from the interfacial region.

The surface layer composition of lipid/soluble protein dispersions is probed for
the first time by quantitative IR spectroscopy and ellipsometry. Thermodynamic
and interfacial mass transfer principles are applied for the first time for
predicting and controlling how lipids can adsorb and expel proteins from the
interface. This could be important for processes affected by foam stability and
breakup, such as bioreactors, washing machines, and foam-based separations, and
in lung surfactants design and formulations.

The results are important in processes involving drop deformation and breakup,
as in DNA and protein microarrays, inkjet printing processes, and the design and
uses of agricultural pesticide sprays. Since albumin and fibrinogen serum
proteins can leak to the alveoli and inhibit the function of lung surfactant,
understanding the factors which affect their displacement could lead in
biomedical engineering applications of treatment of lungs injured by the acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). This may have direct and indirect
implications in effectively treating or alleviating infant and adult respiratory
diseases. Other societal impacts could be improved and leaner pesticide
formulations, for reducing environmental pollution.

This research will also lead to effective training of graduate and undergraduate
students, who will be exposed to state-of-the-art experimentation and modeling.
The results will be used in part in a graduate course and an undergraduate
course. Developing and refining surface layer characterization will improve the
infrastructure of research and education in interfacial, biomedical,
biochemical, and mineral engineering. The P.I. is committed to diversity in
recruiting graduate and undergraduate students for this project, and has worked
with several members of underrepresented groups over the past five years. The
results may lead to partnerships with medical researchers or professionals and
with industrial and academic researchers dealing with surfactant, lipid, and
protein applications.

