* 0457315
* Theory of Particles and Strings in the Sky, Underground, and Laboratory
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2005,10/31/2010
* Mary Gaillard, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 10/31/2010
* USD 2,150,000.00

The investigators in this group propose to work on outstanding questions in
physics. What is the Nature of the Universe and what is it made of? What are
matter, energy, space and time? How did we get here and where are we going? from
the theoretical standpoint. Theoretically, string theory has undergone major
developments in the last several years in techniques as well as emerging
cosmological applications. Many new possibilities of physics beyond the standard
model that were not considered in the past have recently emerged. Connection
between particle physics and physics underground or in space is becoming
stronger than ever.. This proposal attempts to address these major questions
from many possible directions Specifically, the PIs propose to take the
following approach. Ganor proposes to do research in M-theory, string theory,
supersymmetric Yang-Mills theories, field theories in higher dimensions,and to
search for possible tests of string theory and M-theory in cosmology. Gaillard
studies effective supergravity theories at the quantum level, with an emphasis
one those derived from the weakly coupled heterotic string. She will explore the
implications for collider physics and cosmology of these theories. Hall plans to
study issues of electroweak symmetry breaking, and connections between particle
physics and cosmology, such as how inflation and dark energy can be incorporated
into fundamental theories that connect to scales of unification and to neutrino
masses. Murayama proposes to study physics behind the electroweak symmetry
breaking, underground physics such as neutrino physics and proton decay, dark
matter and cosmology, and dynamics of field theory. Zumino studies various
aspects of noncommutative quantum field theories and (super)string theories and
tries to go beyond the known mathematical techniques to develop a deformation
quantization of differential forms (for gauge theories) and a functional super-
star product for (super)string field theory. The broader impact is that the PIs
provide training to students and postdocs who become the next generation of
scientists of the nation as well as the world. Diversity is promoted through
interactions with two female PIs The group works with QuarkNet teachers to bring
the excitement of forefront research to high-school students through lectures as
well as making themselves available as resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;