* 0457248
* Smoothed multiple endpoint procedures.
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Harold Sackrowitz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 160,000.00

Classical multiple endpoint testing procedures such as
Scheffe,&lt;br/&gt;Tukey, Bonferroni etc. are oftentimes too conservative. This
is&lt;br/&gt;particularly true if the number of endpoints is large as in many
recent&lt;br/&gt;applications. In an effort to declare significance of endpoints
more&lt;br/&gt;rapidly than classical multiple comparison methods permit,
procedures with&lt;br/&gt;stepwise structure were introduced. Most recent
procedures have a&lt;br/&gt;stepwise structure, that is they are either single-
step, step-up or&lt;br/&gt;step-down. To evaluate and compare procedures the
proposers have studied&lt;br/&gt;properties of these stepwise procedures. One
very surprising result of&lt;br/&gt;considerable practical value is that the
popular step-up procedure is&lt;br/&gt;inadmissible, even for a vector risk
function consisting of average size&lt;br/&gt;as one component and average type
II error as the other component. The&lt;br/&gt;step-up and step-down procedures
also have a disturbing practical&lt;br/&gt;property; namely a small negative
change in one variable accompanied with&lt;br/&gt;reasonably sizeable positive
changes in other variables can lead from many&lt;br/&gt;rejections to many
acceptances. The current proposal is to find "smooth"&lt;br/&gt;procedures that
retain the desirable properties of stepwise procedures&lt;br/&gt;while improving
on the shortcomings. By representing the step-up&lt;br/&gt;procedure as a linear
combination of products of indicator functions a&lt;br/&gt;smooth competitor to
step-up is found and will be evaluated. Another idea&lt;br/&gt;proposed is to
find a parametric empirical Bayes procedure that will&lt;br/&gt;control the
average size component of the vector risk used to evaluate&lt;br/&gt;procedures.
A critical aspect of the proposal is to study the amount
of&lt;br/&gt;improvement the new methods have over step-
up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigators study the problem of how to decide
which among&lt;br/&gt;many possible individual entities are significant. For
example, there are&lt;br/&gt;thousands of a person's genes examined in a
microarray. Which genes are&lt;br/&gt;different or expressed differently when
one examines cancer patients&lt;br/&gt;compared to non-cancer patients. To be
able to decide such could provide&lt;br/&gt;a valuable diagnostic tool for early
detection of cancer. This example,&lt;br/&gt;is one of many, that illustrates
the problem of multiple testing&lt;br/&gt;procedures. Other areas of application
include detection of covert&lt;br/&gt;communications, detection of bioweapons,
comparing several treatments with&lt;br/&gt;a control, examination of mutual
fund data in an effort to single out&lt;br/&gt;successful funds, examining
testing methodologies in education and&lt;br/&gt;psychology settings. New and
efficient statistical methodologies are&lt;br/&gt;introduced and analyzed in
this research undertaking.&lt;br/&gt;