* 0457520
* GOALI: Tooling-Workpiece Interface Understanding and Modeling Towards Concurrent Stamping Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2011
* Qian Wang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2011
* USD 256,000.00

The research objective of the project is to explore the nature of changing
tooling-workpiece interface and tooling wear due to material advancing, and to
develop an Interface Concurrent Modeling, Simulation and Optimization System
(Interface-CMSOS) in the environment of stamping process and workpiece quality
control, assisted by experimental measurements and validation. The research will
also aim at industrial goals to establish die material/surface design guidelines
for successful implementations of advanced high strength steels in new vehicle
programs. Both experimental and numerical approaches will be used to pursue the
objective. Four tasks are planned: (1) Understanding the tooling-workpiece
interface and tooling wear based on multi-scale modeling, (2) model validation
and correlation with stamping test results, (3) Integration of models to form an
Interface-C-MSOS framework, and (4) Development of an optimization methodology
and efficient algorithms considering variations and uncertainties. The education
objective of the project is to integrate research with education and to connect
teaching with industrial practice, which will be accomplished through
collaborations among PIs and participating engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that the research results will provide critical understanding of
tooling-workpiece interfaces, die wear and the trend of interface changing due
to material upgrading, as well as approaches for advancing such understanding
hand-in-hand with new material development. This Interface-CMSOS is the first
integrated attempt to tackle systematically the problems raised in material
updating. Equally important, the idea of Interface-CMSOS tends to encourage the
application of new materials, making material research and development more
profitable.