* 0457453
* Liquid-Core Capsules via Interfacial Free Radical Alternating Copolymerization
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Carlos Co, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2009
* USD 245,043.00

ABSTRACT

PI: Carlos C. Co and Chia-Chi Ho Institution: University of Cincinnati Proposal
Number: 0457453 Title: Liquid-Core Capsules via Interfacial Free Radical
Alternating Copolymerization

Research:

Liquid-core capsules have application in the high efficiency encapsulation and
controlled delivery of drugs, dyes, enzymes, etc. These applications have driven
the rapid development of innovative techniques, based on layer-by-layer
assembly, shell polymerization of particles and dendrimers followed by core-
removal, microphase separation of core-shell latexes, and vesicles, to confine
polymerization or assembly of encapsulants at the interface. However, all of
these techniques require, in one way or another, procedures and materials, such
as repeated centrifugation-washing, sintering, core-removal, microphase
separation, vesicle templates, or block copolymers, that limit control of shell
thickness and permeability, preclude direct encapsulation of substrates, or
hamper large-scale practical application.

The aim of this project is to study interfacial free-radical alternating
copolymerization for direct encapsulation of liquid drops within a polymer shell
without the need for a solid core or vesicle template. The approach for making
liquid-core capsules is based on a free-radical analogy of interfacial
condensation principles routinely demonstrated with the nylon rope trick.
Instead of diamines and diacid chlorides that react uncontrollably upon contact,
oil- and water-soluble vinyl ethers and alkyl maleates are alternately
copolymerized at interfaces via a free-radical mechanism. The objectives of the
work are to: 1.Elucidate the mechanism through which liquid-core capsules are
formed during interfacial polymerization 2. Demonstrate dynamic control of shell
permeability for aqueous-core capsules

The underlying principles and methodology of this type of polymerization allows
for the direct encapsulation of many substrates through a highly scalable and
inexpensive process. The general principle of interfacial free-radical
alternating copolymerization has potentially significant impacts that extend
beyond liquid-core capsules and into many established nanotechnologies where the
preponderance of interfaces accentuates the significance of interfacial
polymerizations.

Broader Impacts:

Broader impacts of this project include the introduction, education, and
training of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in the principles
of radical and condensation polymerizations, interfacial phenomena, and complex
fluids. Special effort will be made to recruit American and minority students to
pursue advanced studies. In particular, engineering education will be promoted
to under-represented groups via UC programs aimed at recruiting students from
the large black population in the city of Cincinnati. The free-radical
polymerization approach to liquid-core capsule formation proposed here, itself
promises broad impact from a commercial standpoint due to its low cost and the
ease with which it can be implemented on a large scale.

