* 0457528
* Searching for Gravitational Waves Using the LIGO Detectors in Coincidence with Astrophysical Triggers
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Szabolcs Marka, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2010
* USD 331,034.00

The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO)'s goal is the
direct detection of gravitational waves from various astrophysical sources to
open a totally new window on the Universe. LIGO's widely separated
interferometers are used in coincidence to search for gravitational waves
emitted by compact binary systems, spinning neutron stars, supernovae and other
cosmological phenomena. The LIGO detectors are now approaching design
performance and prolonged data taking will commence in late 2005. Development of
a more sensitive advanced detector is already well underway. The scientific
program of LIGO is the mission of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC).

LIGO's current alternating cycles of data taking, data analysis and detector
improvement activities provide an opportunity for the experimental gravity group
at Columbia University (GECo) as a new LSC group. The GECo group intends to play
a pivotal role in the following critical areas: (1) Timing accuracy and timing
diagnostics for LIGO and Advanced LIGO to enable crucial coincidence detection;
(2) Improvement, development, and support for detector diagnostic tools and
physical environmental monitoring systems needed to improve detector reliability
and to quantify data quality; (3) Execution and further development of sensitive
and specialized analyses, which take advantage of astrophysical triggers, such
as gamma ray bursts and optical supernovae. These activities provide hands-on
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. The PI will participate
in a number of Columbia University programs involving outreach to the local
community.