* 0457026
* GOALI:  Integrating Micro-scale Physical Chemistry, Fluid-Flow and Process Control for Conceptual Design of a New Aluminum Process
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Sridhar Seetharaman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2009
* USD 300,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: B. Erik Ydstie and David Roha
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Carnegie Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0457026&lt;br/&gt;Title: GOALI: Integrating Micro-scale, Physical Chemistry,
Fluid-Flow and Process Control for Conceptual Design of a New Aluminum
Process&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Processes with integrated flow, chemical reaction
and phase transition are used in industry to produce and process a variety of
materials. Process simulation can help design and optimize such processes to
reduce cost and improve environmental impact parameters. To advance application
of this tool however, it is necessary to find new ways to integrate meso-scale
fluid flow, micro-scale chemical reactions and phase transformations with macro-
scale design and control methods in a stable and consistent manner. The PIs want
to develop a computational architecture that combines existing and new software
on a distributed cluster computer. Cluster computing allows one to develop
process modules and integrate these through network computing in a parallel
manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to develop a
computational architecture suitable for modeling, scale-up, design and control
of a high-energy chemical reactor for carbothermic production of Aluminum. This
reactor has multiple phases, particulates and complex fluid flow. The approach
achieves stability and computational scalability by exploiting a symmetry
property of physical systems that arises from the second law of thermodynamics.
Other examples where this property holds include fluid bed reactors,
crystallization, chemical vapor deposition, bio-reactors, slurry reactors, and a
large number of processes that rely on particulate processing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be part of a multi-disciplinary
industry/university program, which aims to develop a coherent design methodology
for the carbothermic aluminum process in order to bring it to commercialization
within 10 years. Researchers at Carnegie Mellon University and industrial
researchers at the ALCOA Technical Center will be involved in the development
effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Multi-scale modeling and
distributed computation is of great current interest since they promises to
address problems in process design, meteorology, bio-medicine and industry.
Advances in this area can give shorter lead times in the development of new
processes and products. This research is unique since it combines behavioral
constraints imposed by the laws of physics with tools from mathematical systems
theory and parallel computing in a novel way. Generic results and theory from
this research can be used to design computational tools for integrating new
software and legacy code in a distributed multi-scale simulation
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Aluminum is an important material
for packaging and transportation because of its durability and high strength to
weight ratio. This research will help design a new process for making primary
aluminum, which reduces the combined capital, energy and operating costs
relative to current Hall-Heroult technology by no less than 25%. It will also
eliminate the emission of fluoride containing gases. Aluminum in automotive
applications reduces transportation costs, relative to steel, due to its low
weight.&lt;br/&gt;