* 1900617
* D3SC: Discovery and Optimization of Chiral Catalysts Guided by Chemoinformatics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Scott Denmark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 485,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Scott E. Denmark of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Professor Denmark
is developing a new paradigm for the development of catalysts that combines the
creative power of "diversity-oriented synthesis" with the computational power of
informatics. Under the data-driven discovery science in Chemistry (D3SC)
initiative, the foundation of this program is the invention and implementation
of high-resolution descriptors that are able to accurately reflect the chemical
properties of molecules in a form that is readable by a computer. The current
state of the art is insufficient to provide the level of granularity needed to
assure that the properties of computer generated libraries of hypothetical
catalysts are accurate reflections of the true character of the molecules. Most
importantly, however, the development of a truly general, computationally guided
workflow for the optimization of molecular function can impact the entire
spectrum of chemical properties from optimizing the performance of functional
materials (sensors, LEDs, adhesives, energy storage systems, etc.) to the
discovery and optimization of catalysts for industrially relevant chemical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this proposal are summarized in the
basic components of a discovery oriented program that combines computational
analysis with experimentation, namely: (1) in-silico generation of a massive
library of hypothetical catalyst structures based on a given scaffold followed
by calculation of descriptors of each library member, (2) diversity analysis to
generate representative "training set", (3) synthesis of training set, (4)
evaluation of the training set in a given reaction, (5) development and
validation of a mathematical model that correlates empirical output with
molecular properties (6) application of that model to the virtual library of
catalysts, (7) synthesis and evaluation of best predicted catalysts, and (8)
repeat steps 4-8 until desired output is achieved. Great potential exists for
3D-Quantitative Structure Selectivity Relationship (3D-QSSR) modeling to impact
asymmetric catalysis, not only by identifying high performance catalyst
structures, but also by providing a new framework to elucidate the structural
features that govern the activity and enantioselectivity of catalysts for any
given chemical transformation. Most importantly, this framework should be
universally applicable to the optimization of any kind of molecular property or
function. These activities are ideal for the intellectual and practical training
of graduate students and postdoctoral coworkers. The interplay of theory and
experiment is the essence of the scientific method. Students are presented with
hypotheses for the outcome of planned experiments and they must learn to collect
and interpret data to substantiate or eliminate the hypothesis. They also become
expert synthetic chemists, proficient scientific programmers, and competent in
computational chemistry, data-science, and machine learning. The unifying theme
of this activity is the development of a computationally guided workflow that
leads to the creation of universally applicable training sets of molecules that
can be used to optimize myriad chemical reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.