* 1900178
* Total Synthesis of Complex Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Neil Garg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2023
* USD 485,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the fundamental research of Professor Neil Garg at the University of
California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Professor Garg is pursuing the chemical
synthesis of several important molecules that possess interesting chemical
properties and structures. The ability of scientists to synthesize such
molecules in an efficient manner is instrumental to agrochemistry, materials
science, and drug discovery. In this project, Professor Garg is merging chemical
synthesis with synthesis by enzymes isolated from nature, leading to versatile
and streamlined procedures that could have impacts beyond the specific molecules
that are being studied. Professor Garg and his graduate students perform
chemistry and science demonstrations for young children in the Los Angeles
community, specifically to the UCLA Krieger Daycare and Warner Elementary
School. He has also created a series of industrial-sponsored lecturers (roughly
10 per year), where a prominent academician will visit UCLA with an industrial
representative (pharmaceuticals or agrochemistry) to interact with graduate and
undergraduate students and deliver seminars on recent cutting edge research.
Professor Garg and his daughters publish ?The Organic Coloring Book?, which
provides a fun means for children (and adults) worldwide to learn about the
tremendous impact organic chemistry has on our everyday lives. More than 1200
copies have been donated to children at local schools and to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Garg is studying two important classes of
organic molecules. The first pertains to the monoterpene indole alkaloid
strictosidine, which was first isolated fifty years ago, but has never been
accessed by total synthesis. This natural product displays biological activity,
possesses a challenging chemical structure, and serves as the last universal
biosynthetic precursor to all other monoterpene indole alkaloids, including the
chemotherapeutic vinblastine. Professor Garg is studying the first total
synthesis of strictosidine via a combined chemo-enzymatic approach. He and his
team are also pursuing the synthesis of a complex hydrocarbon that is of
longstanding scientific interest and is a notorious challenge for synthetic
chemistry. The key transformation in this synthesis is also of theoretical
interest as it can proceed via a concerted or stepwise manner. Forays in
chemical synthesis, such as these, are defining the scope and limitations of
known reactions and advancing the modern state of synthetic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.