* 1900229
* Strategies and Catalysis for the Synthesis of Diketopiperazine-Containing Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Thomas Snaddon, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Thomas Snaddon of Indiana University.
Professor Snaddon is developing new tools and chemical reactions for the
synthesis of organic compounds with an emphasis on a family of complex molecules
found in nature called epidithiodioxopiperazines (ETPs). The ETPs show important
biological activity as anticancer agents. They share a common core structure
that contains carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur atoms in a precise
3-dimensional arrangement. ETPs are challenging to prepare and modify, and
Professor Snaddon is designing new chemical transformations to facilitate their
synthesis. His approach is enabling the synthesis of new ETP derivatives such
that their reactivity with biological systems can be rigorously explored and
understood. Professor Snaddon's research group is also involved in various
outreach activities. Specific to this award, and in collaboration with Professor
Deborah Snaddon, graduate and undergraduate students are involved in the
production of "Inspirational Interviews". These interviews comprise short videos
of faculty members explaining their life, education, and science backgrounds,
why they chose to study chemistry, and what their research involves. The
interviews serve as a broad resource for high school students interested in
careers in science, but who have no direct contact with STEM-involved students
or researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Snaddon is pursuing novel
reactions and strategies that will facilitate the efficient construction of
medicinally-important diketopiperazine-containing molecules. In particular, he
is studying new and modular ways to synthesize the epidithiodiketopiperazines
(ETPs), disulfide-bridged diketopiperazines, by exploiting the unusual
bifunctional reactivity of triketopiperazines. These hetereocycles undergo
controlled, sequential reactions with electrophiles and nucleophiles,
respectively, leading to general synthetic routes to ETPs. In addition to
naturally-occurring ETPs with therapeutically-relevant biological properties,
the experiments underway in Professor Snaddon's laboratory is also enabling new
unnatural ETPs to be designed and synthesized for use as probes to elucidate and
evaluate biological processes. Students working on this project receive rigorous
training in chemical synthesis, preparing them for future careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.