* 1900555
* Intermetallic and Extraordinary Bonds of Beryllium and the Alkaline Earth Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Michael Heaven, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2021
* USD 234,029.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Michael C. Heaven and his research
group at Emory University are investigating the unusual bonding mechanisms of
the element beryllium (Be). A common type of chemical bond is called a covalent
single bond, where two electrons are shared by two atoms, each atom of the pair
typically contributing one electron to the bond. Beryllium atoms are unusual in
that they often form what are called dative covalent bonds, where both bonding
electrons are provided by the other atom. The Heaven research group is using
specialized lasers and mass spectrometers to characterize the structure and
properties of small molecules containing Be and other metal atoms (e.g., BeLi,
LiBeLi, Li4Be2, where "Li" is a lithium atom). The chemistry of beryllium is
underexplored due to its toxicity. However, Be and its compounds exhibit unique
and useful properties. For example, beryllium alloys are used as lightweight
structural materials due to their exceptional strength to weight ratios. The
remarkable durability of the metal is reflected by the fact that it is used as a
plasma facing material in fusion reactors. This research project is providing
new insights into chemical bonding in general, as well as data that can be used
to test new theories on bonding and help in the prediction of the properties of
new Be compounds for new technological applications. The graduate students
engaged in this project are gaining experience in both experimental and
theoretical chemistry. Undergraduate students from the Atlanta University Center
Consortium (AUCC) institutions are also involved in the project. This successful
collaboration with AUCC institutions provides research opportunities for
undergraduate students from Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs). Undergraduate researchers are not only receiving technical training
related to Be chemistry, but also developing soft skills, such as networking,
manuscript preparation and oral presentation of research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, the experimental data needed to
evaluate quantum chemical models for beryllium are lacking. This validation is
needed to establish confidence in the computational methods used to identify
compounds with valuable physical and chemical properties. Experimental studies
of prototypical beryllium compounds are the primary objectives of this research.
Spectroscopic techniques, including laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) and pulsed-
field ionization-zero electron kinetic energy (PFI-ZEKE) are being applied to
gas phase molecules and ions to obtain structural and thermodynamic properties.
The species being examined, including LiBe (and ions LiBe(+), LiBe(-)) and
LiBeLi are chosen because they have been the subjects of high-level theoretical
investigations in the Heaven laboratory and by others. In addition to the
experimental spectroscopic work, this project employs computational studies that
utilize complete active space self-consistent field (CASSCF) and multi-reference
configuration interaction (MRCI). The research provides the graduate and
undergraduate students, and post-doctoral associates involved with a rich
experience in advanced experimental and theoretical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.