* 1900108
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Regional Ecogeographical Impacts of Large Herbivores on Savanna Ecosystems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Kyla Dahlin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 17,994.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project focuses on geographical
patterns and processes of savanna ecosystems by quantifying the broad-scale
ecological and climatological impacts of the megaherbivores (large herbivores
&gt;100 kg), particularly elephants. Savannas and prairies cover a fifth of
Earth's land surface, are home to over a half a billion people, and
disproportionately affect interannual variability of the global carbon cycle.
Yet, there is limited understanding of the factors that create and maintain the
low woody cover (trees and bushes) of savannas. For decades, researchers have
clearly documented how large herbivores suppress local savanna woody cover,
while the large-scale effects continue to remain unclear. By quantifying a large
herbivore's ecosystem-wide impacts, this dissertation will enhance understanding
of the factors shaping savannas and their influence on global climate. Such
understanding is critical for large herbivore conservation worldwide. The work
will establish a field site that will benefit the early academic careers of the
researchers and create a collaborative partnership with an established savanna
researcher. The project will build capacity through a student internship and a
week-long programming course for students and faculty. This Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish an independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite decades of research, the scientific
understanding of the determinants of woody cover in savannas and prairies lags
behind that of other biomes. To this end, a growing number of site-specific
studies have found that tree mortality rates in some protected areas are
principally controlled by large herbivores. However, it is not known whether
these impacts significantly affect the total woody cover of the larger
landscapes and region. If they do, it will lend significant support to the
growing argument that biome extent and persistence can be a direct product of
herbivory. This project focuses on quantifying the relationship between African
savanna elephant (Loxodonta africana) densities and savanna woody cover in
twelve protected areas across elephants' eastern African range. It then asks
whether elephants' impacts alter global climate. To answer these questions, the
researchers used satellite imagery to map the woody cover in each of the study
sites. NSF funding will be used to assess the accuracy of the maps through the
collection of ground truth data at a select site. By incorporating the data into
a global network, with plans to monitor the field site into the future, the
researchers will establish important baseline data which will be made available
to researchers for future studies. Globally, the world's megafauna populations
continue to decline and the ecosystems, national revenues, and local livelihoods
they support face detrimental consequences. Although this research project will
focus on savanna ecosystems in eastern Africa, the research will provide new
insights and approaches for megaherbivore conservation in many other countries,
including the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.