* 1900675
* FET: Medium: Memory Processing Unit (MPU) - An Efficient, Reconfigurable In-memory Computing Fabric
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 960,352.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is expected to become a disruptive force for both
emerging and mature industry sectors. However, current AI progress is mostly
driven by software and algorithm advances, while physical AI implementation is
limited by hardware systems that were primarily developed to perform
conventional computing tasks. Large scale implementation of AI in smart homes,
robotics and autonomous vehicles will only become possible with hardware
innovations, through new computing architectures and devices that can overcome
the limits of today's systems in terms of power efficiency and speed. This
project aims at precisely addressing these problems through the development of a
new in-memory computing architecture that is naturally suited for AI
applications. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained to become
experts at the interface of nanoelectronic devices and computing architecture,
and be able to join the workforce of computer engineering and semiconductor
research and development. The knowledge developed in this project will also be
widely disseminated to the general public through publications, tutorials,
course modules, high-school visits and industry partnerships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will lead to a new computing
architecture that is fundamentally efficient, parallel, modular and
reconfigurable. Unlike specialized accelerators designed for specific
algorithms, the project aims at developing a general memory-centric hardware
platform that can be used for a broad range of computing tasks. The program will
be carried out through multidisciplinary research efforts organized around five
central thrusts that cover small scale prototype and circuit verification,
uniform module development, scalable chip design, algorithm mapping, and system
benchmarking and optimization. Key performance parameters will be measured and
optimized, while new devices, circuit components, design tools and simulation
packages will be developed and shared with the research community and the
general public to help broaden the impact of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.