* 1900050
* Conjugate addition coupled to cationic cyclization: new methods for small molecule synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Alison Frontier, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2022
* USD 490,000.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Alison Frontier of the University of
Rochester, whose research program is focused on building small molecules with
different three-dimensional architectures. The spatial array of carbon, nitrogen
and oxygen atoms of molecules is critical to the behavior of the molecules,
specifically, their reactivity in different environments, and their ability to
bind to other molecules. However, many natural and man-made molecules with
potential uses as materials, catalysts, or pharmaceutical agents, are difficult
to prepare using existing chemical protocols. The research conducted by
Professor Frontier and her students expands the range of three-dimensional
molecules that can be assembled using chemical methods, and at the same time,
develops chemical reactions that have not been previously described. Through
methods that form several new bonds in a single, controlled process, the group
develops chemical strategies useful in a broad set of applications. Professor
Frontier also continues to develop and maintain the "Not Voodoo" website, an
educational resource. The site is designed to help students demystify laboratory
protocols and procedures. It serves hundreds of organic experimental chemists
each day, from students just beginning independent research, to advanced
students looking for more efficient synthetic methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic chemists are constantly searching for versatile
new methods for building densely functionalized molecules containing bridged,
spirocyclic and fused ring systems, ideally with heteroatoms embedded in the
scaffold of the three-dimensional molecules. The new methods Professor Frontier
and her students are studying simplify the synthesis of targets with unusual,
densely functionalized ring systems, including cycloheptane systems and
nitrogen-rich heterocycles. Novel pericyclic reactions are being developed in
the context of reaction cascades that build complex ring systems from simple
precursors, with the formation of up to three carbon-carbon or carbon-nitrogen
bonds in one synthetic operation. Given the stereochemical control imparted by
these pericyclic processes, the work represents efforts to develop efficient,
stereoselective reaction sequences while garnering a new understanding of the
factors critical to successful multi-step processes with pericyclic components.
Students engaged in this work learn to devise synthetic strategies, analyze
complex reaction outcomes ,and characterize small three-dimensional molecules.
Professor Frontier's long-standing website project (Not Voodoo: Demystifying
Synthetic Organic Chemistry) provides a resource for students learning
laboratory techniques for the first time, and supporting more advanced students
seeking to explore unfamiliar territory in their experimental
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.