* 1900272
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Photoinduced Charge Transfer Dynamics Across Molecule-Nanocrystal Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* David Watson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 384,000.00

Plants use sunlight to convert carbon dioxide into energy rich sugar molecules,
in a process known as photosynthesis. The development of artificial
photosynthetic systems that could use sunlight to make fuels such as alcohol
from carbon dioxide and hydrogen from water would have enormous societal
benefit. However, the chemical reactions are complicated and involve multiple
electron transfer steps and connecting these steps with the absorption of light
remains a challenge. With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms A and Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry programs in
the Division of Chemistry, Professors David McCamant, Pengfei Huo, and Kathryn
Knowles at University of Rochester are teaming up with Professors Luis Velarde
and David Watson at the University at Buffalo, State University of New York and
Kacie Liwosz at D'Youville College to study light-induced electron transfer
reactions between dye molecules and semiconductor nanoparticles. Working with
their students, they grow nanoparticles composed of common minerals such as
titanium dioxide and iron oxide and coat them with organic dyes. They then
combine sophisticated laser spectroscopies with computer modeling to
characterize the electron transfer process that occur when the dye molecules
absorb light. In addition to training the next generation of scientists, the
team is also running educational workshops in Upward Bound summer schools for
high-school students with disadvantaged backgrounds. The summer workshops
inspire students' curiosity and enthusiasm about renewable energy and chemistry,
as well as encourage them to pursue higher education in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoinduced interfacial charge transfer is a fundamental
process underlying the conversion of solar energy to chemical energy and is
particularly important in photocatalytic fuel-forming reactions. Detailed
knowledge of the conformation and electronic structure of the ground,
photoexcited, and charge separated states of molecular species bound to
semiconductor surfaces is critical to a mechanistic understanding of the
dynamics of such charge transfer reactions. The project combines
interdisciplinary expertise in time-resolved electronic and vibrational
spectroscopy, sum-frequency generation spectroscopy, quantum dynamics
simulation, and the fabrication and characterization of nanostructured
semiconductors. These tools are being applied to three important areas relating
to interfacial charge transfer: (i) the role of molecular structure in mediating
relaxation and energy transfer pathways that precede interfacial charge
transfer, (ii) structure-function relationships between the morphology of wide
band-gap p-type semiconductors and hole injection from surface-bound molecular
sensitizers, and (iii) structure-function relationships between the morphology
of narrow band gap semiconductors and charge transfer to surface-bound molecular
hole and electron acceptors, such as catalysts for fuel production. Fundamental
mechanistic insights generated by this work could enable the rational design of
semiconductor/molecule partner systems with improved performance in
photocatalytic generation of fuels from sunlight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.