* 1900124
* Research Catalyst: Environmental Quality Assurance using Ion Mobility Spectrometry
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,09/30/2022
* A Bakarr Kanu, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Research Catalyst projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The project at
Winston Salem State University will investigate novel approaches to ion mobility
spectrometry (IMS) when coupled with a membrane sampler for the separation,
detection and identification of different classes of compounds in complex
matrices. This work will provide research opportunities for undergraduate
chemistry majors, while preparing them for careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to utilize a novel sample
introduction sampler system (SIS) as a single unit using polydimethylsilicone
(PDMS) membranes and nanoparticle materials. This will allow sampling,
isolation, pre-concentration, separation, and desorption of key environmental
pollutants in a single step. The uniqueness of this study is the use of
temperature programming similar to a gas chromatography oven, to analyze solid,
liquid, and gas samples. Interfacing the unit to an ion mobility spectrometry
(IMS) will allow the detection of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and semi-
volatile organic compounds (semi-VOCs) of extreme environmental concern. This
project has the potential to develop a sampling and sample introduction approach
that requires little or no preparation and use of less or no solvent, is not
labor intensive, and has greater analytical reliability. The long-term goal is
to use this method for collecting samples in indoor buildings and sites
suspected to have been exposed to contaminants and for analyzing water
contaminated with VOCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.