* 1900956
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Augmenting Human Cognition with Collaborative Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Deborah Switzer, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 41,704.00

Collaborative robotics is a growing application space in robot technology used
in manufacturing, mining, construction, and energy industrial settings. A recent
report by the International Federation of Robots indicates that global robotics
spending will reach $13 billion in 2025. The largest consumers of industrial
robotics have been in the Asian market, i.e. China, Japan, Republic of Korea,
with the U.S. lagging behind both Europe (Germany, France, Spain) and Asia. It
is in the national economic and stratgic interest to ensure that US industry and
workers regain leadership in collaborative manufacturing robots. Towards that
goal, this project will develop understanding of technical and socio-technical
requirements to accelerate the use of collaborative robotics. The project will
contribute new knowledge and theory of Human-Computer Interaction and Human-
Robot Interaction, by augmenting human cognition for safer and more efficient
collaborative robot interaction. The new design principles for collaborative
robotic technologies will improve both the worker and the employer's growth and
progress. Fundamental knowledge gained here will be directly applicable in other
high-risk domains that use collaborative robots, such as offshore oil rigs,
military, and construction. The project seeks to empower new populations of
workers (e.g., workers with disabilities), allow older workers to remain in the
workforce, and potentially assist novice workers, thereby reducing skills gaps
and improving work efficiency. The team will focus on broadening the
participation of females in computing. In addition to traditional academic
venues (e.g. conference, journals, etc.), research results will be further
disseminated through workplace workshops and seminars through existing state,
regional, and national networks of employers and industry partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these goals, the team of researchers plan to: (1)
develop a novel HRI task/scenario classification scheme in collaborative
robotics environments that are vulnerable to system failures; (2) establish
fundamental neurophysiological, cognitive, and socio-behavioral models
(workload, cognitive load, fatigue/stress, affect, and trust) to monitor and
model the mind motor machine nexus; (3) use these models to determine when and
how a human's cognitive, social, behavioral and environmental states require
adjustment via technology to enhance HRI for efficient and safe work
performance; and finally (4) create an innovative and transformative Work 4.0
architecture (AMELIA: AugMEnted Learning InnovAtion) that includes a layer of
augmented reality for human and robots to mutually learn and communicate current
states. The team will characterize worker cognitive states inferred from their
physiological data and eye tracking. They will then use embedded sensor
readings, error codes, and surveillance cameras to characterize robot states.
Through augmented reality, AMELIA will provide this data to both the worker and
the robot for effective real-time adjustment in behaviors to mitigate failure
sources and errors while ensuring minimal additional cognitive load. The team
plans a novel communication scheme using artificial emotional intelligence in
which robots and humans collaborate in potentially dangerous situations. The
robot will detect the worker's cognitive state using different machine learning
techniques, and then take the appropriate action. Ultimately AMELIA seeks to
empower the worker to focus on complex, cognitive problem-solving tasks,
performed safely and efficiently, while ensuring that it adapts to both the
worker's attitudes and cognitive states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.