* 1900375
* Metalloradical Catalysis for Selective Radical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Peter Zhang, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 484,999.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Peter Zhang of Boston College. Professor
Zhang is developing new metal complexes as catalysts for the synthesis of
organic compounds. Most metal-catalyzed processes rely on what chemists call
"polar reactivity" where reactions involve transfers or sharing of two electrons
at a time. Professor Zhang develops "metalloradical catalysis" where reactions
involve the transfer or sharing of only one electron at a time. Professor
Zhang's new catalytic systems take advantage of the unique features of such
radical reactions. In comparison with the typical need for rare and expensive
metal ions for catalyzing two-electron polar reactions, the one-electron
metalloradical reactions are carried out with catalysts based on earth-abundant
and inexpensive transition metals such as cobalt. As such, this research is
addressing important issues of sustainability in fine chemical manufacturing,
and applications to biology, medicine, and materials. Professor Zhang is also
promoting science among the general public by providing educational resources
for K-12 teachers and stimulating scientific interests of K-12 students. In
addition to scientific training for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers, Professor Zhang's laboratory provides first-hand research
experiences to high school students and teachers as well as undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Zhang's research centers on
establishing metalloradical catalysis as a fundamentally new approach for
controlling reactivity and stereoselectivity of radical reactions.
Metalloradical systems based on cobalt(II) complexes of chiral porphyrins are
being developed to harness the full potential of homolytic radical chemistry.
These new catalytic radical processes, which are both mechanistically
distinctive and operationally attractive, are serving as valuable synthetic
tools for the construction of organic compounds including biologically-important
natural products and pharmaceutically-interesting small molecules. The concept
of metalloradical catalysis, which aims at the full exploration of homolysis as
a fundamental way for bond breaking and making, is having far-reaching impact on
organic synthesis and is stimulating the development of new synthetic methods
based on radical chemistry. The successful demonstration of cobalt-based
metalloradical catalysis is prompting the identification of new metalloradical
catalyst systems based on different combinations of open-shell metal ions and
chiral ligands that can catalyze a broad range of stereoselective radical
reactions. While this research focuses on generalizable synthetic methods,
applications to synthetic targets, including targets that are group III
metabotropic glutamate receptor agonists may have implications in the proper
neuronal function of the brain. In addition, Professor Zhang is creating public
educational materials entitled "The Colors of Life" presented to students in
local K-12 schools. These educational materials are being made available for
public access in PowerPoint format via the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.