* 1900391
* New Cycloaddition and Annulation Strategies for Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Rick Danheiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2022
* USD 485,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Rick L. Danheiser of the Department of
Chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In this research
program, Professor Danheiser and his students are developing new methods for the
chemical synthesis of cyclic organic molecules that are incorporated in the
chemical structures of numerous biologically-important compounds. The
development of highly efficient methods for the synthesis of these molecules has
great value in providing improved access to compounds with important
applications in medicine, materials chemistry, agriculture and electronics. The
goal of this research program is the development of new synthetic strategies
with the power to dramatically streamline the synthesis of these classes of
compounds. The utility of these new methods is being demonstrated by their
application to the synthesis of several naturally-occurring compounds that have
activity as antitumor agents, but which are not available in large quantities
from their sources in nature. The graduate students supported under this grant
serve as coordinators for the MIT Outreach Program, which each year visits about
25 high schools in the New England region providing presentations on chemistry
and careers in science. Approximately 1,200-1,500 high school students attend
these presentations each year, with up to 50% of the students being members of
underrepresented minority groups. Dr. Danheiser is also a recognized leader in
chemical safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances the ability of
chemists to develop efficient syntheses of several important classes of organic
compounds including polycyclic aromatic molecules and heterocyclic systems such
as indoles and pyridines. The methods under investigation involve
mechanistically novel transformations. These studies are furthering the
understanding of the chemistry of unusual reactive species such as strained
cyclic allenes and alkynes, vinylketenes, vinylallenes, and several other
classes of highly unsaturated conjugated molecules. From the perspective of
sustainability, the methodology under development has several attractive
features. Most of the methods are highly atom economical, i.e., all of the atoms
of the reactants are incorporated in the products, minimizing the generation of
chemical waste. In addition, most of the new cycloadditions are triggered simply
by heat or light, avoiding the need for even catalytic amounts of reagents
(especially heavy metal catalysts). Synthesis is often described as the
"enabling technology" of chemistry. The synthetic methods provide researchers in
both academia and industry with new tools to design and make heterocyclic
compounds with applications in medicine, agriculture, electronics, and other
areas. The graduate students supported under this program receive training to
develop their skills as synthetic chemists, in scientific ethics, and in
developing their oral and written communication
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.