* 1900154
* Synthetic Studies on Alkaloids Isolated from Lycopodium annotium and a New Synthesis of Tetrodotoxin
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Dirk Trauner, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2022
* USD 484,368.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Dirk Trauner of New York University.
Professor Trauner is studying a class of naturally occurring molecules called
"alkaloids". These molecules contain nitrogen atoms and have been vital in the
discovery of several biological or physiological processes, particularly in the
nervous system, and have played important roles as therapeutic drugs. Due to
their fascinating chemical structures and biological activities, they have
inspired the development of new methods for the synthesis of organic molecules,
some of which now play a crucial role in the pharmaceutical industry. They have
been a platform to continuously refine tactics and strategies that synthetic
chemists employ to synthesize related molecules found in nature. In this
proposal, Professor Trauner is preparing several such molecules via routes that
mimic their possible synthesis in nature. In addition to synthesizing these
molecules, this work is providing a better understanding of the effects of these
molecules on their biological targets. Professor Trauner is also engaged in
outreach and is a co-organizer of "Entertaining Science," which brings together
scientist, artists, and the general public in the Cornelia Street Cate, New York
City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Trauner and his team are studying the
synthesis of a class of structurally complex alkaloids from the clubmoss
Lycopodium annotinum, none of which have been synthesized to date. Members of
this class of alkaloids known as the annotinolides and lannotinidines, are being
be synthesized through a unified approach that centers on lannotinidine G.
Additionally, a new synthesis of tetrodotoxin (TTX), the infamous toxin
responsible for the paralytic effects of fugu poisoning, is being studied.
Although TTX is a classic target, its synthesis remains a formidable challenge.
This approach is improving the state of the art and serving in the development
of new TTX derivatives that are being used to study certain voltage gated sodium
channels that have relevance to alleviating pain. As a part of this project,
Professor Trauner's students are receiving training in chemical synthesis and
exposure to neurophysiology, preparing them for careers in chemical and
pharmaceutical industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.