* 1900406
* Characterization of Macromolecular Dynamics Using Para-hydrogen Induced Polarization of Nuclear Spins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Christian Hilty, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2024
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Christian Hilty of Texas
A&amp;M University and a team of graduate students are using nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (NMR, a cousin of the magnetic resonance imaging used in
medical technology) to investigate how proteins fold to attain their three-
dimensional structure. The structure, structural changes and molecular
interactions of proteins are responsible for their function in the most basic
processes of life. While it is possible to determine the three-dimensional
arrangement of atoms even in these large molecules, the measurements often are
too slow to resolve changes that occur over time. Proteins normally embedded in
the cell membrane pose additional challenges, because they depend on the
interactions with lipid molecules even when they are purified for study. In this
project, the investigators are overcoming some of these challenges by using a
method called para-hydrogen induced polarization of nuclear spins, which
enhances the signals of nuclear magnetic resonance and makes it possible to
achieve these measurements more rapidly. With the application of these methods,
the project contributes insights into the longstanding problem of membrane
protein folding, of which many aspects remain unknown despite the knowledge of
the folded, three-dimensional structures of the molecules involved. The graduate
students involved in this research project are gaining knowledge and skills that
will be valuable in their future career pursuits, be these in fundamental
chemistry research or in the applications of NMR in chemical analysis, medicine,
and other areas of science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
develops methods for the characterization of structural changes in non-
equilibrium macromolecular processes, motivated by the goal to elucidate the
mechanisms of folding and insertion of beta-barrel membrane proteins. The proven
ability of NMR to provide chemical selectivity for the determination of
structure and molecular dynamics is exploited. NMR spectroscopy is made
compatible with the elucidation of these structures under non-equilibrium
conditions through the use of hyperpolarization by para-hydrogen induced
polarization. Hydrogen enriched in the para-spin state is delivered to
biomolecular samples, to generate hyperpolarization of small molecules in-situ.
A first aim demonstrates the use of this para-hydrogen enhancement for
characterizing intermolecular interactions with the model protein dihydrofolate
reductase. Multi-dimensional protein NMR experiments are developed that exploit
the ability to regenerate and transfer hyperpolarization to the protein, and
that enable measurement of the binding interface structure. In a second aim,
catalysts for para-hydrogen polarization are designed, which are specifically
compatible with the application to samples of biological macromolecules.
Finally, in a third aim, NMR spectroscopy of thus hyperpolarized molecules is
applied to the structural and kinetic characterization of the membrane insertion
process of the beta-barrel proteins OmpX and OmpA, and of their interaction with
chaperones. The methods developed in aims 1 and 2 provide the resolution
necessary to follow these macromolecular processes on relevant time scales. In
addition to the aforementioned student training in physical and biophysical
chemistry and nuclear magnetic resonance s techniques, the educational component
of this research project includes the development of low-field NMR
instrumentation for undergraduate laboratories (and eventual public
demonstrations), and enzyme catalysis themed experimental kits ("ChemBoxes") for
K-12 students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.