* 1900793
* Research Initiation Award: Search for the Epigenomic Mechanisms of Paternal Inheritance of Aggression in Social Honeybees
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Hongmei Li-Byarlay, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,950.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Central
State University seeks to determine the epigenetic modifications and epigenomic
architecture connecting aggressive behavior of honeybees to their
sociogenome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the potential imprinting
mechanisms via parental inheritance, the project will focus on the
quantification analysis of epigenetic marks in the brain of Africanized and
European honey bees. The use of modern epitranscriptomic and genomic approaches
will reveal the molecular regulation of behavioral epigenomics. These studies
will provide new insights and the first evidence of how epigenetic marks
regulate or link to the process of transcription, gene regulation, or molecular
evolution. A new field of behavioral epigenetics and epigenomics will also be
developed using social honey bees as a model system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.