* 1900047
* Research Initiation Award: Novel Perovskite Solar Cells Based on Interface Manipulation
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2025
* Qilin Dai, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2025
* USD 519,998.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Jackson State University has potential broader impacts in a number of
areas. The goal of this project is to study the stability and efficiency of
perovskite solar cells by adding a ternary semiconductor layer; as well as to
enhance teaching and learning at the university at the undergraduate level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work focuses on improving the stability and
efficiency of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) by interface manipulation. Ternary
semiconductor layers with hydrophobic groups and controllable energy levels will
be used as interface layers in PSCs with the aim of obtaining high stability and
high efficiency. The goals are to: 1) develop the synthesis methods for ternary
semiconductor layers with adjustable energy levels controlled by the three
element ratios, which can decrease the charge recombination in the devices; 2)
passivate the ternary semiconductor layers with hydrophobic groups to prevent
moisture penetrating the devices, which can improve the moisture stability; 3)
design and develop novel PSC device structures with the interface layers; and 4)
optimize PSCs device performance using the ternary semiconductor layers towards
high stability and high efficiency. This study has the potential to solve the
stability issue of PSCs and facilitate the development of PSCs toward practical
applications. This project will be conducted in collaboration with the
University of Southern Mississippi and Emory
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.