* 1900724
* CNS Core: Medium: Collaborative Research: Persistent memory objects for consistent sharing in Non-Volatile Main Memories
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yan Solihin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 523,719.00

The continual performance growth of data center servers is critical to the
nation's economic competitiveness and as a catalyst for progress in scientific
endeavors. Two important data center components are the main memory, which has
fast access but can only store data temporarily, and storage, which keeps data
permanently but suffers from slow access. Recent technology advances have
brought in a new non-volatile memory, now commercially available, that can both
host permanent data and be accessed quickly. However, to reach its potential,
utilizing these new memory technologies requires rethinking of how data should
be persistently and efficiently stored.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal
describes a new abstraction for storing persistent data in non-volatile memory:
hyperfiles, which are long lived, provide fast access, and can be quickly
attached to and detached from a process address space. Hyperfiles provide naming
and permission characteristics similar to (but faster than) files, and speed
closer to memory. They are accessed directly through loads/stores to avoid
system call overhead. This project also investigates new sharing semantics for
hyperfiles, allowing non-cooperating processes to share them simultaneously and
safely, while keeping the crash recovery property. Architecture support to
accelerate hyperfile sharing will also be designed and evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable fast access to persistent data by reducing
overheads inherent in file access, and thus enable more concurrent use of data
through strong sharing semantics. Big-data workloads becoming common across all
industries will either perform better or require fewer resources. The software
and prototyping artifacts produced will enable other researchers to further
enhance the design, and to adapt workloads to take advantage of the hyperfile
abstraction. The education and outreach components of this plan will train the
next generation of programmers on use of persistent memory, and will encourage
underrepresented students to join the next generation of programmers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will maintain data, code, results, publications, and
simulator artifacts for the duration of the project plus five years afterward.
Each artifact will be released as it reaches sufficient maturity. They will be
posted at: https://sites.google.com/view/hyperfile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.