* 1900011
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Electrochemical Reaction Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Istvan Kiss, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Istvan Z. Kiss and his
research group at Saint Louis University to study pattern formation of
electrochemical reactions. For most chemical reactions that occur in gaseous or
liquid conditions, the reacting atoms or molecules steadily decrease in number,
and the product atoms or molecules steadily increase in number until the
reaction is complete (or, we say when it reaches "equilibrium"). Prof. Kiss is
interested in so-called oscillating chemical reactions, in which the number of
molecules of certain substances fall and rise with time. In other words, the
reaction sometimes proceeds in the forward direction, and at other times in the
reverse! Oscillating reactions can produce solutions that switch from blue to
yellow color and back to blue, or they can produce patterns of color that may
resemble zebra stripes or leopard spots. Such pattern formation is an example of
chemical reaction networks, which are not yet fully understood but are very
relevant to how living systems evolve and function. Prof. Kiss' research adds
another twist to oscillating reactions: rather than just mixing reactants
together in a beaker, he generates reactants with electrodes immersed in the
solution. For example, nickel electrodes can generate nickel ions (Ni(2+)) at a
precisely controlled rate. This means that the oscillations and patterns created
can be controlled, and in turn the chemical network behavior better understood.
In addition to its relevance to biological systems, this research also has
implications for battery and energy technologies. The graduate students and
post-doctoral scientists involved in this project are immersed in a
multidisciplinary experience that spans not only chemistry, but data science,
mathematics, and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this
project is to discover the laws that govern self-organization and pattern
formation in complex, far-from-equilibrium charge transfer chemical reactions.
The project is following three tracks: 1) Spatially Organized Electrochemical
Media on the Microscale. The emergent networks that form in lab-on-chip devices
are decoded. The coupling topology among the microelectrodes is used to identify
novel types of dynamical structures with simple equilibrium reactions, including
metal dissolution systems (Ni(0)/Ni(2+), Cu(0)/Cu(2+)) and the H2 oxidation
reaction. 2) Cathode-Anode Interactions: The nature and structure of cathode-
anode interactions are determined with bipolar electrodes and serially coupled
electrochemical cells. Models of network topology developed in this study are
tested for their utility in describing the dynamics of battery cells. 3) Chimera
Patterns on Designed Electrochemical Networks: Modular networks of current
generating reactions are built with known network configurations. The resilience
and the scalability of the localization of the synchronization patterns are
explored by changing the number of elements in each module and the number of
modules. In addition to the aforementioned formal training of students and post-
doctoral researchers, demonstrations of nonlinear chemical dynamics are being
incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum, as well as public outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.