* 1900214
* RUI: Harnessing Electroanalytical Chemistry for the Exploration of Photocatalytic Electron Transfer Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jonas Goldsmith, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 197,408.00

Catalysts that use the energy from light to cause chemical reactions are key to
many important processes, including the synthesis of novel molecules, the
splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen gas, and photosynthesis. Studying
these catalysts is important because a better understanding of how they work can
lead to more efficiency in current applications as well as to new catalysts and
new processes. In this project, Dr. Goldsmith of Bryn Mawr College is developing
an analytical method to measure how efficiently catalysts use the light energy
they capture. This new method is being used to study known catalytic systems to
learn how they can be modified and improved. Dr. Goldsmith is also making
polymers (plastics) that contain these catalysts to construct systems that
better capture the energy from light. This new analytical technique gives
insight into the functioning of these systems. The deeper understanding of the
factors that govern light harvesting efficiencies obtained from this research
provides avenues for the further catalyst development and improvement. As a
faculty member at a women's college, Dr. Goldsmith is deeply committed to
increasing access to and persistence in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) for women and underrepresented minorities. This research
project is influencing Dr. Goldsmith's teaching in the classroom. The research
project sparks students' interest in topics such as catalysis and renewable
energy - large industries in today's society. Involving Bryn Mawr College's
diverse student population directly in this research provides opportunities for
women and minorities to engage in cutting-edge interdisciplinary research and
fosters their participation in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Goldsmith and his
research group at Bryn Mawr College are developing an analytical technique,
photoinduced chronoamperometry (PICA), that couples photoexcitation with
chronoamperometry to yield a direct measurement of the efficiency of
photoinduced electron transfer processes. A series of iridium based photo-redox
catalysts, including ones that can mediate the reduction of water to hydrogen
and others that are used as single-electron-transfer catalysts in organic
synthesis are being investigated with PICA. These results give insight into the
structure-function relationships that govern the performance of such catalysts,
guiding their rational optimization. Using electropolymerization, thin-layer
light harvesting architectures containing these catalysts are being constructed.
The ability of such structures to effect the photoreduction of water to hydrogen
is interrogated with PICA in order to gain a better understanding of how to
design an optimally efficient thin-film-based water reduction system that
harnesses the energy from visible light. Dr. Goldsmith teaches chemistry courses
at all levels of the curriculum and the research provides real-world examples
that can be used to spark students' interest in STEM. Dr. Goldsmith's research
group is composed of Bryn Mawr College's diverse female students. The research
topic encourages the students in interdisciplinary research in inorganic
photochemistry and facilitates their increased engagement in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.