* 1900266
* Redox catalysis strategies for synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Corey Stephenson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2023
* USD 480,000.00

This project is addressing issues - such as the environmentally-friendly
manufacturing of economically-important chemicals - that are at the forefront of
modern chemical synthesis, catalysis, and sustainability. Photochemistry is the
conversion of solar energy into chemical energy and is an important component of
this goal. The application of photochemistry to organic synthesis has
traditionally required hazardous reagents and/or high energy, ultraviolet light.
In this project, Dr. Stephenson is studying the use of complexes that harvest
sunlight to power chemical reactions. Importantly, this research project is
being carried out in collaboration with pharmaceutical companies. This
collaboration enables the rapid incorporation of the new methods into practical
applications. Dr. Stephenson's research group participates in several outreach
programs to engage grade school (3rd-12th grade) students, with the intention of
inspiring the next generation of scientists and leaders. For example, the
research team is contributing to the Females Excelling More in Mathematics,
Engineering, and the Science (FEMMES) and the Michigan Math and Science Scholars
(MMSS) programs at the University of Michigan. This outreach is directly
engaging grade school students in a fun and supportive atmosphere, while also
encouraging them to pursue a career in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Stephenson at the University of Michigan
- Ann Arbor is studying how transiently generated electron donor-acceptor (EDA)
complexes can be leveraged for the development of new methods in chemical
synthesis. The rational design of visible light-active EDA complexes is possible
by applying basic principles of Mulliken theory. Such complexes are
characterized by UV-Vis spectroscopy. EDA photocatalysis represents an exciting
new frontier for the development of methods in organic synthesis. In this
regard, methods for arene trifluoromethylation and radical aryl transpositions,
for the rapid generation of molecular complexity, are being developed. Through a
detailed understanding of each reaction mechanism, the developed methods are
rapidly translated to industrial scale in collaboration with the AbbVie Process
Research and Development team. Dr. Stephenson's research group is involved in
several outreach programs that apply their expertise in synthetic chemistry to
engage grade school (3rd-12th grade) students, with the intention of inspiring
the next generation of scientific leaders. Dr. Stephenson's involvement in the
Females Excelling More in Mathematics, Engineering, and the Science (FEMMES) and
the Michigan Math and Science Scholars (MMSS) programs at the University of
Michigan have allowed for the direct engagement of grade school students to
teach synthetic chemistry in a fun and supportive atmosphere while also
encouraging them to pursue a career in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.