* 1900756
* EAR-PF: Revisiting Megafloods: Insights From Glacial Isostatic Adjustment on Flood Size, Flow Routes, and Climate Response
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Tamara Pico, Pico, Tamara
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Tamara Pico has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
investigate the influence of glacial isostatic adjustment on late Pleistocene
catastrophic flooding to improve our understanding of the timing and routing of
mega-floods. The work will be conducted at the California Institute of
Technology and Oregon State University. During the last ice age, 22,000 to
14,000 years ago, dozens of catastrophic mega-floods from an ice-dammed Glacial
Lake Missoula scoured the landscapes of Idaho and eastern Washington, forming
what are known as the Channeled Scablands. These glacial lake outbursts are the
largest known floods on Earth. Reconstructing the magnitude of these events
informs our understanding of how floods shape Earth's landscapes and relate to
abrupt changes in climate. Over the period of flooding, ice sheet melting caused
crustal deformation with rates of about 10 mm/yr, which is orders of magnitude
above regional tectonic uplift rates, resulting in a substantially different
regional topography relative to today. This process of glacial isostatic
adjustment has been neglected in prior estimates of flood volumes or discharge,
introducing a potentially large error, which has not yet been quantified. This
study will provide a more accurate estimates of total discharge during flood
events which in turn will help quantify the response of the ocean and broader
climate system to mega-floods. In addition, the research will help inform for
outburst flood planning by studying the nature of past catastrophic flooding and
the stability of ice sheets in response to climate change. The PI has extensive
leadership and outreach experience in women in science and underrepresented
minority groups and will continue a committed involvement in these communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outburst mega-floods from glacial Lake Missoula, occurring
from 22,000 to 14,000 years ago, are the largest known floods on Earth. Prior
estimates of water volume and flow discharge during these flood events rely on
slopes based on modern topography. Over this time period, glacial isostatic
adjustment caused crustal deformation with rates of about 10 mm/yr, orders of
magnitude above regional uplift rates, and changed local slopes by about 30%.
Thus, prior estimates of flood volumes include a potentially large error, which
has not yet been quantified. Furthermore, over the interval of Missoula
flooding, patterns of uplift and subsidence due to glacial isostatic adjustment
evolved significantly, and this reshaping of topography may explain observed
changes in flood routing over time. This proposal, within disciplines of
Geomorphology and Geophysics, seeks to investigate the influence of glacial
isostatic adjustment on the Channeled Scablands landscape as it developed over
the course of Missoula mega-flood events. Three interconnected goals for this
project are proposed: (1) reconstruct drainage path evolution across the
interval of flood events in response to glacial isostatic adjustment; (2)
accurately estimate flood discharge using slopes corrected for glacial isostatic
adjustment; and (3) connect the response of ocean, and broader climate system,
to newly-refined estimates of total freshwater flux. Glacial isostatic
adjustment simulations will be performed to predict paleo-topography and paleo-
slopes in the Channeled Scablands. Flood drainage pathways and flood discharge
estimates will be calculated using the resulting topography corrected for
glacial-isostatic adjustment. Finally, these new estimates of freshwater flux
will be compared to the geochemical record of sediment cores collected off the
Oregon coast, to assess the response of the ocean's biological system to mega-
flood events. The proposed research, which transcends multiple scales by using
glacial-isostatic adjustment modeling to connect geomorphic processes to both
small and large wavelength features of the mantle's response to ice loading,
ultimately linking local short-lived outburst flooding to longer global climate
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.