* 1900086
* Computational Strategies for Transition Metals and Heavy Elements
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Angela Wilson, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

Professor Angela K. Wilson of Michigan State University is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry. Dr. Wilson develops computer-based methods to better
understand properties of molecules that have important uses such as in sensors,
optical probes in medical applications, photocatalysts, optical switches, and
organic light-emitting diodes (OLED) used in lighting, mobile phones, and
televisions. Her project combines a myriad of computational chemistry methods
grounded in quantum mechanics in what is termed a composite approach to predict
energies and other properties of molecules containing heavy elements. Greater
understanding of the properties of these molecules aids in the rational design
of next-generation devices, and helps to identify strategies to replace rare
components in devices that are not easily recyclable. Some of the heaviest
elements that comprise molecules are very difficult to characterize and can
require a very significant amount of computer time, memory, and storage space to
model. In some cases, the elements cannot be modeled due to the limitation of
resources and complexity of the molecules. Dr. Wilson and her research group
develops methods that enable the properties of these heavy element molecules to
be described with significant efficiency and accuracy. The training of students
from high school to graduate school is a top priority in Dr. Wilson's research
group, as is increasing and advancing underrepresented minorities in STEM
through a variety of outreach events and research opportunities. The research
enables students to gain experience in computational methods development and
applications, manuscript preparation, and presentation of research results at
scientific conferences, preparing these early career computational chemists to
thrive in their future scientific careers. In addition, increasing and advancing
underrepresented minorities in STEM is a continuing priority in the Wilson
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the design of new molecules to the
development of new photophysical devices, energetic data is often critically-
needed information needed. However, one of the long-standing challenges in
computational chemistry is achieving chemically-accurate energetics due to the
extensive computational requirements. Dr. Wilson and her research group are
developing a family of accurate, efficient, and easily usable quantum mechanical
approaches for the transition metals and heavy elements. Her methods provide a
complete set of ab initio composite strategies that can be applied across the
periodic table, and providing the field with novel, accessible ways to approach
the heavier elements. Such methods are needed for a range of challenges,
including characterizing charge transfer states in photochemical processes which
are important in applications such as sensors, probes, switches, and organic
light-emitting diodes. The methodology developed is being implemented in
computational chemistry packages to enable dissemination to the broader
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.