* 1900462
* Research Initiation Award: Predictive Models for Wind-Penetrated Power Systems Using Bayesian Approach
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Amir Hossein Shahirinia, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 03/31/2024
* USD 275,420.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to the University of the District of Columbia has potential broader
impacts in a number of areas. The goal of this project is to develop the
concept, model, simulate, and characterize a novel framework for predictive wind
speed and wind-penetrated power systems making use of less precise existing
models and associated outcomes. This will make important contributions to
improving the methodology of probabilistic renewable energy
forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is to develop a novel
Bayesian approach to take into account the uncertainties inherent in the wind
speed models due to variation among the locations of the wind turbines on a wind
farm in a wind-penetrated power system; wind blow angle of attack at the hubs of
the turbines in a wind farm; and variation among the distances between multiple
dependent correlated wind farms and random loads in a wind-penetrated power
system, simultaneously. Bayesian information will result in better decisions
while it improves the characterization of wind speeds as it has lower variance
in estimates, as well as less bias. The result will be better utilization of
wind resources and less reliance on the need for thermal capacity to be in
service to compensate for wind variability. Furthermore, the goal is to present
the application of proposed approaches to well-known power system problems such
as stochastic economic dispatch, linearized AC optimal power flow, and security
constraint unit commitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.