* 1900816
* Operator Theory and Stable Polynomials
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Greg Knese, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 191,022.00

Operator theory is a broad and mature area of pure mathematics with close ties
to the mathematics of quantum mechanics and control systems engineering. Indeed,
von Neumann is often credited with formulating the foundations of operator
theory as a language for quantum mechanics, while Nobert Wiener initiated an
approach to engineering prediction problems (such as jet tracking) based on
ideas from operator theory and harmonic analysis. In more recent decades,
operator theory has been used in H-infinity control theory which has
applications in automatic pilot design. On the other hand, a stable polynomial
is not a field per se but a basic concept in mathematics that has become
profoundly useful in the study of a diverse range of problems in mathematics:
combinatorics (enumeration problems), graph theory (the study of networks), and
operator theory. The purpose of this project is to use operator theory to study
stable polynomials and vice versa.

This project focuses on three problems: (1) the generalized Lax conjecture, (2)
a quantitative understanding of linear preservers of stability, and (3)
extensions of the theory of stable polynomials to entire functions. Semi-
definite programming is a powerful technique in optimization and the generalized
Lax conjecture is a bold assertion about the sets on which this theory can
successfully be implemented. The conjecture claims that these feasibility sets
have a geometric description in terms of hyperbolic polynomials (a slight
generalization of the concept of a stable polynomial). Although evidently
important in optimization, this would further establish links between stable
polynomials and operator theory as the question is closely related to the
concept of representing stable polynomials via operator theoretic determinantal
representations. Problem (2) is about taking the highly successful theorems of
Borcea-Branden that characterized the linear maps on stable polynomials that
preserve stability and making them quantitative. How exactly do stability
preservers modify zero sets? One approach to this problem is through analyzing
how stability preservers affect various sums-of-squares formulas for stable
polynomials. Problem (3) is about a natural extension of stable polynomials to
various classes of entire functions (the Polya class, Hermite-Biehler class) and
would require developing multivariable theories of Hilbert spaces of entire
functions. This latter endeavor is important in its own right as the successes
in one variable Hilbert spaces of entire functions have been profound (i.e. the
Poltoratski approach to problems of uncertainty type).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.