* 1900048
* Metal-oxo and Metal-peroxo Complexes in Oxidative Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* John Groves, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 840,000.00

Most chemicals derive from a just a few simple starting materials yet chemical
synthesis has a major impact on the economy of the United States, contributing
more than 30% of the Gross National Product (GNP). In this project, with the
support from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor John Groves of Princeton University seeks to design new chemical
processes to make high value chemicals. The new synthetic methods may be used to
make new drugs and agrichemicals. The research combines laboratory experiments
and computer calculations to predict and verify how the reactions progress. The
ultimate goal of this work is to replace expensive metal catalysts with less
inexpensive metals that are more effective in convert carbon-hydrogen (C-H)
bonds to carbon-fluorine (C-F) bonds. This research illustrates the detailed
pathways for the new chemical reactions. The research group of Professor Groves
trains future scientists, especially women and those that are under-represented
in science. These scientists gain both technical training and mentoring so that
they are successful in careers in teaching, research, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 95% of industrially-produced chemicals
are derived from a small slate of simple, molecular building blocks. Chemical
manufacturing contributes more than 30% of the GNP of the United States. With
funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Groves of Princeton University is developing new methods for the catalytic
oxygenation, fluorination and pseudo-halogenation of C-H bonds. Such processes
are of fundamental interest as they inpact the economic value of the
pharmaceutical, agrochemical and chemical process industries. The development of
such novel oxidative processes requires a thorough understanding of the
mechanisms of metal-mediated atom transfer. The project aims to observe the
unitary processes of catalysis by characterizing reactive metal oxo and metal
peroxo intermediates and elucidating the nature of their reactions with organic
substrates. In particular, the research elaborates a conceptual basis for
heteroatom rebound catalysis (HRC), which can be dissected in a manner similar
to hydrogen atom transfer. The project integrates small molecule chemical
catalysts with insights from metalloenzymes and biocatalytic processes. Through
analogies with Nature, the redox chemistry of iron, manganese, cobalt and other
metals can add significantly to understanding and increased capabilities in
chemical catalysis. The Groves group at Princeton University trains students and
postdoctoral research associates, especially under-represented minorities and
women, through the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates Programs, the
Girls Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Summer Program (GSTEM),
and Princeton Chemistry's summer diversity program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.