* 1900064
* Vapor-Liquid-Ice: Exploring Water's Phase Transitions Far from Equilibrium
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Barbara Wyslouzil, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,999.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A) and
Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Programs of the Division of Chemistry are
funding Professor Barbara Wyslouzil at Ohio State University (OSU) to exploring
how water moves between the vapor, liquid and solid states. Two phenomena that
are being studied are supercooled water and supersaturated water vapor. Liquid
water generally changes into ice solid water) below 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0
degrees Celsius), but sometimes it remains in liquid form well below the
freezing temperature (hence the name "supercooled"). Similarly, sometimes, water
can remain in vapor form well above the concentration at which it should form a
liquid (condense); this point is called "supersaturated." Professor Wyslouzil
and her research team are using a supersonic nozzle, infrared spectroscopy, and
x-ray scattering tools to determine the limits to which water vapor can be
supersaturated and liquid water supercooled, and how fast the eventual freezing
and condensation occur. These questions are important in the atmosphere where
the state of water affects both the ability of clouds to bounce sunlight back
into space and the chemical reactions taking place within the clouds. In
industry, understanding when water condenses is important to developing
efficient energy extraction schemes. Professor Wyslouzil participates in OSU's
Breakfast of Science Champions program and collaborates with the Steam Factory,
an OSU initiative to promote interdisciplinary collaboration across Science,
Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate
phase transitions involving supercooled and supersaturated water, the Wyslouzil
group has developed a transportable supersonic nozzle apparatus that is easily
integrated with a broad range of analytical tools. In her lab, standard methods
include static pressure measurements to characterize the flow and infrared
spectroscopy to quantify the distribution of the condensable fraction among the
vapor, liquid and solid states. To fully characterize the size of the aerosol
droplets and their crystal structure requires spatially resolved small- and
wide- angle X-ray scattering (SAXS/WAXS) experiments and these are made at
national user facilities. The high transformation rates that are measured also
approach those that can be directly investigated using molecular simulations.
Experiments, exploring how water far from equilibrium behaves and/or transforms,
are critical to advancing our understanding of the phase diagram of water, the
validity of advanced water models, the anomalous behavior of this fascinating
compound, and for developing&lt;br/&gt;accurate models of natural and industrial
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.