* 1900651
* Non-Innocent Main Group Centers for Targeted Multi-Electron Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Gabriel Menard, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Catalysts are species that improve the speed, the energy consumption, and/or the
efficiency of chemical reactions; they are essential for industrial chemistry
and for biological processes. The design of new catalysts is an important area
of research as there is continual need for them in order to develop more
efficient chemical processes. A special class of catalysts are those that can
facilitate a flow of electrons to perform multi-electron chemical
transformations. Professor Gabriel Menard, Chemistry Department, University of
California - Santa Barbara, is supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program of
the Chemistry Division to develop new catalysts for multi-electronic processes.
These catalysts are based on inexpensive, abundant metals that are able to
transfer electrons to and activate a non-metal center. This is nearly opposite
the usual design in which the electron transfer goes from a non-metal to
activate a metal center. These new catalysts open new processes to everyday
goods and utilize common, inexpensive starting materials. Students from
underrepresented groups are engaged in this research and Professor Menard seeks
to increase broader scientific literacy by hosting a free, monthly "Science Pub
Night" event, where scientists present their research to the public in an open
and accessible way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how tethering
multi-metallic redox-active platforms to group 13 or group 15 centers facilitate
multi-electron transformations at the main-group site. A goal is to develop
main-group catalysts for multi-electron processes. By coordinating vanadium to
various ligands, complexes with a variety of redox properties are obtained.
These are attached to group 13 or 15 centers to generate species that contain up
to three vanadium moieties attached to a main-group atom. The compounds are
characterized by the usual chemical and spectroscopic techniques, with
particular attention being paid to the electrochemical and magnetic properties.
The presence of several vanadium atoms provides the ability for cooperative,
multi-electron redox chemistry at the main group unit. This reactivity is probed
in atom or group transfer chemistry and for the activation of water, ammonia,
and hydrogen. This research provides excellent training to undergraduate and
graduate students in the synthesis and characterization of typically air
sensitive molecules. This prepares them for careers in academia, industry, or
national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.