* 1900210
* SaTC: EDU: Expanding Digital Forensics Education with Artifact Curation and Scalable, Accessible Artifact Exercises
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Ibrahim Baggili, University of New Haven
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 12/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

In digital forensic investigations, practitioners typically find data of
forensic value in digital forensic artifacts. The Scientific Working Group on
Digital Evidence (SWGDE) defines an artifact as "Information or data created as
a result of the use of an electronic device that shows past activity". However,
educational programs and resources have not kept up with digital forensics
artifacts - which are the cornerstone of real-world investigations.
Practitioners face the challenge of the diversity and volume of digital forensic
artifacts they encounter. This makes the process of integrating artifacts into
educational programs difficult. Little to no research has focused on creating
scalable educational material that may be employed by instructors to teach the
process of artifact curation and analysis. This is not only causing a learning
gap in academic programs but is decreasing the possibility of students
graduating with the necessary skills to conduct artifact analysis upon
graduation. The community needs a granular, validated academic artifact dataset
as well as academic exercises that employ them. This project will support the
development of educational materials to address the artifact problem and will
lead to graduates that understand artifacts, what they are and the process of
recovering them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging past work on the Artifact
Genome Project (AGP), the researchers will curate digital forensic artifacts,
and use them to design scalable, self-paced, open, online digital forensic
exercises. Furthermore, artifacts produced from this work will impact practice.
The work will have an impact on a multitude of organizations worldwide spanning
private, local, and federal organizations. The work will also impact digital
forensics education through a paradigm shift from focusing only on data dumps,
to digital forensic artifacts. Lastly, the curation of artifacts over time aids
in the exploration of the basic scientific principles related to what artifacts
are, their ontology, and definition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.