* 1900374
* D3SC: CDS&amp;E: Learning molecular models from microscopic simulation and experimental data
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Anatoly Kolomeisky, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2023
* USD 510,000.00

Cecilia Clementi of Rice University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to
develop multiscale models for macromolecular systems. Professor Clementi and her
group are developing machine learning tools to combine the results from
microscopic simulation and experimental data into a data-driven modeling
framework. The last several years have seen an immense increase in high-
throughput and high-resolution technologies for experimental observation. These
advances are combined with high-performance techniques to simulate molecular
systems at a microscopic level resulting in vast and ever-increasing amounts of
data. Professor Clementi is taking advantage of this abundance of data and uses
machine learning to extract information, in order to formulate general
principles regulating the behavior of molecular systems. Understanding chemical
processes at the molecular level is essential for a large number of
applications, from energy storage to drug design. Additionally, as the need to
represent massive data sets in terms of a model bears similarity across
different fields, Professor Clementi's work may have an impact on a broad range
of completely different disciplines from genomics to finance. This research
impacts an interdisciplinary community of students and researchers. Her project
includes the development of undergraduate and graduate courses, and outreach
activities focused in the recruiting and mentoring of minority students,
especially through collaboration with the Tapia Center at Rice
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Clementi is developing a data-driven
framework to design effective molecular models at multiple resolutions, to
address questions currently out of reach to existing computational and
experimental approaches. The main idea is to use state-of-the-art machine
learning methods to "learn" the coarse-grained dynamical models governing
molecular systems (structure, thermodynamics, and kinetics/mechanism) at the
mesoscale, by combining simulation data generated from microscopic simulation,
and experimental data. By integrating different sources of data, this modeling
approach reconciles bottom-up and top-down methods. This approach generates
functional building blocks that can be embedded in higher-order simulations in
order to bridge the gap to macroscopic systems. This modeling framework may
serve as a keystone to integrate vast amounts of chemical data into
quantitative, mechanistic and comprehensible models. Such models may explain how
different molecular components organize and interact as a function of time and
space in performing functions at the macroscopic scale. In particular, the
developed framework is applied to investigate one specific biomolecular process:
the binding of peptides to Major Histocompatability Complex (MHC)
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.