* 1900220
* Excellence in Research:Understanding environmental adaptation by elucidating the changes in molecular mechanisms associated with genetic selection in two-component response systems
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Joseph Graves, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 547,098.00

Bacteria, just as all living organisms, often find themselves in harsh
environments ranging from extreme temperatures, to toxic waste, or even exposure
to antibiotics. In order to survive, they must react quickly. Their response for
survival comes in two ways: they either can acclimate through changes in gene
expression, or they can adapt by specifically changing their DNA. Two-component
response systems (TCRS) are one of the best studied genetic elements bacteria
use for environmental acclimation. Previous work has shown that under extreme
conditions, TCRS genes acquire mutations that allow the bacteria to survive, but
the exact effect these mutations have on the growth and reproduction of bacteria
are unknown. This research aims to understand the role that TCRS play in
adaptation to high levels of silver (a well-studied stressor), by studying
mutations acquired during experimental evolution, and how those mutations will
affect the overall fitness of the bacteria. The research will benefit four
broader impact areas: (1) The larger scientific community, as synthetic
engineering of TCRS have been proposed for many applications ranging from
bioremediation to antimicrobial drug design. (2) By improving underrepresented
minority retention in STEM fields by mentoring undergraduates and a PhD student
at an HBCU to integrate approaches in microbiology, molecular biology,
evolution, genomics, and computational biology to make them more competitive for
professional school and/or STEM careers. (3) By engaging and exposing local
communities to the world of microbiology and evolution by volunteering in local
K-5 afterschool programs; and (4) by using the data to write teaching case
studies to be used by educators around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-
component response systems (TCRS) are among the best studied genetic elements
for environmental acclimation in bacteria, although very little is known about
their role in adaptation. The overall goal of this research is to show that
evolutionary adaptation commonly occurs through the acquisition of mutations in
TCRS genes after prolonged acclimation. This then allows selection for
differential reproduction leading to the survival of the adapted bacteria,
although likely with negative consequences on their fitness and function. TCRS
consist of two proteins, a histidine kinase (HK) that senses changes in the
external environment and is activated via autophosphorylation. The phosphate is
then transferred to a response regulator (RR) which activates transcription of
relevant response genes. In this study, the investigators will assess TCRS
mutations acquired through the adaptation of Escherichia coli to silver via
experimental evolution. In silver adapted strains, three independent studies
identified mutations in two TCRS proteins: CusS, a HK which regulates
copper/silver homeostasis; and OmpR, a RR which regulates outer membrane porin
expression. The motivation for this study is to show the cellular costs
associated with the acquisition of such mutations by (1) associating mutations
in specific domains of TCRS to a particular phenotype; (2) assessing the fitness
cost and reversion rates associated with biologically relevant mutations in
TCRS; and (3) identifying changes in global cellular physiology affected by
mutations in a single TCRS. The innovation lies in the assessment of mutations
that have been selected by the organism through experimental evolution and are
therefore biologically relevant. The project will lead to further understanding
of the role TCRS play in adaptation and the fitness cost associated with these
genetic adaptations which may then be used to predict the outcome of competition
and fitness by linking these phenotypes to genomic
determinants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.