* 1900699
* Research Catalyst: Laminated Object Manufacturing (LOM) of Composites using Bio-fiber Reinforcements Infused with Thermoplastic Bio-resins
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Lai Jiang, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,001.00

Research Catalyst projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Prairie View A&amp;M University focuses on developing 3D printing technology to
manufacture bio-fiber reinforced composite materials; and provides an
opportunity for undergraduate students to enhance their education through
research experiences. The researcher has established a strong collaboration with
faculty at Rensselear Polytechnic Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this research is to utilize the laminated object manufacturing (LOM) technology
for rapid prototyping laminated bio-composite parts that are made from bio-fiber
reinforcements and bio-resin matrix, which can be used as an environmentally
friendly alternative to traditional, non-biodegradable advanced composite parts
in industrial prototyping/manufacturing applications. A functional LOM 3D
printer will be designed and built, which uses bio-prepregs made from selected
woven bio-fiber and bio-resin that is partially cured as starting work materials
for the LOM process. This process will involve the design of experiments,
optimization of work material composition, individual process result
comparisons, design for manufacturing and assembly, as well as closed-loop
control theory implementations. The qualitites of 3D printed bio-parts will be
assessed based on their geometric accuracies and mechanical properties, which
will be compared to the original input model, as well as 3D printed parts made
from other common rapid prototyping technologies and materials. This research
seeks to use 100% biodegradable composite materials for rapid prototyping
purposes to achieve similar or better part quality results than regular 3D
printing strategies, as well as reduce the carbon footprint of the process. The
idea of using biodegradable materials for rapid prototyping processes will also
act as an excellent guide for 'green' manufacturing process developments in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.