* 1900411
* Ergodicity, Rigidity, and the Interplay Between Chaotic and Regular Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Anne Wilkinson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

The aim of this project is to discover new phenomena in the area of dynamical
systems. Dynamical systems ("dynamics," for short) is the study of motion, and
in particular motion that is dictated by an unchanging set of rules, such as the
Newtonian forces controlling mechanical motion. Well-known experimental
phenomena in dynamics such as chaotic trajectories combined with stable motion
have been observed experimentally but are far from being fully understood from a
theoretical perspective. The research will address the theoretical mechanisms
behind chaotic motion in broad classes of dynamical systems, which include
systems of both a physical and geometric nature. Based on previous work of the
principal investigator and her collaborators, the interplay between a numerical
invariant called entropy and chaotic motion will be further understood. On the
flip side, the principal investigator proposes several problems connecting
entropy and related invariants with a phenomenon called rigidity. Rigidity
occurs when quantitatively small changes to the rules guiding a system force
fundamental qualitative changes in the resulting dynamics. Identifying the rigid
systems is a first step toward classification of certain peculiar dynamical
behaviors observed in physical and geometric systems. An important aspect of the
project is to further interaction between mathematical and adjacent scientific
communities, such as physics. The principal investigator has already
collaborated in questions surrounding the design of particle accelerators and is
currently collaborating with a physicist studying the quantum dynamics behind
the emergence of black holes. Furthermore, the principal investigator has given
several public lectures on dynamics and has written in the popular press about
the work of mathematicians. She proposes to expand these activities in the
coming years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamics is the study of systems (for
example, a state space for a physical process) that evolve over time according
to a deterministic set of rules. Well-studied classes of such dynamical systems
include the so-called hyperbolic systems, which display chaotic, unpredictable
features at every point, and KAM systems, which have stable regions of regular
motion. The partially hyperbolic systems are a more general class of dynamical
systems than the hyperbolic class and include systems that combine hyperbolicity
in some directions with KAM behavior in other directions. Partially hyperbolic
systems occur widely in dynamical systems arising in physics; for example,
planetary motion usually contains partially hyperbolic sub-dynamics, and the
effective construction of particle accelerators (used in biological imaging, as
well as theoretical physics) requires a detailed understanding of both KAM and
partially hyperbolic dynamics. The principal investigator has a well-developed
research plan of over 15 years studying partially hyperbolic systems and is
poised to raise the theory of these systems to a new level of generality and
applicability. The impacts of this research will be seen in future applications
to systems of a concrete origin, in biology, physics and engineering. The
principal investigator is currently collaborating with the particle accelerator
group at Fermilab to explore some of these potential applications. The research
supported by this award is guided by the far-reaching goal of developing a
general theory of partially hyperbolic systems along the lines of the hyperbolic
theory developed in the past 40 years. In particular the principal investigator
proposes to study: ergodic properties of conservative partially hyperbolic
diffeomorphisms; actions of large collections of diffeomorphisms and embeddings
on manifolds; and rigidity phenomena in actions of groups. A highlight of the
proposed research is to investigate the interaction between hyperbolicity and
KAM phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.