* 1900506
* Tuning the Photo-physics of Organic Semi-conductors using Morphological and Plasmonic Effects
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Linda Peteanu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2024
* USD 520,000.00

Polymers are long molecular chains formed by linking together many small
molecules, called monomers. By varying the monomer's chemical structure,
chemists can create polymers that absorb light, fluoresce, and conduct
electricity, making them useful for cell phone displays, solar photovoltaics,
and even in medical imaging. Despite these advantages, polymers degrade upon
exposure to oxygen and light, and their fluorescence decreases when the chains
pack together to form the films used in devices. With support from the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism A and Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry Programs in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Linda Peteanu of
Carnegie-Mellon University is addressing these challenges. Working with her
students, she is using a wide array of spectroscopic tools to understand why
polymer chains degrade less when placed onto metal films, as well as why their
fluorescence is reduced when the chains pack together. The team's discoveries
are helping chemists to create improved polymers for consumer electronics
applications, which could have significant societal broader impact. The
educational broader impacts lie in the training of students with expertise in
optics and novel imaging methods. In addition, outreach to K-12 students and to
the public demonstrate how light interacts with matter. The outreach activities
and demonstrations developed as part of this award help young scientists
visualize the connections between the microscopic and macroscopic worlds and
help the general public appreciate how this fundamental connection has been
critical in the development of many of the products they use in their everyday
lives.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on conjugated semi-conducting
oligomers, polymers and their aggregates. These materials demonstrate the
remarkable ability to transport energy and charge over distances that are large
compared to molecular scales. These properties, in addition to their emissivity,
are important to applications ranging from opto-electronic devices, such as
photovoltaics and light emitting diodes, to chemical sensors and biological
labels. From a fundamental perspective, extended or electronically-delocalized
structures, such as these polymers and their aggregates, are of interest because
their electronic properties lie in the gap between those of small molecules and
extended solids. The goals of this project are two-fold. The first is to perform
a comprehensive investigation utilizing a variety of spectroscopic and imaging
tools, molecular modeling, and synthetic modification to understand how the
emission spectra, dynamics and yields are controlled by ground-state
conformation and by the rates and efficiencies of intersystem crossing and
internal conversion. The second is to explore the effects of two local
environmental perturbations, solvent polarity and plasmonic field effects, on
the fluorescence yield and the rates and efficiencies of singlet-triplet
relaxation, energy transfer and charge separation. These data may yield a better
understanding of how the structure, morphology, and local environment of this
important class of materials can be optimized for existing and novel
applications that require high emissivity and efficient charge
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.