* 1900109
* Exploration of Non-Equilibrium Interfacial Phenomena in Spin Forbidden Oxidation
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Sylvia Ceyer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Modern computer chips are made from semiconductors, such as silicon, coated with
an extremely thin layer of silicon-oxide. To fabricate reliable electronic
components, the thickness of this oxide layer must be precisely controlled,
which presents significant challenges as devices become smaller and smaller.
Present methods of creating the silicon-oxide film require heating the
semiconductor at high temperature. This process leads to a non-uniform oxide
layer. In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Sylvia T.
Ceyer of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and her students are using
sophisticated molecular beam techniques to study the oxide formation process.
Their discoveries could lead to improved methods using lower temperatures, which
would have significant societal and economic benefit. This research is also
providing a broad-based education in scientific problem solving for students
embarking on careers in chemical industry. Professor Ceyer leverages MIT?s
Summer Research Program (MSRP) to recruit underrepresented undergraduate
students for summer research engaging them in the excitement of scientific
discovery. Professor Ceyer also authors and narrates compelling general
chemistry lectures on YouTube as a part of educational and outreach activities
designed to make science understandable and accessible for all.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work proposes a novel method using (O2)2 dimer to
easily synthesize O2 in its first electronically excited singlet state with the
aim of bypassing a spin-forbidden reaction that limits oxidation activity of
semiconductors. This idea may lead to precise control of ever-thinner oxide
layers in devices. The comparison between the experimentally-determined
interaction dynamics of O2 versus (O2)2 are providing insights into the origin
of the low, but non-zero probability of this spin forbidden reaction. This
research program also explores a non-equilibrium phenomenon involving lattice
electronic excitations due to the initial collision of the incident O2 in the
quest for understanding the non-zero O2 reactivity. Finally, these experiments
test a hypothesis that an alternate mechanism for dissociative chemisorption,
atom abstraction, which does not require a spin forbidden transition, may be
operative via a metastable, non-equilibrium precursor state or a direct atom
abstraction associated with a transient potential energy
maximum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.