* 1900510
* Time-Domain Atomistic Theory and Simulation of Excitation Dynamics on the Nanoscale
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Oleg Prezhdo, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 512,000.00

Oleg V. Prezhdo of the University of Southern California is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop computational approaches to study nanoscale
materials. The award is cofunded by the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
program in the Division of Materials Research. Studying matter at the nanoscale
allows scientists and engineers to develop smaller and faster electronic and
electro-optic devices. These devices have many technological benefits. For
example, they can improve the efficiency and lower the cost of solar cells. Many
new technologies, such as those relevant to quantum information science also
emerge from nanoscale research. Bridging the gap between molecular and bulk
scales, nanoscale materials exhibit novel phenomena. An atom-level description
and fine time-resolution are needed to understand these phenomena. To gain this
detailed understanding, Professor Prezhdo and his research group develop novel
theoretical methods and use them to study ultrafast dynamics in nanomaterials.
This theoretical research is performed in close collaboration with
experimentalists. The current focus of the Prezhdo group is on hybrid
organic/inorganic perovskites, which show record solar cell efficiencies, as
well as on two-dimensional materials, such as metal dichalcogenides and black
phosphorus, which can lead to the development of devices that are just a few
atoms in thickness. Professor Prezhdo is engaged at curriculum development aimed
at increasing student involvement in energy
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies are rooted in the recent
advances in nonadiabatic (NA) and semi-classical molecular dynamics (MD), and
their implementation within time-domain density functional theory (TDDFT). The
focus is on the investigation of the fundamental questions posed in the recent
time resolved experiments performed on nanoscale materials. Specific attention
is given to the development and testing of new simulation approaches and
algorithms for NAMD with focus on rigor, accuracy, efficiency and applicability
to large systems, which undergo practically important non-equilibrium processes
involving excited electronic states and ultrafast timescales. The implementation
and testing of the NAMD approaches within TDDFT with the goal of extending the
applicability of NAMD to new problems and larger systems is also a goal of this
research. The larger systems have electronic structure can be described by ab
initio and tight binding DFT, including a new family of NAMD techniques
(Liouville space NAMD) and types of processes (many-particle and spin-orbit
interactions). Finally, the study of the excitation dynamics in two-dimensional
materials and halide perovskites, which are under intense experimental
investigation are investigated. These materials carry great promise for
photovoltaic, photocatalytic, electronic, spintronic, plasmonic, valleytronic
and related technologies, underlying future societal advances in energy
harvesting and information processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.