* 1900153
* Leveling the Field: Increasing the Preparedness and Belonging of Underrepresented Community College Students in Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Louise Lyon, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 298,363.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by recruiting community college students to and preparing them
for success in computer science. The project aims to achieve this goal by
providing students at Los Positas Community College (California) with a week-
long, pre-semester computer science workshop called "Code Jam." The Code Jam
workshop is modeled on a semester-long computer science program at Siena
College, a private four-year institution, and a week-long math workshop at Los
Positas Community College. Like Math Jam, Code Jam will be a week-long, full-
day, pre-semester hands-on program that is enhanced with intentional personal
and social supports. The intention is to create an engaging environment that
welcomes students into computer science, even if they have no prior experience
with computational thinking and computer programming. The project expects that
students who participate in Code Jam will be more likely to enroll in
introductory computer science classes. This effort addresses the critical need
for U.S. workers to understand computing fundamentals, given the pervasiveness
of technology and the rising number of jobs requiring technical knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two objectives. First, it seeks to create
a computer science entry program specifically designed for success in a
community college setting. Second, it endeavors to create a program that can be
implemented at colleges across the Nation. The project has the potential to
attract and prepare students who would not otherwise consider pursuing computing
or who would struggle to succeed in introductory computer science classes. Based
on this potential outcome, together with student demographics at Las Positas
Community College (a Hispanic-Serving Institution), this project has the
potential to broaden participation in computer science. Using a social cognitive
career theory framework, the project will conduct a mixed-methods longitudinal
research study. This study will investigate the mechanisms by which personal
characteristics, background contexts, and learning experiences coalesce to give
messages about which career-related choices are possible and appropriate for
community college students of varying social categories. The project aims to
examine the role of the workshop in supporting student success in introductory
computing classes as well as its impact on affective factors such as interest,
confidence, and identification with computing. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.