* 1900338
* Development and Applications of Density Functional Methods for Large Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Weitao Yang, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

Professor Weitao Yang of Duke University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry. Dr. Yang's research focuses on studying the distributions of
electrons in, or the electronic structures of, chemical systems. The electrons
present in atoms rearrange their positions when atoms combine (or bond) to form
molecules and solids. This positioning determines the characteristic chemical
properties of these systems and is important when studying many challenging
problems in science. Specifically, Dr. Yang models the electronic structure of
chemical systems using equations of motion based on a mathematical method called
density functional theory. This theory has been applied successfully in a wide
array of chemical studies such as modeling the speed of chemical reactions,
solar energy conversion, fuel cell design and the development of
pharmaceuticals; however, there are still important areas, including studies
involving charged or transitory systems, where density functional theory
contains approximations which lead to significant errors. Dr. Yang's project
focuses on analyzing these errors and developing systematic corrections to the
approximations in current use, thus making the density functional theory of
electronic structure more accurate and robust. The advances in density
functional theory from this research may find applications to a wide range of
computational modeling problems in biology, chemistry, physics, engineering,
nanoscience and nanotechnology. The project contributes to the development of
future generations of theoretical and computational chemistry researchers. Dr.
Yang also engage students from underrepresented minorities in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics in his research project as part of
Project SEED.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The density functional theory (DFT) of
electronic structure has had a significant impact on the application of quantum
mechanics to many interesting and challenging problems in chemistry. Much
progress has been made in both the forms and the performance of the approximate
functionals based on the so-called generalized gradient approximation (GGA),
ranging from meta-GGA and hyper-GGA to functionals incorporating perturbation
theory and the random phase approximation. With all these developments, the
accuracy of density functional approximations has been significantly improved
for many chemical and physical problems, even for the very challenging problem
of long-range van der Waals attractions. However, outstanding challenges in DFT
remain and these challenges prevent the broad and robust application of DFT.
Commonly used approximate functionals have significant delocalization error,
with deviations from the exact linearity condition for fractional charges,
leading to many inaccuracies in applications. These functionals also fail to
describe static or strong correlation. Necessary conditions for overcoming these
errors have been expressed in terms of fractional charges and fractional spins.
Dr. Yang's research group derives corrections to commonly used functionals to
satisfy these constraints, thus advancing the frontiers of DFT. Research efforts
focus on eliminating delocalization error with localized orbital scaling
corrections and reducing static correction errors with both localized orbital
scaling corrections and multireference DFT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.