* 1900483
* RUI: Development of Dianionic Enolates for the Stereoselective Synthesis of Natural and Unnatural Amino Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Cannon, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2023
* USD 184,182.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Jeffrey Cannon at Occidental College who
works with undergraduate researchers to synthesize unnatural amino acids. Amino
acids are one of the fundamental building-blocks of biological systems.
Professor Cannon and his research team are devising new strategies for the
synthesis of these building blocks that can provide useful quantities of amino
acids that are not readily isolated from natural sources. Furthermore, because
their three-dimensional shape or stereochemistry is critical for proper
function, this research is working to control the exact arrangement of atoms in
the amino acid products so that the products function properly in biological
systems. Professor Cannon and his research team then apply these results to the
chemical synthesis of a family of molecules known as indolizidines. The
indolizidine structure is found in many biologically-active molecules. Molecules
of this type have many applications as pharmaceuticals and other biological
agents. The broader impacts include new syntheses and applications of unnatural
amino acids as well as the development of biologically-active nitrogen-
containing molecules. This project also creates summer research fellowships for
undergraduates in synthetic chemistry with an emphasis on support for
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many limitations to
the syntheses of unnatural amino acids, especially those that are fully-
substituted. Professor Cannon and his students are developing the reactions of
dianionic enolates to provide ready stereoselective access to unnatural amino
acid derivatives and other synthetic precursors. His research group is
investigating the use of a chiral auxiliary to direct the stereochemistry of
reactions of dianionic enolates. These reactions are studied experimentally as
well as computationally in order to understand the elements of control provided
by these auxiliaries. The goal is to provide a robust and accessible system for
the synthesis of amino acids. These reactions are tested in complex settings in
order to understand their limitations and inspire further reaction
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.