* 1900321
* 'Molecular Nanoparticles' of Magnetic Perovskite Manganites and Other Metal Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* George Christou, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor George Christou of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Florida is using synthetic chemistry methods
to prepare nanoparticles of important metal oxides that are identical in size
and shape. Such "molecular nanoparticles" (molecules less than one billionth of
a meter in size) address an important current challenge in nanoscience, namely
how to avoid mixtures of sizes and shapes, and thus of properties. Most current
preparations of nanoparticles result result in various particle sizes and shapes
in the same batch. The project is initially targeted at making molecular
nanoparticles of cerium dioxide and manganite perovskites, materials of
widespread importance in industrial and medical applications, as well as
potentially new quantum device technologies. Professor Christou and his group
carry out a number of outreach, education and international activities. They
participate in the annual Chemistry Day at the Mall in Gainesville, targeted at
K-12 students, teachers and parents, and the local community and media.
Undergraduate research students participate in hands-on research gaining
important skills for graduate work or employment. Professor Christou organizes
the Showcase Symposium at the annual meeting of the Florida ACS Local Section,
and also organizes the annual Florida Inorganic and Materials Symposium student
meeting, which involves 14 Florida PhD-granting universities, and undergraduate
and community colleges. Internationally, he co-organizes two biennial workshops,
the Current Trends in Molecular and Nanoscale Magnetism (2021), and the North
America-Greece-Cyprus Workshop on Paramagnetic Materials (2020, 2022), which
include many talks from students and postdocs. Finally, the team continues to
collaborate with national and international groups, providing samples for
specialized physics studies, and assisting synthetic chemists in the magnetic
characterization of their materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthesis of truly
monodisperse (identical) nanoparticles and their structural characterization at
atomic resolution are extremely important challenges in nanoscience. For many
nanoscale materials important to the development of next-generation electronic,
magnetic, catalytic, and biomedical systems/devices, the top-down approach has
limitations as the fabrication of monodisperse nanoparticles becomes more and
more difficult with decreasing size. The bottom-up molecular approach provides
an alternative route if high nuclearity clusters that have the same structure as
the bulk material can be synthesized. Such "molecular nanoparticles" bring the
advantages of molecular chemistry to nanoscience, particularly true
monodispersity, solubility, and crystallinity. This synthetic approach is
especially available nanoscale metal oxides, which are of scientific and
technological importance. Breakthroughs in cluster chemistry to produce truly
monodisperse nanoparticles of manganite perovskites and cerium dioxide have
recently been achieved by the Professor George Christou's group, opening up new
directions that promise knowledge generation at the
nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.