* 1900652
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Deciphering the LLSVP-plume relationship
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Matthew Jackson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 04/30/2023
* USD 98,714.00

Much of our view of mantle evolution is shaped by our current knowledge of
mantle convection and plume dynamics; examples include hotspot volcanism--
including large igneous provinces--and mantle mixing. By gaining a deeper
understanding of how, where, and why plumes form, and their composition and
their relationship to the deep interior's large low shear wave velocity
structures (LLSVPs) under Africa and the Pacific, the PIs will make a
significant step towards understanding the dynamical and geochemical evolution
of the mantle. Their efforts should provide a basis to better understand the
three-dimensional flow structure surrounding LLSVPs and where, how, and why
plumes form. This may help answer the question: How is the relationship between
plumes and LLSVPs reflected in hotspot lavas such as those found in Hawaii? The
new research directions will enrich cross-fertilization between the fields of
mantle dynamics and geochemistry and contribute to the growing body of work on
mantle plumes and LLSVPs. The PIs are engaged in a number of activities aimed at
education and training at all levels. The PIs have and will continue to engage
undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented groups in their
research activities. As part of this proposal the PIs aim to augment the content
associated with related Wikipedia entries and develop a series of educational
films to post on specifically dedicated YouTube channels. The lab lends itself
to site visits by elementary, middle school and high school students. PI
Lithgow-Bertelloni intends to continue providing lab tours and opportunities for
elementary and middle-school children to be involved in simple
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amongst the most enigmatic aspects of the
Earth's deep interior are the anomalous large low shear wave velocity provinces
(LLSVPs) under Africa and the Pacific. The origin, composition, and dynamics of
these provinces remain controversial. For example, it has been suggested that
plumes predominantly form at the edges of LLSVPs and that entrained material
from LLSVPs explains the distinct chemical asymmetries found at certain
hotspots. The PIs are proposing an experimental fluid dynamical study to explore
how three proposed LLSVP structures control and interact with mantle plumes.
These three structures represent the range of LLSVP formation hypotheses so far
proposed: a) purely thermal; b) dense and deformable; c) undeformable and
uncoupled. They will use state-of-the-art visualization tools, including
scanning particle image velocimetry and thermometry to measure the three-
dimensional temperature and flow fields, laser induced fluorescence, and
Lagrangian analysis tools to locate plumes and quantify entrainment to very high
spatial and temporal resolutions. The PIs seek to test both location control and
whether entrainment at the edges explains the observed chemical asymmetry in
hotspot lavas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.