* 1900457
* CNS Core: Medium: Collaborative Research: Cross Layer File Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Emmett Witchel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 05/31/2022
* USD 553,806.00

Computer hardware designers are developing new technologies for permanent
storage of user data, such as non-volatile memories (NVM) and solid-state disks
(SSD). Relative to the storage technologies commonly used just a decade ago,
these offer unprecedented performance, but at a cost that is also much higher
per megabyte of storage. This work uses software to bridge that gap: to build
file storage systems that can seamlessly span multiple types of storage
technology, from NVM to SSD to traditional disk storage, to reliably store user
data at low cost and high performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key innovation is
to change the interface between applications and the operating system to
streamline file system updates. Applications ask the kernel for permission to
log changes to the file system in per-application NVM. These changes can be
applied with performance close to the hardware limits of NVM, often under a
microsecond per update. In the background, the kernel copies these changes back
to its own data region, providing the illusion that all applications are working
on the same storage system. The kernel then copies the data to SSD and disk to
make room for additional updates to NVM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industry is
rushing to deploy these new technologies because of the advantages they bring,
but new software techniques are needed to bring those advantages to real users.
As desktops and cloud computing systems are the default platform for all types
of computing used by billions of people worldwide, there is the potential for
widespread benefit. In addition, computer science instruction must adapt to
address the challenges and solutions to these new technologies, to enable
students to thrive in this new environment. Proposed lecture and project
materials will prepare students for this multi-layer storage and file system
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary type of data to be produced will be
software artifacts and measurements of these software artifacts. During the
project, software source code and data measurements will be stored using an
industry-standard version control system and backed up on multiple servers in
different areas of the University of Texas Austin computer science department
building. After publication, copies of the source code and data measurements
will be moved, along with copies of all published papers, to a permanent
repository at https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~simon/strata/ which will remain in
place for at least ten years after completion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.