* 1900532
* Modeling X-ray Transient Spectroscopy with Adaptive Wavefunction Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Francesco Evangelista, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2023
* USD 431,437.00

Francesco Evangelista of Emory University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop computational approaches to study how molecules interact
and change in response to exposure to X-ray radiation. X-rays can be used to
probe the dynamics of electrons and nuclei during chemical reactions. These
experiments have an unprecedented time resolution down to the attosecond scale
(one quintillionth of a second). The interpretation of experiments that probe
molecules via X-rays relies heavily on quantum mechanical simulations. This
involves solving the electronic Schrodinger equation for these systems. Such
calculations are challenging due to the combination of relativistic effects and
the correlated motion of electrons. Evangelista and his coworkers develop
efficient and accurate methods for such simulations. They develop efficient
adaptive algorithms that reduce the computational cost of simulating the
structure and dynamics of electrons in molecules. They also develop open-source
software that implements the theories developed in this project. This software
is made available to the broader research community. Evangelista also recruits
undergraduates majoring in STEM fields to pursue summer research in his research
group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a fundamental level, the project addresses the
problem of computing transient core-excitations with important contributions
from both weak and strong correlation. The strategy employed by Evangelista uses
compact selected configuration interaction wave functions to describe strong
correlation effects and efficient many-body correlation methods to treat weak
correlations. The adaptive configuration interaction (ACI) scheme developed in
this project is both adaptive and tunable and provides a systematic path to
compute excited states with high accuracy. The ACI method is developed to
address two challenging problems that require an explicit treatment of highly-
excited electronic configurations: the simulation of transient X-ray
spectroscopies and the decay of core-ionized and core-excited
states&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.