* 1900568
* Ballistic Energy Transport in Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Igor Rubtsov, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/28/2023
* USD 485,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry is funding Professors Igor Rubtsov and
Alexander Burin of Tulane University to investigate unusually rapid movement of
energy in molecules, so-called "ballistic energy transport." Most often energy
(as heat) is transported slowly through materials through the random motion of
electrons and atoms making up the material (this is called "thermal diffusion").
Professor Rubtsov's research group has discovered systems where energy deposited
in long molecules is rapidly transferred to distant locations, not unlike a
bullet or projectile. This anomalous transfer of energy may help scientists
discover new materials with improved thermal transport properties. The graduate
and undergraduate students working on this project are receiving training in
optical science, laser spectroscopy and quantum theory. The PI and co-PI
participate in a number of educational activities on their campus, including the
Tulane Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation (LS-LAMP)
Summer Undergraduate Research Training Program, which provides undergraduate
students from groups underrepresented in science with authentic research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Professors Igor Rubtsov and Alexander Burin
and their respective research groups are combining ultrafast laser spectroscopy
(relaxation-assisted two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy (2DIR)) with
theoretical modeling to develop a better understanding of how the very rapid
energy transport over molecularly-significant distances occurs. Some of the
questions that these scientists hope to answer include: What are the main
factors determining the speed of ballistic transport and how to increase its
efficiency? How do the transport parameters, such as efficiency, speed, band
selection, and cooling rate, depend on the environment and temperature? Can
these transport parameters be controlled by external stimuli and how to design
molecules for such control? Can the ballistic transport be efficient against the
direction of thermal gradient? Among the factors affecting transport to be
examined are the primary and secondary chain structure, chain architecture, the
nature and energy of the source vibrational mode, and the temperature. These
studies are identifying the most likely transport mechanisms and, as such, will
likely suggest ways of reducing losses for ballistic energy transport and
directing energy to specific targets. The ballistic transport mechanism is
considered as a principal component of energy transport in molecules, especially
for molecules featuring functional groups with repeating units, which are very
common. These studies are helping us understanding how to use the ballistic
transport and how to manipulate its outcome. Establishing the fundamental
principles needed to make the process either fast and efficient or slow and
inefficient could impact a broad class of problems that take center stage in
nanoscience and molecular electronics. In addition to the aforementioned
training and outreach activities, this project includes the the designing of a
novel undergraduate course that incorporates the knowledge obtained in the
program and implements an experimental exercise on 2DIR
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.