* 1900094
* Heterogeneous Catalysis for Carbon-Carbon Bond Forming Reactions using Clusters Supported on Defect-Engineered and Chemically Modified Graphene-based Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Shiv Khanna, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 472,092.00

Developing efficient, recyclable, and inexpensive catalysts for the synthesis of
pharmaceutical ingredients is an important goal of chemical research. Currently,
palladium catalysts are used extensively in pharmaceutical applications.
However, these processes often leave residual metal contamination in the
reaction products. In addition, the catalysts are expensive and difficult to
recover and recycle. In this project, Professors Samy El-Shall and Shiv Khanna
and their students at Virginia Commonwealth University are developing new
catalysts based on palladium nanoparticles supported on graphene-based materials
to address these problems. Professors El-Shall and Khanna are deeply engaged in
training students at all levels and are encouraging VCU undergraduates and
Project SEED students from the Richmond area high schools to participate in the
project where they will develop valuable skills as
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Drs. Samy El-Shall and Shiv Khanna of
Virginia Commonwealth University are developing a fundamental understanding of
the heterogeneous cross-coupling catalytic activity of palladium and palladium-
nickel nanoparticles supported on a variety of graphene-based materials. The
ultimate objective is to develop an efficient and inexpensive catalyst that
could allow sustainable cross-coupling reactions. Density functional theory
(DFT) calculations are carried out in parallel to the experimental work to
investigate how the physical and chemical modifications of the graphene-based
support can be controlled to influence the nature and density of surface
defects, to improve the electron donor and acceptor characteristics of the
support, and to allow carrying out co-catalysis on neighboring sites in a
bimetallic catalyst. Drs. El-Shall and Khanna are actively engaged in the
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students in the multi-
disciplinary cutting edge research areas of heterogeneous catalysis,
nanomaterials, surface science, and theoretical chemistry. Outreach programs are
focused on recruitment of underrepresented minorities and women undergraduates
and high school students to participate in the research in support of the
broader impact of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.