* 1900271
* High-Performance Panoptic Mass Spectrometry for Electrocatalytic Reaction Screening
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Abraham Badu-Tawiah, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B and
Chemical Measurement and Imaging Programs, Professor Abraham Badu-Tawiah of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Ohio State University is developing
a new electrocatalytic screening platform for the selective reactions
(oxidation) of carbon carbon double bonds. The project seeks to identify
electrocatalytic conditions that enable selective synthesis of high-value fine
chemicals. Education and outreach activities are designed to directly impact
students in the early stages (K-12) of their educational experience. The project
is well-positioned to introduce students - including groups underrepresented in
the STEM fields - to interdisciplinary science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
majority of heterogeneous electrocatalysts are oxides or metals dispersed onto
oxide supports. Traditionally, oxide synthesis and subsequent reactivity
screening occur separately in two independent experiments. This project targets
an all-in-one panoptic system that combines in-situ oxide synthesis and
catalytic reaction screening into a single experimental step. The research
involves the development of a multimodal, contained, nano-electrospray system
for the in-situ preparation of the eletrocatalyst and subsequent modification of
the reaction environment in real-time. Anodic reaction screening is investigated
using the electrooxidation of alkenes by non-inert metal electrodes to produce
several important reactive chemical intermediates. Cathodic reaction screening
is showcased using the selective reduction of carbon carbon double bonds in the
presence of carbon oxygen double bonds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.