* 1900801
* Topics in Harmonic Analysis: Time-frequency Analysis and connections with Additive Combinatorics and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Victor Lie, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

This project lies mainly within the area of harmonic analysis, with a special
focus on revealing the deep connections between time-frequency analysis and
fields such as additive combinatorics, incidence geometry, and partial
differential equations (PDE). The project investigates three major themes: 1)
the problem of the pointwise convergence of Fourier series (near the
integrability threshold), 2) the role of curvature in several model problems
connected with major open problems including Zygmund's differentiation
conjecture and the boundedness of the trilinear Hilbert transform, and 3)
applications in PDE and fluid mechanics. The first theme of pointwise
convergence lies at the very foundation of Fourier analysis and has a history of
more than 200 years. Along the way, it has generated new areas within
mathematical analysis (e.g. time-frequency analysis) and served as a motivation
and inspiration for the development of wavelet theory -- a field that nowadays
has numerous real-world applications in engineering (image processing, data
recovery), medicine (MRI), and other fields. The second theme aims to understand
toy curved models designed to shed new light on longstanding open problems with
applications to ergodic theory and number theory. Finally, the third theme deals
with questions such as the global behavior of the maximal Schrodinger operator
and the study of singularity formation in two dimensions for water waves -- the
latter having direct implications for our understanding of physical reality.

This is a diverse project involving relevant problems in harmonic analysis, with
applications in several related fields. The PI has obtained relevant progress on
all three of the themes discussed above. Indeed, for the first theme, the PI
completely solved the lacunary model of the problem, in particular verifying a
conjecture posed by Konyagin at the 2006 International Congress of
Mathematicians. Moreover, in the course of his work on the lacunary model, the
PI established deep and surprising connections between time-frequency analysis
and additive combinatorics, which he is now using to develop a new methodology
for approaching the longstanding full problem. For the second theme -- meant to
develop a deeper understanding of the role of curvature in harmonic analysis, by
studying the transition from nonflat to flat models of some difficult well-known
open problems -- the PI developed a program which recently unified three
directions: the Hilbert transform, the bilinear Hilbert transform, and the
Carleson operator along non-flat curves (together with their maximal variants).
The third theme has strong connections with dispersive PDE and fluid mechanics.
The fluid mechanics component is part of a joint project and aims to understand
the asymptotic geometry of the interface between two fluids in a 2D setting as
the interface approaches a "splash" scenario from the water-wave case. This
project builds on the previous joint work of the PI together with C. Fefferman
and A. Ionescu on the lack of splash singularity formation in the 2D case of
locally smooth two-fluid interfaces under irrotational assumptions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.