* 1900562
* Investigating the Dioxygen Activation Mechanisms of Biologically Relevant Nonheme Iron Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Adam Fiedler, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2023
* USD 455,279.00

Bacteria employ a wide variety of iron-containing enzymes to breakdown natural
and human-generated compounds in the environment. Such reactions commonly
proceed by cleaving the carbon-carbon bonds of the molecules in a process that
requires dioxygen (O2) from the atmosphere. The mechanism by which biological
iron sites facilitate these O2-dependent reactions is not fully understood,
which hinders the design of man-made molecules capable of using O2 as a cheap
and environmentally-friendly oxidant. In this project, Dr. Adam Fiedler is
generating a series of model systems, ranging from small complexes to
supramolecular assemblies, to obtain molecular-level insights into the O2
reactivity of iron in both biological and man-made contexts. A powerful
combination of spectroscopic and computational tools is utilized to characterize
unstable and transient species that have been proposed (but rarely observed) in
Nature. In this way, the project provides a more complete picture of reactions
that are essential for the remediation of polluted soils and groundwaters. The
interdisciplinary nature of the project offers a valuable training experience in
both experimental and theoretical methods for graduate and undergraduate
students. Dr. Adam Fiedler collaborates with local teachers to engage high-
school students in activities that combine chemistry with artistic expression.
This outreach program exposes students to concepts and instrumentation used in
the project, thereby increasing scientific literacy and the chances that
students pursue college degrees in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding
from the CSDM-B Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Adam Fiedler of Marquette
University is developing synthetic iron-containing complexes that mimic key
features of nonheme iron dioxygenases. Dioxygenases that cleave carbon-carbon
bonds are critical for the microbial degradation and assimilation of organic
compounds that arise from both natural and human sources. However, the O2
activation mechanisms employed by these enzymes are not fully understood. In
particular, there is uncertainty regarding the geometric and electronic factors
that govern the reactivity of pivotal intermediates featuring superoxo, peroxo,
and/or substrate radical ligands. This project combines coordination chemistry,
reaction kinetics, spectroscopic techniques, and computational methods to
illuminate the complex relationships between structure and reactivity in bio-
inspired iron complexes, including transient intermediates of catalytic
significance. In addition, new approaches for incorporating well-defined second-
and third-sphere ligand architectures are developed. These efforts provide
fundamental knowledge regarding O2 activation processes in a variety of
metalloenzymes and aid in the design of new oxidation catalysts. The methods
used in this research offer interdisciplinary training for undergraduate and
graduate-level scientists. Dr. Adam Fiedler is also engaged in outreach
activities directed towards high-school students that stimulate interest in
science by emphasizing the visually appealing aspects of inorganic chemistry and
crystallography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.