* 1900160
* Tensor Train Methods for Simulations of Photoinduced Reaction Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Victor Batista, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Victor Batista of Yale University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Program in the Division of Chemistry to develop
rigorous theoretical and computational methods to describe light-driven reaction
rates. Such rates (dynamics) are studied after a molecule absorbs light from a
laser, the sun, or another light source and reaches a high-energy state (it
becomes "excited"). Professor Batista's methods are based on quantum mechanics -
mathematical descriptions of the motion and interactions of subatomic particles,
that consider packets of energy and the wave-particle duality of matter. A wide
range of important chemical and biological processes are critically dependent on
quantum mechanical effects. The systems and processes that the Batista group
studies are relevant to new technologies for optical data storage and molecular
electronic logic gates. The research program is integrated with the continued
development of Wikichem, established by the Professor Batista and his co-workers
to facilitate the dissemination of new teaching approaches, research findings,
and software developments on the World Wide Web. Professor Batista also works
with the Yale University's Science, Technology and Research Scholars (STARS)
program to foster the participation of underrepresented minority students in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the development and
implementation of truly transformative methods for simulations of nonadiabatic
quantum dynamics, including methods based on tensor-train hierarchical Tucker
decomposition and applications to photoinduced reactions explored by high-
resolution gas-phase and solution spectroscopy. The projects include
interdisciplinary collaborations between the Batista group (Yale University) and
Nibbering (Max-Born Institute, Berlin, Germany) in a joint experimental and
theoretical effort to characterize the nature of ultrafast photo-transduction
mechanisms at the detailed molecular level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.