* 1900093
* Topics in protein and RNA folding and dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Devarajan Thirumalai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,239,688.00

Professor Devarajan (Dave) Thirumalai at the University of Texas Austin is
supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
Program in the Chemistry Division and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences. Professor Thirumalai creates
novel, theoretical, computational models in order to address outstanding
questions in biologically-related research. For example, there are many proteins
that do not adopt well-defined structures, these are referred to as
Intrinsically Disordered Proteins (IDPs). IDPs behave like synthetic polymers
but still control many biological functions. Professor Thirumalai uses
computational models to predict the structure and reactions of IDPs with other
IDPs as well as of IDPs with RNA (ribonucleic acid). The characteristics of RNA
folding and interactions with unstructured proteins are of specific interest.
Finally, the physical mechanisms by which molecular-sized motors, transport
molecular "cargo" within cells are not well understood. Professor Thirumalai
examines how these motors move and make their deliveries. In addition to the
potential for broad impact of this research in biotechnology, Professor
Thirumalai is devoted to the training of new generations of students in
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last twenty years, it
has become increasingly clear that nearly 40% of the proteome consists of the
so-called low complexity IDPs, which are involved in a number of still unknown
functions. A major goal of Professor Thirumalai's research is to develop
reliable models that can quantitatively predict the structural and dynamical
properties of IDPs. This first step is needed in order to understand how they
interact with RNA and themselves in producing liquid droplets, which are
recognized to be important, but whose properties are largely unknown. Another
aspect of Professor Thirumalai's research deals with how RNA molecules fold,
especially with the focus on the difficult problem of the mechanisms by which
metal cations drive their folding. In addition, Thirumalai is keenly interested
in uncovering the principles of RNA-RNA interactions. These structures also form
droplets by themselves and in interactions with IDPs. Finally, two-headed
molecular motors (Myosin, Dynein, and Kinesin) are largely responsible for
transport of cargos in cells. They achieve this complex task by walking along
actin and microtubules (MTs) in a preferred direction. One of Professor
Thirumalai's major goals is to elucidate, using a combination of sophisticated
theory and simulations, the structural basis by which the motors coordinate the
two heads in a way such that one head steps forward while the other is bound to
actin or MTs. Professor Thirumalai uses theoretical ideas to predict the
outcomes of experiments, which include the distribution of motor velocities.
These results are critically needed in order to redesign motors for synthetic
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.