* 1900643
* Excited and Ground State Hydrogen Migration
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Matthew Platz, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 393,775.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic and Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division and directed by Professor Matthew Platz, NSF
funds are used to support undergraduate research at the University of Hawaii-
Hilo (UHH). The research incorporates synthetic organic chemistry,
photochemistry, chemical analysis of reaction mixtures and chemical
computations. This research tests the predictions of advanced theoretical
methods in the description of a new photochemical reaction mechanism. The
University of Hawaii Hilo (UH Hilo) consistently ranks among the most diverse
four-year campuses in the nation. This project provides a modern research
experience to economically-challenged undergraduate students from historically
underrepresented populations. Through a collaborative relationship, UH Hilo
undergraduates spend summer months at the Ohio State University developing
skills in computational chemistry under the tutelage of Professor Christopher
Hadad, an expert in the field of time-resolved, femtosecond
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Hilo, Hawaii, undergraduate students
synthesize diazirines, diazo compounds and oxadiazolines, expose these compounds
to monochromatic ultraviolet-visible radiation to generate carbene
intermediates, and analyze the ratio of alkene products so produced as a
function of excitation wavelength. The predictions of theory are confirmed if
the ratio of alkene stereoisomers changes dramatically after a critical energy
of exciting photons is realized. Through a collaborative relationship, UH Hilo
undergraduates spend summer months at the Ohio State University developing
skills in computational chemistry under the tutelage of Professor Christopher
Hadad, an expert in the field. The students also participate in femtosecond
time-resolved infrared experiments which measure the lifetimes and reactivities
of carbenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.