* 1900237
* Spectroscopic and Electronic Structure Studies of Molecular Electron Transport and Excited State Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Martin Kirk, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Martin L. Kirk of the Department of
Chemistry and Chemical Biology at the University of New Mexico is developing and
studying new molecular electron donor-acceptor systems. These novel systems will
enhance our knowledge and understanding of the emerging field of molecular
electronics and develop new insights into technologically-relevant processes
that occur in solar energy conversion devices, optoelectronics, photochemistry,
and photonics. The long-term goal of this research is to understand how
molecular design principles can be used to affect molecular electron transport
and excited state lifetimes and processes. The project is interdisciplinary and
involves organic and inorganic chemistry concepts that are interrelated with
physics and materials chemistry. This research team is located at a Hispanic
Serving and Minority Serving Institute and thus, the research activities include
broad participation by underrepresented minority students. Professor Kirk and
his team advance discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training
and learning by engaging undergraduate and high school students in research
projects through their relationships with international universities, the
Albuquerque Academy, and New Mexico Tech. Professor Kirk gives public lectures
at New Mexico museums,, co-organizes a Telluride Science Research Center meeting
(Molecules and Mechanisms for Quantum Information Processing), and give lectures
to the general public (Energy Prospects for New Mexico) and to undergraduates
(The Molecular Highway: How Molecules Direct Electron Traffic). Potential
benefits to society result include advances in quantum device
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Donor-Acceptor systems provide a convenient
platform to address technologically-relevant questions in molecular electronics
and excited state processes. The donor-acceptor molecules that are studied
possess novel electronic structures that define their ground state properties
and excited state photophysics. In this project, chemical synthesis and
spectroscopic approaches are augmented by theory and computations to understand
the interrelationships between molecular and more complex, extended systems. The
project goals focus on using well designed donor-acceptor molecules, including
magnetic exchange coupled Donor-Bridge-Acceptor biradical systems, to bridge
critical knowledge gaps and explore the relationship between computed molecular
conductance values and experimental spectroscopic and magnetic data. Such
experiments may provide new insight into single-molecule conductance and
molecular rectification. The project also tackles vibronic spin-orbit coupling
and anisotropic covalency contributions to excited state lifetimes; and the
complexity of multiple pairwise spin exchange interactions in electronic excited
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.