* 1900020
* Diatomic chemistry of low coordination metal complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Jeremy Smith, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 11/30/2023
* USD 460,000.00

Very small molecules common in interstellar space are often unstable and very
reactive. For example, the compound that contains a phosphorus atom (P) bonded
to a single nitrogen atom (N) was the first phosphorus compound to be detected
in space, but this molecule has only fleeting existence on earth because it
easily reacts with other molecules. Nonetheless, this P-N species has been
proposed as a starting materials for electronic and magnetic materials. Because
these molecules are so simple, but so reactive, a very important research topic
is focused on how to prepare and stabilize them. In this project, funded by the
Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jeremy Smith of
the Department of Chemistry at Indiana University, is developing a new strategy
to make a variety of simple, yet highly reactive molecules. The strategy
involves individually attaching two atoms (P and N) to two different metals.
These species are then brought into contact and the P and N then to bind each
other, while being stabilized by the metals. In addition to training students
for entry into the technological workforce, the team develops materials to
assist teachers and the general public in reading and interpreting scientific
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project a combination of
synthetic, spectroscopic and computational methods are used to assemble and
characterize diatomic molecules as ligands in transition metal complexes. The
modular nature of the building block strategy allows a range of diatomic
molecules to be accessed, with the resulting compounds displaying unusual
magnetic and reactivity properties. In collaboration with the Indiana University
College of Arts and Science Office of Science Outreach, publications resulting
from the research are deconstructed to assist teachers and the general public to
understand and interpret the concepts, assumptions, and methods of scientific
papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.