* 1900636
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Learning in Networks: Performance Limits and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Bruce Hajek, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 06/30/2024
* USD 546,420.00

Many machine learning problems deal with networks that encode similarities or
relationships among different objects, for which observational data may be
limited in extent and noisy. Learning the desired information requires highly
efficient algorithms that can process large-scale network data and detect
tenuous statistical signatures. This project involves modeling large-scale
networks and observations, devising learning algorithms, analyzing the
performance of the algorithms, deriving bounds on the possible performance of
best algorithms, and deploying theoretically-grounded algorithms to real network
data. The research aims to significantly advance the theoretical and algorithmic
understanding of graphical inference and provide key enabling technologies for
high-impact applications such as ordering of short DNA sub-sequences for genetic
sequencing. Improvements in the ability to sequence DNA can accelerate the use
of genomics with applications in health care. The associated mechanisms for
broadening participation in computing include: (a) Explorations in computing and
statistics for K-12 with broad participation; (b) Career and life skills
guidance for graduate students at the Annual Allerton Conference on
Communications, Control, and Computing; and (c) Mentoring female and minority
students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is grouped into four
interrelated areas, ranging from inference problems for single graphs, to
inference involving two graphs, in order to study classification of graphs from
general families: (a) learning community structure in dynamic graphs with heavy-
tailed degree distribution, specifically, in a new variation of the Barabasi-
Albert preferential attachment model; (b) recovering graphical structures beyond
communities, including but not limited to recovery of hidden Hamiltonian cycles
arising in a genetic sequencing problem and hidden matchings in bipartite graphs
arising in a particle tracking problem; (c) matching two graphs to each other by
identifying vertex correspondences, in particular, matching of perturbed
versions of Erdos-Renyi random graphs and Barabasi-Albert preferential
attachment graphs; and (d) learning properties of graphs using sampling,
including sampling along random walks on graphs. Computationally efficient
algorithms that estimate the number of both local structures (e.g., edges and
triangles) and global structures are designed. Network dynamics and subsampling,
as well as inference of network structures that are not necessarily low rank or
static, are addressed by employing techniques ranging from information theory,
message passing, spectral and non-convex methods, and convex methods including
linear, quadratic, and semi-definite relaxations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.