* 1900541
* Probes, Labels, Traps, and Reporters: Exploring the Modern Spin Chemistry Landscape
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Malcolm Forbes, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Malcolm D. E. Forbes of the
Department of Chemistry at Bowling Green State University is investigating the
structure, changes (dynamics), and reactivity of free radicals. Free radicals
are short-lived, very reactive species resulting from the fragmentation of
stable molecules which have been exposed to heat or light. Free radicals are
characterized by having unpaired electrons, in contrast to most stable molecules
in their lowest energy state, which have all of their electrons paired. Using a
specialized spectroscopic technique called time-resolved electron paramagnetic
resonance, free radicals can be observed on short time scales in organized
structures such as vesicles (biological cell mimics), micelles (oil droplets in
water), bubbles, polymer matrices, and other supramolecular structures such as
organic nanocrystals. The results provide a deeper understanding of entangled
spin states, which have potential use in quantum computing, quantum sensing, and
quantum information systems. The scientific impact of the work reaches the
fields of medicine, quantum computing (control of highly entangled electron spin
systems), coatings (thin film curing and drying), and photocatalysis and drug
delivery. The Forbes' laboratory is active in public outreach to libraries and
museums. They participate in a summer research program for high school students
in Northwest Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin wave function evolution and
molecular motion are intimately connected in spectroscopic methods, especially
time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance (TREPR). Their dynamics can be
analyzed through the use of theoretical models such as the nano-reactor model
for spin-correlated radical pairs. A major thrust of the project is to place the
radical-triplet pair mechanism (RTPM) of chemically induced electron spin
polarization on a stronger theoretical footing, and in doing so make it more
useful for understanding the nature of molecular motion in confined spaces on
the nanoscale. The advantages in using RTPM spin polarization for experimental
studies of molecular dynamics in both homogeneous and heterogeneous systems
include the magnitude of the electron spin polarization observed in the
nitroxide is directly dependent on the number of encounters it experiences with
the photoexcited triplet state, providing quantitative translational diffusion
information. The team also investigates the line shape of the nitroxide spin
reporter (intensities, line widths, hyperfine couplings) gives information about
polarity and viscosity, in particular rotational mobility. The excited triplet
state is silent in the TREPR spectrum because of fast electron spin relaxation,
induced by modulation of the dipolar interaction and this advantages is
exploited by the team. Finally, neither the triplet precursor or the nitroxide
are consumed during the experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.