* 1900296
* Spectroscopic Studies of Single-Ion Magnets
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Ziling Xue, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ziling B Xue of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Tennessee is studying molecular magnets for their
potential applications as a new generation of materials for information storage
and quantum computation. Such materials could have a much larger storage
capacity than the current storage materials with significant energy savings and
reduced environmental impacts. The goal of the research is to use spectroscopies
to probe properties of molecular magnets to help design better materials in the
future. The project is interdisciplinary covering inorganic, physical, and
materials chemistries. It will offer graduate and undergraduate students
opportunities to conduct research at national laboratories and broaden their
educational background and training. Professor Xue plans to attract high school
students who are potential first-generation college students from low-income
families to sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular magnets demonstrate slow
magnetic relaxations and quantum tunneling. Some such magnets have been shown to
be candidates for chemical qubits. Research efforts have been mostly focused on
design and preparation of the magnets with large anisotropies and slow
relaxations. However, there has been relatively little understanding of the
nature of certain critical properties of the magnets such as spin-lattice
interactions, spin-spin interactions, and molecular dynamics. In this project,
molecular magnets will be studied by several spectroscopic methods to answer the
following questions: (1) Can variable-field and variable-temperature inelastic
neutron scattering reveal magnetic transitions and spin-phonon couplings in
molecular magnets? (2) Can the intermolecular interactions in the molecular
magnets be probed by inelastic neutron scattering? (3) What properties in the
molecular magnets can Raman and far-IR spectroscopies reveal? (4) How dynamics
in the molecular magnets could be studied by quasielastic neutron scattering?
The project could demonstrate that these spectroscopies could be developed into
new methods to probe molecular magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.