* 1900473
* III: Medium: De Rham-Hodge theory modeling and learning of biomolecular data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Guowei Wei, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,184,362.00

Understanding the rules of life is the major mission of biological sciences in
the 21st Century. The availability of massive biological data and the recent
advances in computational algorithms have paved the way for biological sciences
to transition from a qualitative, phenomenological and descriptive to a
quantitative, analytical and predictive approach. However, this transition is
hindered by tremendous structural complexity and excessively large datasets. For
example, even all the world's computers put together do not have enough power to
design drugs automatically because of the structural complexity of protein-drug
interactions, excessively large datasets associated with drug configurations,
and the high dimensionality of involved molecular simulation and/or machine
learning. These challenges will be addressed by innovative mathematical
strategies in the present project. A team from mathematics and computer science
at Michigan State University will turn sophisticated mathematics into
computational algorithms that create simplified representations of complex
biomolecules or their interactions. As a result, deep learning and other types
of machine learning can be efficiently carried out to extract the structure-
function relationship from massive and diverse biomolecular datasets. This
information will be extremely valuable for revealing the rules of life and for
design new biomolecules, including biomedicine, which ultimately tests our
understanding of the biomolecular world and brings a direct benefit to human
health. Additionally, this project will support the development of undergraduate
and graduate-level courses on computational biophysics and machine learning at
Michigan State University. Finally, this research will facilitate the cross-
disciplinary training of the next generation researchers who are experts on
advanced mathematics, computer algorithms, and molecular-level
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the present project is to develop
novel de Rham-Hodge theory-based approaches to revolutionize the current
practice in biomolecular data analysis and modeling. The de Rham-Hodge theory is
a hallmark of the 20th Century?s mathematics that has had a great impact in
modern mathematics, quantum physics, and computer science. The investigators
will introduce for the first time the de Rham-Hodge theory to reduce the
structural complexity of biomolecules. Additionally, the research team will
propose the persistent de Rham-Hodge theory and element-specific de Rham-Hodge
theory for the first time to properly encode chemical and biological information
in biomolecular data representation. These methods will be carefully integrated
with advanced machine learning or deep learning algorithms to reveal
biomolecular structure-function relationships. Moreover, the investigators will
extensively validate the proposed methods on a variety of datasets, such as
protein binding to the proteins, ligands, DNA and RNA, protein folding stability
changes upon mutation, drug toxicity, solvation, solubility, and partition
coefficient. Finally, user-friendly software packages and online servers will be
developed using parallel and GPU architectures for researchers who are not
formally trained in advanced mathematics or sophisticated machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.