* 1900102
* RUI: Platinum-Catalyzed Selective Carbon-Hydrogen (C-H) Functionalization Reactions: Mechanism and Synthetic Utility
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Shouquan Huo, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 338,614.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry is supporting
the research of Professors Shouquan Huo and Yumin Li at East Carolina University
developing catalytic reactions that convert a carbon-hydrogen bond into a
carbon-carbon bond. By exchanging these bonds, subsequent reactions can produce
more complex molecules that can be used as building blocks in drug discovery and
materials science. Drs. Huo and Li are working with undergraduate and
master's-level students to gain a deeper understanding of the reaction
mechanisms by using both laboratory experiments and theoretical calculations.
Dr. Huo expands his innovative 1-2-3 Undergraduate Research Enhancement Program
to attract more students to research and to train them more effectively. This
project is broadening the participation of students from underrepresented groups
and engaging high school students through collaboration with the East Carolina
University Summer Ventures in Science and Mathematics (SVSM) Program. The
project is also preparing students for a stronger national scientific workforce
and contributing to educational, economic, and societal development in the
eastern Carolina region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Huo and Li are studying a
unique platinum-catalyzed carbon-hydrogen (C-H) acylation reaction and advancing
this underdeveloped reaction into a practical synthetic method. Compared to
other metal-catalyzed C-H acylation reactions, this platinum-catalyzed reaction
is free of oxidants and other additives, and also free of undesired
decarbonylative side reactions. As such, efficient methods to introduce alhpa-,
beta-, and gamma-keto ester functional groups, diketone groups, and various
other acyl groups into a variety of aryl-heteroaryl ethers, are being studied,
thereby creating many biologically and/or medicinally interesting building
blocks. Drs. Huo and Li are also investigating the mechanism of this platinum-
catalyzed reaction using a combined experimental and computational approach.
Experimental studies are unveiling the underlying factors controlling the
reactivity and selectivity of the reaction while density functional theory (DFT)
and the nudged elastic band (NEB) methods are being used to locate the lowest
energy pathway of the reaction and predict the structures and stabilities of key
intermediates and transition states. DFT is also being employed in the design of
new catalysts. This research is advancing fundamental knowledge in
organometallic chemistry while providing efficient methods to a broad organic
chemistry community. Further, undergraduate students, master's-level graduate
students, and high school students are engaged in the synthesis and
characterization of organic and organometallic compounds, computational
modeling, data analysis, and dissemination of research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.