* 1900399
* Nonadiabatic Transition Probabilities: Applications in Spectroscopy and Quantum Thermodynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Katharine Hunt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 280,000.00

Professor Katherine Hunt of Michigan State University is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop theoretical approaches to understand the uptake
of energy by a quantum mechanical system from an applied electromagnetic field.
This research has important impacts in solar energy conversion, energy transfer
between molecules, and ultrafast electronic processes. An accurate description
is also valuable in the design of molecular machines and in nanotechnology. When
a molecule or other quantum mechanical system is in the presence of an applied
field, the lowest energy state is modified by this field. The field can also
cause transitions from this "new" ground state to excited states. Quantum
descriptions of transitions are based on a probabilistic analysis. The existing
theory of transition probabilities was developed by P. A. M. Dirac over ninety
years ago, long before lasers had been developed. This theory does not make a
distinction between actual excitations of the quantum system with energy
absorption, and simple modifications of the energy of the lowest state due to
the field. L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz suggested a different theory, based
on nonadiabatic transition probabilities, which account exclusively for true
excitations. Hunt and her coworkers have developed this theory further, to show
that power absorption from an applied field is determined by the nonadiabatic
transition probability. In this project, the nonadiabatic theory is applied to
describe energy uptake, energy transfer processes, and quantum thermodynamic
systems. Experimental means of determining the actual transition probability are
identified during this project, and explored in collaboration with research
groups in spectroscopy. Applications to quantum thermodynamic engines are also
being analyzed. Professor Hunt works closely with undergraduate students,
engaging them in the supported research project, in particular those from the
underrepresented minority groups and persons with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dirac's theory of transitions is based on an
expansion of the solution of the time-dependent Schr'dinger equation in the
instantaneous eigenstates of the unperturbed Hamiltonian. The norm-square of the
total coefficient is used to find the probability of transition to an excited
state. Landau and Lifshitz separated the excited-state coefficient into an
adiabatic term and a nonadiabatic term, by integration by parts in Dirac's
expression. The adiabatic term depends on the instantaneous value of the
perturbation; this term follows the adiabatic theorem of Born and Fock and
describes the adjustment of the initial state of the system to the perturbation.
The nonadiabatic term characterizes actual transitions and depends on the time-
derivative of the perturbation; this term determines the power absorption from
an applied field. In this project, applications of nonadiabatic transition
probabilities are explored theoretically and tested in collaboration with
experimental groups. When a perturbing field is off-resonant with the transition
frequency, the difference between Dirac's form and the nonadiabatic theory is
particularly evident; the difference is also quite evident when the perturbing
field is held constant for a period of time. It is anticipated that transitions
between quantum states that are coupled to other degrees of freedom should show
clear-cut experimental evidence of the correct form of the transition
probability. When an electronic excitation occurs, the associated vibrational
wave functions evolve on the excited-state potential energy surface; but the
adiabatic component of the wave function continues to evolve on the perturbed
ground-state surface. Dirac's theory and the nonadiabatic theory lead to
different predictions for the interference patterns of vibrational wave
functions, after a perturbing pulse has ended and the system has returned to the
ground state; this is testable in experiments. Applications of the theory are
being explored in describing the fluorescence of dye molecules, Stark-induced
adiabatic Raman passage, femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy, and other
ultrafast processes. Applications in thermodynamics on the quantum level are
also being investigated, with a focus on the power and efficiency of quantum
engines. Participation in this project by women and members of underrepresented
minority groups is strongly encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.