* 1900955
* Geometry of Invariants and Mappings in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Peter Ebenfelt, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 270,000.00

The study of invariant geometries is fundamental in mathematics. Invariant
geometries arise in many different areas, such as several complex variables,
partial differential equations, and algebraic, complex, and differential
geometry. This research project investigates a particular geometry that arises
in the study of several complex variables and has deep connections with current
topics in mathematical physics, including quantum field theory, general
relativity, and string theory, as well as applications in, e.g., systems
engineering and control theory. The ideas and techniques needed for this study
are drawn from a variety of mathematical areas, including complex analysis and
geometry, partial differential equations, and differential geometry; at the same
time, the tools developed in this project will inform these areas as well. The
project also provides interesting research topics for graduate students and
postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this mathematics research project is
to study geometric, analytic, and algebraic aspects of generic real submanifolds
in complex varieties (more generally, of CR structures) and their mappings. The
work will investigate the geometric consequences of global vanishing on a
compact CR manifold of a higher order local invariant that arises as the
obstruction to smooth extension to the boundary of the Cheng-Yau solution to
Fefferman's complex Monge-Ampere equation. In three dimensions, this invariant
coincides with the trace on the boundary of the log-term in the asymptotic
expansion of the Bergman kernel; hence this problem is also connected with a
strong form of the Ramadanov Conjecture. The PI will study the existence of CR
umbilical points on compact CR 3-manifolds, especially a revised version of a
question by Chern-Moser, which asks if such points always exist on bounded
strictly pseudoconvex domains in complex 2-space; although the answer is 'no' in
general, the question is still open if the domain is diffeomorphic to the ball.
The PI will also consider questions regarding existence, uniqueness, and
regularity of CR maps, as well as related questions. He will consider the
context of CR maps of a Levi nondegenerate hypersurface into a nondegenerate
hyperquadric of higher dimension. This study will enhance our understanding of
the CR submanifold structure of the hyperquadrics, which constitute the flat
models in the theory of Levi nondegenerate hypersurfaces. The work should also
provide insight into how the local CR geometry of such hypersurfaces affects
various properties, such as notions of nondegeneracy and rigidity, of their CR
maps. The PI will also continue study of CR maps between generic submanifolds of
infinite type by investigating the prolongation of the system defining CR maps
to a singular Pfaffian system on the jet bundle. He will focus on understanding
the recently discovered phenomenon that for infinite type hypersurfaces the
biholomorphic, formal, and smooth CR equivalence classifications are different.
These investigations are expected to shed new light on the nature of CR maps
between infinite type manifolds and lead to a better understanding of the
Pfaffian systems arising in this context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.