* 1900100
* New Strategies for Creating Single and Dual Atom Catalysts on Silica Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Janet Bluemel, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 449,593.00

Catalysts allow reactions to proceed faster and to produce greater quantities of
desirable products. Industrial chemistry would not be possible without the use
of catalysts. However, big challenges remain regarding the sustainable use and
recycling of catalysts. An optimal catalyst would consist of only one or two
atoms that are prevented from grouping together and forming large bundles
(aggregates). This separation of atoms can be achieved by arranging the atoms on
a surface and retaining them at their specific surface sites. In this project,
Professor Janet Bluemel of Texas A&amp;M University is making use of two earlier
discoveries to reach this goal. First, a well-defined one layer (monolayer) of
metal complexes are placed on surfaces such as silica. The metal complexes are
then modified to form single atoms that remain in place, dispersed on the
surface. Similarly, two-atom assemblies are being prepared from metal complexes
containing two different metal centers that are bound to the surface. Professor
Bluemel's group is exploring the catalytic activities of these single- and dual-
atom catalysts, their ability to form products selectively, and their
recyclability. Different analytical approaches are being used and refined to
obtain better insight into the surface processes and ultimately generate more
efficient catalysts with superior characteristics. The project is enhancing the
fundamental knowledge about how to create well-defined, efficient, recyclable
catalysts in general and is leading to more sustainable processes. This project
also provides broad, in-depth training for undergraduate and graduate students
in Professor Bluemel's laboratory. In particular, the students are provided with
opportunities for direct interaction with both domestic and international
chemical companies, thus giving them unique and beneficial industrial
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Janet Bluemel of Texas A&amp;M
University is investigating dynamic processes on silica surfaces that involve
supported molecular nickel, palladium, and copper complexes. The species are
supported by tethering the complexes to the surface with the use of linkers. The
tethered species are used as precursors to deliberately create well-defined
single- and dual metal atom catalysts on surfaces such as silica. Dynamic
processes do not occur only when covalently immobilized catalysts are suspended
in a solvent. The Bluemel group has discovered that metal complexes adsorbed via
Van der Waals interactions also display different modes of mobility on surfaces
within pores, even in the absence of a solvent. At present there is a
rudimentary understanding of how catalysts and their precursors diffuse in
suspension or on dry surfaces. The ultimate goal of this project is to exploit
the impact of specific tridentate phosphine linkers and the dry adsorption of
nickelocene, which leads to well-defined monolayers, and to explore new methods
for generating single- and dual atom catalysts (SACs, DACs) and well-defined
nanoparticles on oxide surfaces. All approaches, which aim at stabilizing the
metal particles and preventing their unrestricted growth are only feasible on
surfaces. Investigating molecular immobilized and adsorbed catalyst precursors
and the supported active metal catalysts generated from them, improves the
understanding of their decomposition, agglomeration, and formation of metal
particles. Direct insight regarding the structure and dynamics of all surface
species is provided by High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy, dia-
and paramagnetic 1H, 2H, 13C, 29Si, and 31P Magic Angle Spinning Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of the dry materials and other
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.