* 1900594
* Methods for the Chemical Synthesis of Complex Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Viresh Rawal, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 05/31/2023
* USD 485,000.00

With this award, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Viresh Rawal of the University of Chicago is developing new
methods for the chemical synthesis of complex molecules. New synthetic methods
and strategies enable the construction of compounds that are essential for
advancements in many scientific disciplines, including chemical biology and
materials science. Such synthesis opens access to diverse compounds that help us
understand biological processes. New synthetic methods also help chemists
prepare large quantities of drugs more cheaply. The Rawal lab examines
cycloaddition reactions, which are reactions wherein two molecules are brought
together to form a ring. These are one of the most important families of
reactions for the synthesis of intricate molecules. The methods allow for the
creation of new compounds and provide students with a rigorous training in
reaction development, and the design and synthesis of molecules, thereby
preparing them for careers in academics or industry. Undergraduate students and
high school students from the Chicago Public School system are also gaining
exposure to scientific research through this award. They learn about the many
opportunities and careers available to them in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Rawal is developing new cycloaddition
methodologies for the synthesis of complex molecules. He and his students are
designing novel substrates for the Diels-Alder (DA) reaction, particularly the
meta-selective DA reaction, for the construction of substituted cyclohexanones
that are key building blocks to many complex natural products. Given the
tremendous need for single enantiomer compounds, with estimated global sales
topping $1.3 trillion in 2018, the Rawal lab is examining chiral catalysts to
render meta-selective DA reactions enantioselective. This work is providing
ready access to important compounds, particularly compounds containing all-
carbon quaternary chiral centers, that previously were difficult to synthesize.
To demonstrate the unique power of the new chemistry, the Rawal lab is carrying
out the chemical synthesis of selected, intricate natural products. This
research program is also helping to develop human resources in science and
technology through the education and training of graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students. Importantly, this project is exposing undergraduate
students and high school students in the University of Chicago Collegiate
Scholars Program to career opportunities in scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.