* 1900181
* Chemical Reactivity and Redox Behavior of Heme-Nitrogen Oxide Derivatives
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* George Richter-Addo, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2022
* USD 540,000.00

Many factors contribute to changes in the weather and the environment, one of
which is the increased accumulation of the nitrogen-containing gas nitrous oxide
(N2O) in the atmosphere. Bacteria and fungi utilize complex metalloenzymes to
generate N2O from the natural starting material nitric oxide (NO), but the
fundamental chemical mechanisms for this process are not understood. Therefore,
there is an urgent need to probe and understand this component of the global
N-cycle, in particular, the role that metals play in mediating the production
and consumption of such NOx gases of environmental and agricultural importance.
Collaborators Dr. George Richter-Addo and Dr. Michael Shaw study non-protein
chemical analogues of complex bacterial and fungal metalloenzymes to probe N2O
formation and NOx utilization by these organisms. In particular, the team is
preparing, isolating, and characterizing unstable intermediates along observed
reaction pathways. These studies allow for a better understanding of how these
gases are produced and controlled, and how nitrogen, an essential element in
fertilizer required for crop growth, can be improved. The collaborative team
combines a Ph.D. environment (at the University of Oklahoma) and a primarily
undergraduate environment (at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville) to
provide high-level training to a diverse group of students. The team is also
active in introducing at-risk high school students and the general public to
modern science. Dr. George Richter-Addo participates in a summer program
designed for inner city high school kids at high risk for failure in academic
programs. Dr. Michael Shaw produces on-line lecture videos suitable for
individuals with disabilities, thus representing an avenue of science outreach
to a traditionally hard-to-reach underrepresented
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heme proteins are involved in the nitric oxide (NO)
to nitrous oxide (N2O) conversion of relevance to global warming, and in the
inorganic-NOx to organo-NOx conversions of relevance to agricultural
N-assimilation and nitrosative stress. Both processes are important, but their
fundamental chemical pathways are not well understood, thus preventing further
development of the chemistry of these components of the global N-cycle. With
funding from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B Program of the
NSF Chemistry Division, the collaborative research team of Dr. George Richter-
Addo (University of Oklahoma) and Dr. Michael Shaw (Southern Illinois University
Edwardsville) is determining the factors that lead to chemical reactivity of the
bound NO ligand in synthetic porphyrin systems that model heme-containing
enzymes in bacteria and fungi involved in N2O and/or organo-NOx generation. The
collaborative team is determining the experimental conditions that favor
nucleophilic attack of the bound NO ligand in ferric-NO porphyrins and promote
N2O formation (via H-N bond formation; fungal N2O pathway) and organo-NOx
generation (via C-N/N-N/S-N bond formation). They are also determining the
requirements for activating the bound NO ligand in ferrous-NO porphyrins towards
N-N bond formation and N2O production (bacterial N2O pathway). The team utilizes
a combination of chemical synthesis, spectroscopy, and advanced
spectroelectrochemistry, complemented by density functional theory calculations
for this research. The collaborative team is active in introducing at-risk high
school students and the general public to modern science. In addition to
developing new educational materials at the freshman (introductory chemistry)
and graduate (electrochemistry) levels, the team actively participates in a
summer program designed for ethnically diverse and economically disadvantaged
inner-city high school children. The team also produces on-line lecture videos
in a rich multilayer flexible online environment suitable for individuals with
disabilities, thus representing an avenue of science outreach to a traditionally
hard-to-reach underrepresented group. The investigators also produce and curate
several freely available electrochemistry Labview software programs for general
worldwide use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.