* 1900646
* Geodetic Lysimetry: GPS/GNSS observations to measure continuous, time-dependent water mass in mountainous watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Rebecca Bendick, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 488,099.00

Every winter, water is stored in the mountains as snow. This snow feeds streams
and rivers as it melts. Measuring the amount of water stored and drained in the
mountains is very difficult, but it is important for predicting water available
to humans and the environment. Recently, scientists have observed that the
weight of the water collected during winter pushes the surface of the earth
down, and that the surface rebounds as the water drains out. Highly accurate,
Global Positioning Systems (GPS) measure these changes to the Earth's surface.
This project measures the up and down movement of the earth to estimate the
volume of water stored in the mountains. GPS stations are installed in the
mountains of Idaho and Montana to measure the up and down movement of the Earth.
Snow depth and water content are also measured. These data determine the best
methods for calculating the amount of water in the mountains. Approximately 100
undergraduate students are trained during immersive learning experiences in
summer classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In regions of substantial topographic
relief, the water loading and unloading is highly heterogeneous due to nonlinear
feedbacks among weather, landscape morphology, and water exchange among
terrestrial reservoirs. This project tests techniques for removing long
wavelength regional hydrologic load and downscales geodetic water loading to
10-100 km. A network of Global Positioning Systems (GPS) and weather stations
are installed across a watershed in northern Idaho and western Montana. High-
precision observations of the watershed hydrologic load using a combination of
field and remotely sensed measurements is used to constrain the local hydrologic
load independent of GPS measurements. The project tests the spatial and temporal
sensitivity of GPS observations, and investigates time constants for different
loading and unloading mechanisms including: snowpack dynamics, surface runoff,
shallow and deep groundwater flux, and evapotranspiration. The quantitative
methods produced here facilitate advances in the basic understanding of
watershed function as well as produce new tools for monitoring hydrologic
resources. Undergraduates are trained in field geophysics and data Integration
courses. This project is jointly funded by the Hydrologic Sciences, Geophysics,
and Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.