* 1900392
* Size Selective Macrocyclic Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Steven Diver, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 587,726.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis and Chemical Synthesis Programs of the
NSF Division of Chemistry are supporting the research of Professor Steven T.
Diver of the State University of New York at Buffalo. Professor Diver is
studying the development of new catalysts, the ways they react, and the use of
new methods for the synthesis of biologically-active compounds such as products
derived from nature (natural products). This project takes a new approach to
catalysis inspired by enzymes. In organic synthesis, catalysts are used to speed
up reactions and make new chemical transformations possible. In Nature, enzymes
are protein-based catalysts that orient their reactive groups in three-
dimensional space to facilitate a chemical reaction. Enzymes have great
specificity in the starting materials they bind with as they create a
microenvironment that recognizes and facilitates chemical reactions. In this
project, Dr. Diver is positioning a well-known metal binding group inside a
large, synthetic, molecular cavity. The cavity creates a unique chemical and
spatial environment for reactions catalyzed by the bound metal. The environment
surrounding the reactive metal center is being used to differentiate molecules
based on their size. This approach is providing a way to gain selectivity over
previously unselective chemical reactions. This project is educating scientists
in a diverse and intellectually-stimulating research environment. Professor
Diver is implementing a new teacher certification program designed to give new
Ph.D. graduates experience in teaching that will improve outcomes at small
colleges and community colleges, where quality teachers are needed. Additional
outreach efforts at the elementary level include developing scientific awareness
of molecules and their functions and uses in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
major challenge in organic synthesis is the ability to differentiate reactivity
between two of the same functional group. This award is addressing this problem
in the context of cross alkene metathesis and other reactions through the
development of new catalysts located inside macrocyclic cavities. The
orientation and metal binding is provided by an N-heterocyclic carbene ligand
(NHC), which is incorporated into the macrocycle. NHC ligands are highly
versatile and found in many different transition metal complexes, including
ruthenium (Ru) catalysts for alkene metathesis. Though a widely used and
important reaction, there are limitations in cross metathesis between two
alkenes that have similar reactivity. This project is utilizing size control,
possible with enzymes, to differentiate alkenes - a new approach to the problem
of selective cross alkene metathesis. The principle of size-selectivity is also
being applied to other metal-catalyzed reactions such as palladium-catalyzed
cross couplings, where size control can prevent side reactions. Cross coupling
and alkene metathesis are two of the most important reactions for synthesizing
new molecules such as medicinal compounds, molecular probes, natural products,
and materials. Ultimately, improvements in catalysis make advanced chemical
manufacturing cheaper, more predictable, and more efficient. In addition to
these scientific broader impacts, this project facilitates the recruitment of
students of diverse backgrounds, encourages science literacy in elementary
schoolers, and enables a chemistry-specific teacher training program designed to
improve preparedness and placement of new Ph.D graduates into college teaching
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.