* 1900358
* Fragment Embedding for Photochemical Electronic Structure Simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Troy Van Voorhis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2022
* USD 510,000.00

Professor Troy Van Voorhis of Massachusetts Institute of Technology is supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program
in the Division of Chemistry. At a microscopic level, chemical reactions
determine how long light emitting diodes (LEDs), solar cells, and batteries will
last. Recently it has become possible - and even routine - to make predictions
about useful lifetimes using computer simulations. These simulations complement
experiments by providing insight into properties that might difficult to measure
directly. This project considers the use of embedding computer methods that may
make it possible to simulate much larger systems with much higher accuracy than
ever before. The fundamental idea of embedding involves breaking a large system
up into many small, overlapping fragments that can then be stitched back
together to describe the whole. The Van Voorhis group uses these embedding tools
to study the photochemistry of molecules relevant to emerging organic light
emitting device (OLED) and solar cell technologies. Professor Van Voorhis is the
departmental coordinator of MIT ACCESS - a joint program between Chemistry,
Chemical Engineering and Materials Science that invites a select group of
underrepresented minority undergraduate students to visit MIT for a weekend
during the academic year. The primary aim is to encourage the students to
consider graduate school in chemistry. Professor Van Voorhis also empowers and
equips graduate students within his group to introduce K-12 students to the
beauty and power of science. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in
this award are encouraged to participate in the MIT chemistry "Magic Show" that
performs at local schools; the Research Communication Laboratory that trains
graduate students to communicate scientific concepts to K-12 students; MIT Women
in Chemistry's "Scientist for a Day" middle school camp; and the MIT museum's
"Science on Saturdays" program that targets children and families.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Van Voorhis group is developing transformative
electronic structure methods in which fragments are the fundamental building
blocks. The goal is to create new tools that are both faster and more accurate
than state-of-the-art approximations, facilitating chemical simulations that
were previously inaccessible. As a starting point, they develop a family of
fragment embedding theories based on the Bootstrap Embedding method. The key
realization is that wave function embedding allows one to combine overlapping
orbital fragments in a robust way. The resulting theory circumvents the scaling
challenges inherent in most wave function theories by only requiring
calculations on very small fragments, which are ultimately combined to obtain a
picture of the entire system. Improvements are accomplished by dressing these
embedding methods with dynamic correlation using the many pair expansion (MPE).
Finally, these techniques are extended to excited states using a novel strategy
that identifies such states as local minima of the energy variance. As a
signature application of these tools, the Van Voorhis Group studies the
energetics and dynamics of triplet excitons in molecules relevant to emerging
OLED and solar cell technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.