* 1900885
* Excellence in Research: Mechanistic Prediction of Soil Microbial Response to Temperature Change
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Steven Allison, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,118,709.00

Microbes in soils break down organic material and produce CO2, a major
greenhouse gas in the atmosphere responsible for global warming. In turn, rising
temperatures may increase the activity of these microbes, causing more CO2 to be
lost to the atmosphere. The so-called positive feedback is a daunting threat to
ecosystem sustainability and human society. However, responses of microbes in
soils are complex. Different microbial groups may respond differently to
temperature increase through changes in growth, composition and physiology.
There may also be genetic changes to these microbes, which may profoundly change
the impact of microbial activities. Genetic changes in response to temperature
increases have rarely been studied. In addition, soil organic carbon varies
substantially in how quickly it can be decomposed by microbes as temperatures
increase. Given this level of complexity, it is difficult to achieve accurate
predictions of soil response to temperature change. This research will design a
unique soil warming experiment to test hypotheses on microbial responses to
future environmental changes. Results will add substantially to knowledge on
carbon cycling and allow better forecasts of environmental changes. In addition,
this project will greatly increase research capacity at an institution serving
underrepresented minorities, with strong impacts on their training and retention
in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, it is hypothesized that
soil warming will cause consistently more CO2 loss to the atmosphere. This is
likely driven by greater microbial decomposition of recalcitrant carbon
compounds in soil organic matter (SOM), supported by elevated phenolic oxidase
activity and greater diversity in fungal laccase genes. To address this
hypothesis, a soil warming infrastructure will be established at Tennessee State
University (TSU) to collect high frequency data on soil respiration, SOM content
and quality, microbial community composition, extracellular enzyme activities,
and microbial genomic information for at least two years. It is further
hypothesized that thermal adaptation will result in decreased carbon use
efficiency (CUE) and accelerated biomass turnover (rB) of microbial communities
under warming. To address this hypothesis, the streams of data collected in the
experiment will be integrated with a microbial ecosystem model to estimate the
temperature sensitivities of CUE and rB. These efforts will improve the
mechanistic understanding of soil microbial community response to temperature
change. The project results should improve the representation of microbial
processes in Earth system models. By developing strong research collaborations
with the University of California Irvine (UCI), a leading institution in
microbial and ecological sciences, this project will enable underrepresented
minorities to participate in learning state-of-the-art modeling skills, and to
get hands-on experience in microbial and molecular analytical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.