* 1900509
* The Crotylation Way to Glycomimetics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* David Mootoo, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 05/31/2024
* USD 485,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor David Mootoo of Hunter College of The
City University of New York, on the synthesis and applications of carbohydrate
and carbohydrate-like molecules (termed glycomimetics). Carbohydrates are
involved in many biological functions including: tissue development,
intracellular signaling, immune responses, cell-cell communication, cancer,
metabolic disorders and pathogen infection. Understanding how carbohydrates are
made and how they react adds to fundamental knowledge in cellular and molecular
biology and provides insight across a variety of fields. In this context, there
is a growing demand to make specific and diverse glycomimetics and to study
their reactivities. While gycomimetics are desirable synthetic products, their
structures are difficult to make because of their complexity. To this end, this
research is developing robust methods for the synthesis of glycomimetics. This
program links real-life problems in biology to chemistry solutions, thereby
drawing students to the physical sciences and providing broad-based training for
STEM careers. Professor Mootoo leverages potential applications to human health,
the diverse 20,000-student body of Hunter College, and the unique cultural
environment in New York City, to attract underrepresented high school and
undergraduate students to STEM fields and the scientific workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthetic chemistry under investigation centers on the
reactions of carbohydrate-derived crotylating agents with aldehydes and imines.
While crotylating reagents are widely used in organic synthesis, carbohydrate
variants have not been as extensively explored because of the high intrinsic
reactivity of crotylating agents and the complexity and nuanced chemistry of
carbohydrates. These issues are being mitigated by recent advances in organic
synthesis and the expertise of Professor Mootoo in carbohydrate chemistry. A
toolbox of tin, boron and silicon based reagents is being assembled and used to
synthesize mimetics of biologically active glycosphingolipids and complex oligo-
mannosides. The broader scientific impacts of this research include a better
understanding of the immunological properties and anti-viral activities of these
materials, including their role in communicable diseases. Given the often
idiosyncratic reactivity of carbohydrates, this project is also unveiling unique
reactivity profiles that can inform innovative paradigms for complex molecule
synthesis. Finally, the research also provides excellent training for the
graduate students and undergraduates that will work on this project alongside
Professor Mootoo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.