* 1900212
* Excellence in Research: Modulation of Synaptic Neurotransmitter Levels by Auto-receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Harbinder Dhillon, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2024
* USD 547,378.00

Precise modulation of neurotransmitter levels is essential for apt functioning
of the nervous system. Dopamine is an important brain neurotransmitter that
plays a critical role in movement control across species, ranging from
microscopic invertebrates to larger mammals, including humans. The levels of
dopamine are regulated tightly and precisely through modulation of dopamine
release into the space between connected neurons as well as clearance of
dopamine from that space. The physiological mechanisms underlying the modulation
of synaptic dopamine remain unclear. Towards the goal of elucidating the
mechanism of dopamine modulation, the simple yet powerful C. elegans model with
a well-defined 302-neuron nervous system is used in this project to uncover the
in vivo function of dopamine auto-receptors, presynaptic receptors on dopamine-
releasing neurons. With only 8 dopaminergic neurons, the C. elegans model allows
dissection of dopaminergic signaling at a level not feasible in other, more
complex organisms. Given the similarities of the mammalian and C. elegans
dopaminergic systems at the cellular and molecular levels, results from this
work will inform understanding of the interactions between dopamine modulators
in the mammalian nervous system and thereby inform movement control more
generally. This research also provides valuable educational training in science
and technology for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students at Delaware
State University (DSU), a predominantly undergraduate institution that is a
Historically-Black College and University (HBCU). In addition to providing
advanced training to an under-represented population of students, this endeavor
helps strengthening the research environment at
DSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms of synaptic vesicular fusion and
neurotransmitter clearance are highly controlled processes whose finely-tuned
regulation is critical for functioning of the nervous system. Auto-receptors
have been suggested to regulate neuronal function by affecting neurotransmitter
synthesis, vesicular release and neurotransmitter clearance. While auto-
receptors for various neurotransmitters have been known for decades, the
mechanisms by which they act remain unclear. The overarching goal of this
project is to understand how neuronal function and behavior are regulated
through real-time precision in synaptic neurotransmitter levels in vivo. The
significance of dopamine is underscored by the fact that it critically
influences a wide range of behaviors with conserved cellular roles across
phylogeny. This research exploits the simple yet well-defined nervous system of
Caenorhabditis elegans with its powerful genetics of the model, combined with
its transparent body that allows imaging of individual dopaminergic synaptic
boutons in living animals. The hypothesis to be tested here is: dopamine auto-
receptors modulate neuronal activity through a negative feedback loop
controlling synaptic vesicle fusion, and they fine-tune their function via
cross-talk with other dopamine regulators such as the membrane dopamine
transporter . The experiments will test the behavioral and physiological
function of dopamine auto-receptors in vivo while visualizing individual
synapses in live animals with fluorescent resonance after photo-bleaching, an
approach not currently feasible in mammals. These studies will advance the field
in terms of establishing the modulatory effect of D2 auto-receptors on synaptic
dopamine, and test its functional interactions with other dopamine
modulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.