* 1900257
* Design of Catalysts for Cooperative Substrate Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Nathaniel Szymczak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Nathaniel Szymczak of the University of Michigan Ann Arbor is leading
a research project on the synthesis of new kinds of catalysts. The new catalysts
bind starting materials by "multipoint interactions". This new approach provides
a way to control chemical reactions and differs from traditional methods. The
project examines how catalyst structures affect the speed and selectivity of the
chemical reactions. One target reaction is the splitting of carbon-hydrogen
bonds. Another theme tests the insertion of carbon monoxide into metal-carbon
bonds. Both processes underpin the production of fuels, commodity chemicals, and
pharmaceuticals. Professor Szymczak is also developing a national outreach
program to engage students in aspects of scientific research and data
interpretation. To further raise scientific literacy among younger students, he
and his graduate and undergraduate students are engaging with students at local
events and schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical
Catalysis program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Nathaniel Szymczak of the
University of Michigan Ann Arbor is uncovering new strategies to make and break
chemical bonds to carbon in organic molecules. These reactions are central in
chemical synthesis, encompassing many industrial sectors, including
petrochemical, materials development, and pharmaceutical production. In this
project, Professor Szymczak is developing transition metal compounds that
contain multiple reactive sites in order to promote difficult chemical reactions
using widely available chemical feedstocks. This approach advances the basic
science needed to develop molecular catalysts for sustainable chemical
production by targeting strategies that promote highly specific chemical
reactions from cheap chemical precursors, applicable to many fields. The broader
impacts of this work include societal benefits from the discovery of low-energy
chemical conversion strategies that might ultimately be adapted to earth-
abundant metals. In addition, undergraduate and graduate students are undergoing
interdisciplinary scientific training to prepare them for careers in teaching,
in industrial chemistry, at a national lab, or in public policy. Professor
Szymczak is developing a nationwide meeting series across multiple institutional
levels to engage students in aspects of scientific research and data
interpretation. To further raise scientific literacy among younger students, he
and his graduate and undergraduate students are engaging with students at
numerous local events and schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.