* 1900638
* CNS Core: Large: Autonomy and Privacy with Open Federated Virtual Assistants
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* James Landay, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 3,000,000.00

Virtual assistants, and more generally linguistic user interfaces, will become
the norm for mobile and ubiquitous computing. This research aims to create the
best open virtual assistant designed to respect privacy. Instead of just simple
commands, virtual assistants will be able to perform complex tasks connecting
different Internet-of-Things devices and web services. Also, users may decide
who, what, when, and how their data are to be shared. By making the technology
open-source, this research helps create a competitive industry that offers a
great variety of innovative products, instead of closed platform monopolies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project unifies all the internet services and
"Internet of Things" (IoT) devices into an interoperable web, with an open,
crowdsourced, universal encyclopedia of public application interfaces called
Thingpedia. Resources in Thingpedia can be connected together using ThingTalk, a
high-level virtual assistant language. Another key contribution will be the
Linguistic User Interface Network (LUInet) that can understand how to operate
the world's digital interfaces in natural language. LUInet uses deep learning to
translate natural language into ThingTalk. Privacy with fine-grain access
control is provided through open-source federated virtual assistants.
Transparent third-party sharing is supported by keeping human-understandable
contracts and data transactions with a scalable blockchain technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to the creation of a
decentralized computing ecosystem that protects user privacy and promotes open
competition. Natural-language programming expands the utility of computing to
ordinary people, reducing the programming bottleneck. All the technologies
developed in this project will be made available as open source, supporting
further research and development by academia and industry. Thingpedia and the
ThingTalk dataset will be an important contribution to natural language
processing. The large-scale research program for college and high-school
students, with a focus on diverse students, broadens participation and teaches
technology, research, and the importance of privacy. All the information related
to this project, papers, data, code, and results, are available at
http://oval.cs.stanford.edu until at least 2026.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.