* 1900022
* Excellence in Research: Elucidating uptake mechanisms of silver/zinc oxide nanoparticles into food crops and transport through soil ecosystem
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Joel Burken, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,915.00

Nanotechnology is one of the most innovative advancements in modern science and
technology and promises to revolutionize a variety of industries including
agriculture. Novel nano-based fertilizers, pesticides, sensors and nutrient
delivery systems for agricultural applications have been rapidly increasing.
However, the underlying mechanisms governing their fate and risks are still
poorly understood. In an effort to address the bioavailability, fate, and risks
to food safety of agricultural nanoparticles, this project will utilize two food
crops and two commonly used nanoparticles in agriculture to study the
accumulation and transformation of nanoparticles in the plant-soil ecosystem.
Findings generated from the proposed research will address critical societal
concerns on the potential benefits, ecological impacts, and limitations of
nanotechnology for agricultural applications and significantly advance our
understanding of nanotechnology applications in agriculture. This multi-
disciplinary, multi-institution collaborative project will also enable Lincoln
University of Missouri, an 1890 land-grant and one of the nation's Historically
Black Colleges and Universities, to strengthen its science, technology,
engineering and mathematics education and research capacity. Through this
project, the investigator will train underrepresented and underserved students
for science, technology, engineering and math career leadership roles in
addressing complex, emerging environmental issues, contributing to a diverse
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology-enabled agrichemicals containing
metallic engineered nanoparticles such as silver and zinc oxide nanoparticles
are particularly popular for agricultural applications. It is critically
important to understand their environmental impacts, interactive mechanisms with
crops or microbial communities, and any synergistic/antagonistic effect with co-
occurring nanoparticles in the plant-soil ecosystem. This project will directly
contribute to advancing the scientific knowledge of nano behavior by addressing
several key questions in the nanotechnology-food safety nexus. Specific
objectives are to: 1) develop and validate single particle inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry method for nanoparticle detection and analysis in
various media; 2) elucidate the mechanisms for plant uptake and accumulation of
selected nanoparticles and their transformed products; 3) understand the role of
rhizosphere microbial community on plant-nanoparticle interactions; 4)
investigate the interactions of plants with co-occurring nanoparticles; and 5)
enhance the science, technology, engineering and mathematics education and
research capacity at an institution designated as a Historically Black College
and University. Two plant species: corn (Zea mays), a popular crop in the
Midwest, and lettuce (Lactuca sativa), a common salad vegetable, will be
selected as representative crop species. Corn is a monocot and lettuce a dicot;
therefore, the uptake mechanisms of nanoparticles may differ between the two
plants due to their different root structures. Silver nanoparticles have become
a common ingredient in a variety of agrichemicals due to their antimicrobial
property. Zinc is an essential micronutrient for plants, and zinc oxide
nanoparticles have also displayed some antimicrobial properties and been
explored as a novel fertilizer to reduce the zinc deficiency for agronomic
crops. The single particle inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry is a
cutting-edge, advanced technology used for nanoparticle analysis. This project
represents a multi-disciplinary research with integration of crop plants,
nanoparticles, and key experimental technologies. The novel methods and findings
from this study could be expanded to other nanoparticle-crop systems to advance
our knowledge on the impacts of nanotechnology on plant growth and food safety,
a critical challenge facing society. The insights obtained from the proposed
project will greatly contribute to the knowledge of nanotechnology applications
in agriculture by providing solid, scientific evidence on the fate and impacts
of nanoparticles in the plant-soil ecosystems. This multi-institution
collaborative project will also provide immense benefits to underrepresented and
underserved students and contribute to a diverse science, technology,
engineering and math workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.