* 1900664
* Developing a Noyce Teacher Education Community of Practice to Broaden Participation and Build Capacity of Minority-serving Institutions in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mercy Mugo, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 493,656.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
workshop hosted by the Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network aims to
serve the national need of increasing the diversity of the STEM teacher
workforce. Through this effort, the project will serve a long-term goal of
improving the representation of students of color in K-12 mathematics and
science coursework, undergraduate STEM majors, and the STEM workforce. Relative
to the composition of kindergarten through twelfth grade students in the United
States, the current teaching force lacks racial and gender diversity. Minority
Serving Institutions (MSIs) have the potential to produce significant numbers of
teachers from diverse backgrounds. Through Noyce support, MSIs have the
potential to offer incentives for STEM undergraduates to pursue K-12 teaching
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QEM Network will use organizational learning
to meet the following objectives in three phases: (1) Initiation Phase - Conduct
one webinar per year (over two years) targeting approximately 500 potential PIs
and administrators from 100 MSIs to discuss institutional and individual
readiness for preparing a competitive Noyce proposal and the social and civic
responsibility of MSIs to advance diversity in STEM teaching; (2) Engagement
Phase - Provide one workshop per year (over two years) for MSI faculty members
to connect Noyce proposal ideas to larger societal needs for diversity in STEM
teaching; and (3) Maintenance Phase - Provide ongoing tailored post-workshop
guidance focused on enhancing participants' ability to complete and submit
competitive Noyce proposals and reinforce societal needs for diversity in STEM
teaching. This project will assist with developing tools that help MSIs to
compete for the resources necessary to provide measurable resources to their
STEM education students, so that their students can become STEM teachers who
make important contributions to our nation. The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.