* 1900873
* CNS Core: Medium: Automated IoT Safety and Security Analysis and Synthesis
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Patrick McDaniel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,199,869.00

This project focuses on advancing a science that enables practitioners to
validate the safety of homes, workplaces, and public spaces that have been
augmented with digital devices such as sensors, smart-devices, and autonomous
infrastructure. Specifically, the objective of this research is the creation of
software analysis and verification techniques to evaluate the safety and
security of Internet of Things (IoT) programs and environments in a range of
domains. This project will study how to model IoT programming platforms to
validate safety, security and functional properties at scale as well as how to
create IoT-specific languages for secure-by-design IoT
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop systems that
extract models (called transition systems) from IoT source code and apply
scalable software verification techniques to provide proofs of correctness with
the desired properties. At the same time, this project furthers the creation of
IoT-specific languages to automatically generate IoT programs that preserve
functional, safety and security properties at run-time. This project will
develop tools and datasets, as well as evaluate the efficacy of verification and
generation techniques in diverse IoT domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected
results of this project are a set of online IoT analysis and synthesis tools and
a curriculum for IoT software safety and security analysis for the public and
technical communities. Such tools will enable the ongoing transition to smart
environments in ways that will be safer and more secure. This project will also
help foster the engagement of scientific and industrial communities in IoT
safety and security through the development of workshop, outreach and tutorial
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All software, data, papers, and tutorials will be
maintained on project website for the entirety of the project and maintained
thereafter as future work progresses. For public distribution, all development
and experimental artifacts for this project will be linked to the project
website (https://github.com/IoTBench/) and maintained over the project
duration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.