* 1900012
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Enhancing Mobile VR/AR User Experience: An Integrated Architecture-System Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Amer Qouneh, Western New England University
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) are now experiencing rapid
growth and debuting into mainstream markets driven by the significant
performance improvement of computing hardware and the revolution of graphics and
display technologies. Both VR and AR are increasingly adopted in smartphones for
providing rich experience to mobile users. However, the limited hardware
resources in mobile devices can barely support the tremendous resource
requirements by VR/AR technology and the demand for a good user experience.
There are several key challenges that dramatically degrade user experience when
enabling VR/AR apps on smartphones. For example, when the VR user shifts her/his
eyes slightly, the computer is unable to provide an image that corresponds to
the new view in a timely manner. This delay causes motion anomalies and
unsatisfying user experience. Other challenges for mobile VR/AR are limited
battery life and increased heat dissipation. The investigators on this project
are leveraging the unique features of VR/AR and exploring a synergetic
architecture-system program to tackle the above performance, battery life, and
thermal challenges, thus, enhancing mobile VR/AR user experience. This project
will open the door for next generation mobile platforms that provide high-
quality low-power VR/AR services to satisfy mobile users. This project will also
contribute to society through engaging under-represented groups, and outreach to
high-school students, curriculum development on Internet of Things, and
disseminating research infrastructure for education and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contains four objectives, including
(1) approximate computing to eliminate unnecessary workloads in mobile AR/VR to
achieve threefold benefits on performance, power, and thermal without
sacrificing the user perceived image quality and output accuracy; (2) emerging
technologies (e.g., processing-in-memory, multiple chip module (MCM)-GPU)
enabled mobile VR/AR for performance/power optimization; (3) exploiting dynamic
thermal energy harvesting to cool hotspots, prolong battery life and improve
performance; and (4) integration of the key research innovations and cross-
technology optimizations to maximize the performance/power/thermal
enhancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.