* 1900393
* Catalysis for sustainable aluminum-carbon bond formation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Aaron Sadow, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 485,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Aaron Sadow of Iowa State University is studying the novel
chemical reactivity of aluminum. This research supports the economy of the
United States since aluminum is widely available in North America and is of
value in many industries including the beverage, housing, and transportation
industries. Of particular interest are the many useful aluminum compounds with
bonds to carbon. Professor Sadow is developing new methods for making such
aluminum-carbon bonds. The specific goal is to generate these bonds with newly
designed catalysts that speed-up and guide the reactions to form desired
products. Aspects of the work are challenging because typical organoaluminum
compounds decompose upon contact with air and water. In addition to this
research project, Dr. Sadow is engaged in community outreach with the goal of
educating broad audiences about the challenges and opportunities of topical
issues, such as green chemistry. The principal venue is community radio
programming, which reaches both a local and national audience through a network
of websites and archived shows. Professor Sadow also participates in an on-going
seminar series on careers in chemistry, which introduces industrial and academic
chemists and other scientists to undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Aaron Sadow of Iowa
State University is studying the catalytic reactions of carbon-hydrogen (C-H)
bonds with aluminum compounds to efficiently synthesize alkynyl-, vinyl-, and
aryl-aluminum compounds. Reactions of aluminum alkyls with alkynes and alkenes
are unselective without a catalyst, giving mixtures resulting from metalation,
carboalumination, and hydroalumination, depending on the unsaturated reactant
and aluminum reagent. In addition, carboaluminum, rather than alumination, is
the typical pathway catalyzed by early transition metals. Instead, Dr. Sadow is
developing catalytic methods for alumination of alkynes involving substitution
of a C-H bond for C-Al bond. The catalytic, salt-waste-free synthesis allows the
new organoaluminum species to be used in two-step, one-pot reactions and takes
advantage of the polarized nucleophilic character of alkynylaluminums. Dr. Sadow
is also investigating the reaction mechanism through kinetics, for comparison
with carboalumination. Dr. Sadow is developing a community radio program that
broadly discusses the challenges and advances made by the chemistry community
toward sustainable enterprises. Additionally, he is organizing a lecture series
for Iowa State undergraduate students that highlights challenges and technical
advances in green chemistry and sustainability in academic and industrial
chemistry research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.