* 1900119
* Spectroscopic Signatures of Divalent Metal ion Binding to Anionic Surfactants and Local Mechanics of Embedded Groups in Two-Dimensional Water Networks Through Cryogenic Cluster
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mark Johnson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 404,704.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Mark A. Johnson of Yale
University is using advanced instrumentation to determine how large molecules
flex in response to the presence of calcium ions that are critical to biological
function. Although calcium is well known to be essential for the formation of
permanent structures like bone, it is also present in the blood (a liquid that
is basically salty water). Most of the salt is just dissolved NaCl, common table
salt, where the positive charge carrier is the sodium ion, Na+. Calcium has much
stronger interactions with molecules because it carries two positive charges
(Ca2+). Direct contacts with doubly charged (divalent) ions like Ca2+ control
how large molecules (like proteins) undergo chemical reactions, but it has been
difficult to identify exactly where these ions are attached to the proteins
using conventional methods of chemical analysis. Professor Johnson and his
research group are able to determine these contact points by measuring changes
in the oscillation frequencies of the molecules' chemical bonds. These
oscillation frequencies typically correspond to infrared (IR) radiation, the
same type of light used in night vision goggles. With IR lasers and other
specialized instruments, the changes in the oscillation frequencies of
biological molecules with and without Ca2+ ions binding to them can be detected.
These changes provide clues to where on the molecule the Ca2+ ion is attached.
The measurements are carried out with custom-built instruments, much of which
are actually built by the students involved in the project. Thus, in addition to
gaining knowledge about metal-ion interactions with large molecules in
biological systems, the students also receive training in instrument design and
construction, as well as in computer modeling of both the instruments and the
chemical systems. This research may have implications in human health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses recent advances in the combination of
mass spectrometry with laser spectroscopy to establish how the infrared
signatures of divalent metal ion binding to surfactants and peptides, observed
in solution, are generated at the molecular level. In this approach, ionic
assemblies are extracted from solution using electrospray ionization, captured
in a temperature controlled radiofrequency (FRF) ion trap, and characterized
with vibrational spectroscopy. The vibrational spectra are obtained in an action
mode by the photoinduced mass loss caused by the evaporation of weakly bound
adducts such as rare gas atoms or H2 molecules. Because these assemblies often
occur in multiple isomeric forms upon cooling, the spectrometer is equipped with
the ability to carry out isomer-specific spectroscopy using a two-color, IR-IR
photobleaching approach. This method isolates the spectra of different
structural isomers by systematically removing each of them from the ion ensemble
with a tunable IR laser, while monitoring changes across the spectrum with a
second IR laser. An important class of such isomers is that created when an
isotopically labeled water molecule is introduced into a cluster containing many
water molecules. Because chemical exchange of H and D atoms between water
molecules does not occur in small clusters, it is possible to isolate a single,
intact H2O molecule in a surrounding network consisting entirely of D2O
molecules. This situation provides an opportunity to monitor the spectral
response associated with the individual hydrogen bonding sites within an
extended water network. Part of this program is, therefore, directed at
elucidating fundamental aspects of water structure and dynamics, which are
important for understanding and predicting the behavior of water when it is in
contact with biological media such as enzymes and DNA. The broader impacts of
this research include the development of new types of instrumentation for
chemical analysis of complex media and the formulation of a "rule book" for
decoding the structural information contained in the vibrational bands of
anionic domains bound to divalent metal ions in aqueous solution. The students
involved in this project integrate a wide spectrum of skills including laser
development, electronics (digital, analogue, high voltage and RF), computer
control over complex experiments, electronic structure calculations,
construction and use of high vacuum apparatus, fundamental aspects of ion beam
and mass spectrometer design, cryogenics, and
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.