* 1900268
* Collaborative research: Weighted Estimates with Matrix Weights and Non-Homogeneous Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Alexander Volberg, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Calderon-Zygmund operators are objects that are largely responsible for our
understanding of a number of physical phenomena, from heat transfer to
turbulence. Recently, these operators have found application in big data
analysis. The classical theory was built by Alberto Calderon and Antoni Zygmund
in the early 1950s, and was intrinsically designed to work on smooth objects.
However, nature often puzzles us with very irregular medium. Thus, the need
arose for a very low regularity Calderon-Zygmund theory, which the three PIs
have, in fact, constructed. One possible application of such low regularity
theory is that by the action of Calderon-Zygmund operators on a set in a space
of a very high dimension, we can conclude that the set itself is nicely
structured and can be analyzed. This is a typical big data problem. Our other
recent observation is that well-studied problems for such an operator can be
dualized to provide new information for analysis on the hypercube - another
widely used model of big data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
consider the following problems, presented here in their simplest by
formulation: 1) Sharp end-point weak weighted estimates for the square function
operator in the homogeneous setting; 2) What goes wrong in the non-homogeneous
case; 3) Matrix A_2 problems for Calderon--Zygmund operators, the square
function operator, their sparse operators analogies and their sharp estimates;
4) How to get from end-point estimates of the square function to geometric
inequalities on the hypercube and in Gaussian space; 5) The David-Semmes problem
for co-dimension higher than one; 6) Harmonic measure estimates on sets of co-
dimension bigger than one; and 7) Estimates from below of singular Riesz
transforms by positive geometric quantities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.