* 1900647
* Design, Synthesis and Investigation of Substitution on Conformation Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Lu, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,949.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jennifer Lu at University of
California, Merced, is developing a new class of molecular switches that can be
triggered by low-energy stimuli. Inspired by long-lasting and precise changes in
the shapes of biomolecules, Professor Lu designs and synthesizes a set of unique
molecular structures and studies their changing structures. The
multidisciplinary nature of this project employs fundamental knowledge from
organic chemistry, physical chemistry and materials science and engineering, and
provides a learning environment that is conducive to training and inspiring
students at all levels. A key component of the education program involves
outreach to encourage high school students to pursue college education in STEM
fields. This research may help scientists understand the directional growth of a
plant in response to sunlight and how to harvest waste energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Lu and her research group develope polymers that
generate anomalously large thermal contractions (up to -2300 ppm/K). These
polymers contain a small amount of 1, 4, 7, 10 tetra-phenylamide substituted
s-dibenzocyclooctadiene (DBCOD), a flexible cyclooctane group fused to one rigid
phenyl ring at each end. The research group hypothesizes that this thermal
contraction stems from DBCOD's conformational up-conversion from the global
minimum to a local minimum. The relative energies of these two conformers and
the energy barriers of this conformational transition can be adjusted by the
local environment (e.g., substitution type and pattern). To acquire a
fundamental understanding of substituent effects on the thermodynamic and
kinetic aspects of the DBCOD conformational change, they conduct a
multidisciplinary investigation that involves computation-guided model system
synthesis and atomic and molecular scale characterizations. The goal of this
project is to establish substitution design rules that correlate specific
substituents to their effects on conformation properties. To connect atomic-
scale changes to macroscopic behavior and validate the design guideline, they
use the DBCOD derivative that favors the twist-boat conformation at lower
temperature and the chair conformation at higher temperature to make a linear
polymer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.