* 1900423
* RUI: Mesoscale Methods for Electrochemistry: Confronting the Complexity of Ion and Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Kevin Minbiole, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 347,653.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Ryan Jorn of Villanova
University is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models, and
Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry. Professor Jorn
develops methods to study the transport of electrons and ions at electrode
surfaces, with particular focus on the reactive interfaces present in
rechargeable batteries. While rechargeable batteries are essential to powering
personal electronics, they may also play a significant role in reducing carbon
emissions by powering cars. Several technical challenges to energy storage for
transportation remain, including loss of storage capacity over time and poor
rates of recharge. These challenges are intimately connected to the transport of
ions and electrons at the molecular level. Unfortunately, charge transport
mechanisms are poorly understood. Few experiments can access sufficiently small
length and time scales at the electrode surface. Most computer simulations are
also inadequate to describe the multiple length scales at work during battery
operation. Studying the behavior of electrons requires using quantum mechanics
to properly treat their wave-like nature. Such calculations, however, are only
feasible for a relatively small numbers of atoms. Accurately capturing the
evolution of the interface through which the electron travels requires
accounting for thousands of atoms for very long times. Professor Jorn's research
uses a multi-scale approach to study these problems. He and his coworkers
compute molecular forces from quantum mechanics. They then use these forces to
describe the classical motion of ions and molecules at the electrode surface.
His work at Villanova University relies heavily on the involvement of
undergraduate students who are trained on state-of-the-art simulation software
and high-performance computing platforms. Professor Jorn also uses his research
to introduce first generation and under-represented college students to
computational modeling through the Center for Access, Success, and Advancement
at Villanova University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular simulations
of electrochemical interfaces have previously relied on ab initio molecular
dynamics (AIMD) to study chemical reactions, and classical molecular dynamics
(CMD) to explore solvation phenomena. Regarding the former, limitations on the
time scales of simulation render description of transport phenomena intractable.
On the other hand, it is widely recognized that "off-the-shelf" force fields
used in CMD fail to accurately capture polarization effects and interface
structure. Professor Jorn's research addresses these deficiencies by employing a
force-matching approach that uses information from quantum AIMD simulations to
train classical molecular force fields. His research group explores how best to
build force fields at interfaces by exploring different functional forms for
intermolecular interactions and sampling high-energy configurations. In addition
to developing force fields for interfacial processes, Professor Jorn's work
includes developing enhanced sampling methods to describe the exchange of
species across the electrolyte/electrode interface. By using a unique
combination of replica exchange umbrella sampling and collective variables, his
approach allows for the study of single defect migration as well as correlated
mechanisms involving ion "knock-off". Regarding the motion of electrons,
Professor Jorn's work employs a Newns-Anderson Hamiltonian coupled with ensemble
scattering theory to describe the classical force on molecules during reduction.
In adding electron transfer to classical simulations, Professor Jorn is
developing a framework to study electrochemistry at a molecular
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.