* 1900881
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Arithmetic Geometry Methods in  Complexity and Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2019,08/31/2023
* J Maurice Rojas, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 308,005.00

Security and efficiency remain central problems in cryptology and communication.
Over the centuries, cryptography has advanced, from ad hoc secret codes that can
be broken by hand, to methods based on number theory which remain secure even
against adversaries using super-computers. As algorithms from number theory have
advanced, our codes for protecting data have also progressed in efficiency: NASA
regularly transmits clear pictures of terrain on faraway planets, using error-
correcting codes that cut through the noise of solar flares, cell phones, and
radio transmissions. As our communication methods have evolved, we are naturally
led to deep mathematical problems which must be solved before we can make
further progress. Some of these problems are also deeply connected to central
questions in complexity theory and new advances in
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will focus on advanced
techniques toward tackling central problems in circuit complexity and pseudo-
randomness. In particular, they will apply recent advances in arithmetic
geometry to the construction of new pseudo-random generators and new complexity
lower bounds. One technique the investigators will pursue is their recent
discovery of an efficient method to count solutions of polynomial equations over
finite rings. This technique will help analyze a new family of pseudo-random
generators with potentially better unpredictability than earlier constructions
based on discrete logarithms and factoring. The research team will also use
techniques from real and p-adic geometry to study the number of integer
solutions to structured polynomials. The latter problem is one of the few recent
methods with the potential to yield new lower bounds for circuit complexity and
a better understanding of the P vs. NP question. In addition to this algorithmic
research, the investigators will train graduate students, and use all work from
this project to develop new content for courses and outreach programs for
younger students. The investigators are committed to broadening the
participation of under-represented groups in computing and ensuring new talent
from all sources is available for future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.