* 1900191
* Collaborative Research: Fracture and Healing of Elastomers: An Experimental and Theoretical Investigation at High Spatiotemporal Resolution
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Krishnaswamy Ravi-Chandar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 329,999.00

The phenomena of how fractures begin (nucleate) and grow (propagate) in
elastomers and other soft organic solids have long occupied the interest of
numerous investigators across different disciplines. While initial progress has
been made in the basic qualitative understanding of both, there is a lack of a
quantitative and unified understanding that bridges the two phenomena. In this
context, this award supports a research collaboration on the theoretical and
experimental analysis of how fracture nucleates, propagates, and possibly self-
heals in elastomers subjected to arbitrarily large deformations. In addition to
addressing a fundamental scientific question that has remained open for decades,
the knowledge sought by this research is essential for the advancement of a
broad range of technologies and medical prognoses. For instance, the results
from this project will provide direct insight into: the failure of tires, the
design of stronger adhesives, the rupture of aneurisms, the design of cartilage,
modeling of wound healing, etc. Additionally, this project will train two
graduate students for careers in academia or industry and will integrate
research results in the undergraduate and graduate curricula at the University
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign and the University of Texas at Austin. The PIs will
also carry out activities to promote interest in high school students to pursue
higher education and careers in STEM programs, especially in the field of
mechanics, through the creation of lesson modules and laboratory
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is two-
fold: i) to carry out experiments at high spatiotemporal resolution that produce
quantitative measurements concerning internal fracture nucleation and
propagation, as well as healing, in three elastomers of practical significance,
and ii) to construct and numerically implement a continuum theory that, with
direct guidance from the experiments, describes, explains, and predicts the
nucleation and propagation of fracture, and healing in elastomers undergoing
arbitrarily large viscoelastic deformations. The experimental component entails
the development of new experiments that will leverage the use of optical
microscopy and high-speed imaging in order to capture and measure the evolution
of the various underlying processes at an unprecedented spatiotemporal
resolution of 1 micron and 200 microseconds. On the other hand, the theoretical
component involves a novel mathematical formulation, and associated numerical
implementation, that views fracture and healing in a unified manner as a phase
transition and that allows, by design, for the accounting of the various
underlying mechanisms (storage of energy by elastic deformation and dissipation
of energy by viscous deformation and the creation of new surfaces) in a clear,
natural, and theoretically consistent manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.