* 1900570
* Collaborative Research: Coupled Proton/Electron Transfer Reactions of Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Russell Schmehl, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2022
* USD 301,817.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B
Program, Professors Russell Schmehl of the Department of Chemistry at Tulane
University and Jared Paul of the Villanova University Chemistry Department are
developing new transition metal complexes that serve as light absorbers capable
of transferring both protons and electrons to other molecules. The metal
complexes under study are important as model systems which may help improve the
efficiency of solar energy converters (solar cells). The project is of direct
significance to the design of solar fuels such as water oxidation to oxygen,
water reduction to hydrogen and carbon dioxide reduction to hydrogenated
products. The investigators are committed to educating the public on issues
relating energy and the environment. As a part of this work, Dr. Paul is
establishing a Villanova center for understanding and communicating issues
relating to energy and the environment and has developed an undergraduate course
on sustainability. Tulane has regular science cafes on topics related to energy.
Both investigators are committed to bringing energy-related science topics to
children, particularly middle school aged students. The research will involve
long-term projects at the Ph.D. level at Tulane as well as undergraduate and
master's level research at both universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a
collaborative venture between Villanova University and Tulane University,
chemists plan to examine optically-triggered proton transfer, electron transfer,
and proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) between the excited states of a
series of transition metal complexes of copper(I), ruthenium(II) and osmium(II)
having one hydroxylated bipyridine (or phenanthroline) ligand and a variety of
electron and/or proton acceptors. The ability to independently examine the free
energy dependence of the kinetics of each of these reactions provides motivation
for the research. Since the reactions are initiated by pulsed laser excitation,
it is possible to track the temporal evolution of the processes and distinguish
true PCET from reactions in which, perhaps, electron transfer precedes proton
transfer. Preliminary work has illustrated that the optical spectra differ for
the complex, the singly deprotonated complex and the oxidized and deprotonated
species in a series of ruthenium(II) hydroxybipyridine complexes. Nanosecond
pulsed laser transient absorption spectroscopy can be used to clearly
distinguish systems that exhibit solely proton or solely electron transfer from
others exhibiting electron transfer followed by proton transfer and those that
react by coupled proton and electron transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.