* 1900606
* Writing Data Stories: Integrating Computational Data Investigations into the Middle School Science Classroom
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2019,06/30/2024
* William Finzer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,369,845.00

As a result of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, the STEM+C program addresses an urgent need for real-world,
interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of students from the early
grades through high school (preK-12). Preparing today's students to work with
data fluently is critical to ensuring a scientifically literate and empowered
citizenry. But most efforts to incorporate data analysis into the K-12
curriculum are limited to short, isolated activities; basic skills development;
or, are introduced as new courses devoted specifically to data and computing,
limiting both the potential benefits and the audience for such efforts. This
project seeks to integrate computational data analysis into the middle school
science curriculum in a longitudinal, interdisciplinary way - drawing from the
computer and data sciences, literacy studies, statistics, and science education
to saturate the classroom with relevant tools, resources, and support. Middle
school classrooms will analyze and draw conclusions about publicly available
scientific datasets using a free, innovative, computational data analysis
platform called the Common Online Data Analysis Platform (CODAP). Units will be
designed specifically with Dual Language Learners (DLL) in mind, inviting
students to share their investigations by writing multimodal texts that blend
both familiar and academic modes of expression to explain and contextualize
their data analysis processes. Units that build on one another in difficulty and
complexity will be introduced throughout the academic year, and participating
teachers will receive significant training opportunities. Overall the project is
anticipated to directly impact approximately 2,500 students and 20 teachers in
the greater San Francisco Bay area, from predominantly high needs
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a research context to
address the following questions: How do students learn, over time, to use
computational tools to structure, calculate, filter, and transform data for
scientific inquiry? What patterns of engagement in scientific practices are
supported by the integration of computational data analysis and visualizations
into the science curriculum? And, what new literacy practices might support DLL
and learners with limited access to technology or who are still developing
academic literacy in constructing oral and written arguments and explanations
using data and visualizations as evidence? Specifically, it brings together and
seeks to extend three complementary research constructs. Data moves are the
computational actions analysts take to transform and analyze datasets. Syncretic
texts are specialized texts that blend academic discourse, such as the formulae
and statistical language needed to explain data analysis, with the familiar
modes of expression (including home languages and alternative forms of
expression such as video, art, animation, etc.), which has been found to invite
a wide range of marginalized students to experiment with and develop academic
language. Finally, a community of learners approach allows different student
groups in a classroom to conduct and share the results of different
investigations with the same dataset, making the exploration of large and
complex data more feasible in everyday classrooms. Analyses will make use of
video, CODAP log data, students' written texts, and pre-post assessments to
investigate learning and participation longitudinally over the course of an
entire academic year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.