* 1900157
* H-Principle and Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Camillo De Lellis, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 09/30/2019
* USD 70,956.00

Fluid dynamics is the branch of physics that studies the motion of fluids, that
are liquids and gases, and it uses sophisticated mathematics to describe the
motions, make useful predictions and find efficient ways to solve practical
problems in science and engineering. While much of the theory behind such
descriptions are rooted in the physics of the nineteenth century, due to the
complexity of the mathematical objects involved in them many aspects are still
poorly understood. Two problems are of primary interest in this research
project. (1) In theory the mathematical models should determine the future
evolution of the fluid when the forces acting on it and its initial status are
known; nonetheless a rigorous mathematical proof of this expectation is missing
for the simplest and most popular models. In layman terms the reason is that we
do not understand "how and why" fluid motions which are apparently "smooth and
calm" evolve into "chaotic and turbulent" ones. (2) Even if we expect the
complete predictability of the models, nonetheless the computations are often so
complex that become practically impossible. For this reason scientists have
developed statistical descriptions of the motions, which allow to infer their
typical behavior without resorting to heavy computations. The rigorous
justification of these statistical descriptions from the primary mathematical
models describing the motions is still a big challenge of modern
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is concerned with some of the most
popular systems of partial differential equations used in the mathematics of
fluid dynamics, the Euler and Navier-Stokes equations. The three main themes of
the project are the following. (A) The convergence of solutions of the Navier-
Stokes equations to the Euler equations when the viscosity of the fluid goes to
zero. A primary concern is a tenet of the theory of turbulence that the rate of
energy dissipation is, for fluid motions of a fixed macroscopic scale,
independent of the viscosity. The recent resolution of a well-known conjecture
of Lars Onsager on the energy dissipation for low regularity solutions of Euler
could pave the way to a mathematical proof of the existence of such anomalous
dissipation. (B) Regularity and singularity of the solutions. One of the
celebrated Millennium prize problems asks whether smooth solutions of the
Navier-Stokes equations develop singularities in finite time. The Navier-Stokes
equations can be "embedded" in a one-parameter family of models where the
parameter describes the regularizing strength of the viscous term. While some of
the known results concerning the Navier-Stokes equations have been extended to
the latter family, there is still quite a few which lack a suitable counterpart.
(C) Rigidity and flexibility of the isometric embeddings of Riemannian
manifolds. The recent resolution of the Onsager conjecture mentioned at point
(A) is based on the discovery of the project leader and Laszlo Szekelyhidi Jr.
of unexpected connections with a classical problem in Riemannian geometry,
solved by John Nash in the fifties. The counterpart of the Onsager conjecture in
the geometric framework is however not yet fully
solved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.