* 1900077
* RUI:  Morphology and Crystalline Orientation of Particles in Al65Cu20Fe15 Alloy Prepared by Arc Melting
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Chunfei Li, PENNSYLVANIA WESTERN UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 305,097.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystalline and amorphous structures
stand in two extremes in term of atomic configuration in solids. In a
crystalline structure, atoms are arranged according to predefined rules while in
amorphous structures atoms are packed in random fashion. Quasicrystalline
structure can be considered as a state between the two. Materials of crystalline
and amorphous structures, represented by gold and window glass, respectively,
have been known to mankind for thousands of years. In contrast, materials of
quasicrystalline structure were recently discovered in 1980's, and many aspects
remain to be studied. An aluminum-copper-iron alloy of Al65Cu20Fe15 composition
is one of the most studied alloys related to quasicrystalline phase. This alloy,
when it is prepared by arc melting, is porous, consisting of multiple voids with
particles of different morphologies on the surface. Despite previous extensive
studies, there are many different opinions about the make-up and formation
processes of these particles, probably because no previous studies have placed
focus on them. Further, a primary study of these particles by the present
principal investigator has revealed new details that deserve further
investigation. This project will carry out a detailed study on these particles.
In addition to scientific contribution, the project has significant impact on
the education at Clarion University, a rural teaching college. First, it enables
the principal investigator to stay active in research field and to integrate
latest developments into teaching. Second, it gives students a rare opportunity
to experience or observe authentic scientific research, strengthening their
confidence in pursuing careers in science and technology. Annually, the project
will reach students in the following ways: eight undergraduate students will
work on the project either as paid research assistants or as volunteers; two
local high school students will be given opportunity to work on the project for
a week in summer; approximately 100 undergraduate students will be exposed to
the project through introduction in course teaching; and interested students
from one neighboring high school will be invited to campus to learn about the
project from principal investigator and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six
important problems related to the morphology and crystal orientation of
particles on the surface of the voids of as-prepared Al65Cu20Fe15 alloy have
been identified, which have either not been reported previously or have not been
well understood. For example, there is strong evidence indicating that one type
of particle consists of multiple phases, in contrast to previous single phase
assumption. There are experimental results that lead to a speculation about the
orientation relationship between quasicrystalline thin film and crystalline
substrate, which needs to be confirmed and investigated further. These problems
will be clarified experimentally by using a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)
equipped with Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) and Electron
Backscattering Diffraction (EBSD), to be carried out at the principal
investigator's home institute. The studies will be supplemented by theoretical
analysis and Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) examinations to be performed
in collaboration with other institutes. Because of the clear and unique focus,
this project will generate sufficient data to fill in the missing details and to
clarify conflicting reports about the microstructure of this well-known alloy,
thus establishing a reliable and consistent model about the phase formation
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.