* 1900095
* Decoding the Infrared Spectra of High Frequency Molecular Vibrations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Edwin Sibert, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Molecules can be detected and identified by how they vibrate. Their vibrations
typically occur at frequencies corresponding to infrared light. Thus, by
observing how molecules absorb different wavelengths of infrared light (the
laboratory technique is called vibrational spectroscopy), we can tell something
about their structure and properties. However, as molecules become large (in
other words “polyatomic”, meaning many atoms), or if a small molecule is
surrounded by other molecules (for example, an alcohol molecule dissolved in
water), their vibrations become very complicated and difficult to interpret. In
this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Edwin Sibert of the University of Wisconsin-
Madison is extending current theoretical models in order to enhance our ability
to extract structural information from the vibrations of polyatomic molecules
and molecules dissolved in liquids. This research is expected to enhance our
ability to interpret get a detailed picture of a molecule’s structure and its
interaction with other molecules in its environment. The models developed in
this research also have implications for understanding complex biochemical
processes as well as the practical design of molecules for a variety of
applications, including pharmaceuticals and fuels. Finally, the Sibert research
group is also developing electronic learning resources for the undergraduate
chemistry program at UW Madison. Professor Silbert is involved in the design of
electronic resources for students. These resources extend from helping students
understand the forces at play in solvation phenomena to educating them about the
significant contributions of chemistry to our
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid phase infrared spectra of the CH, NH and OH
stretch regions often lack the spectral resolution required to interrogate how
the motions of nuclei evolve upon molecular excitation. The analogous molecular
motions sampled in cold clusters are governed by similar forces, yet, due to the
limited cluster size and cold temperatures, the experimental spectra of these
high frequency vibrations have sufficiently narrow line shapes that spectral
features are revealed. The aim of this project is to provide the theoretical
tools that are required for interpreting these features in order to both reveal
the underlying dynamics and extract structural and environmental information.
The limited size of these clusters also allows for the rigorous testing of the
theoretical models. This testing includes quantifying the quality of the
techniques used to determine the underlying force fields. Designing drugs and
predicting outcomes of combustion reactions depend on chemists’ ability to
determine such force fields in order to calculate the relative stabilities of
various chemical species and understand how environment affects those
stabilities. The broader impact of this project includes generating open source
computer software to enable scientists to measure and understand these
stabilities as well as to provide a training ground for students in this
research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.