* 1900366
* GOALI: D3SC: New Ligands and Understanding from Pharmaceutical Compound Libraries
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Daniel Weix, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 485,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Daniel Weix at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison and Dr. Eric Hansen at Pfizer to explore new methods to find
better catalysts for chemical reactions. Metal-catalyzed reactions are the key
to improving the stewardship of the U.S.'s vast petrochemical resources and to
discovering innovative, new medicines. Existing technology is based around
scarce metals, such as palladium and rhodium, but recent developments with more
earth-abundant metals, such as nickel, copper, and iron, show great promise.
Unfortunately, there are currently few catalysts based around these more
environmentally friendly and less expensive metals. This industrial-academic
partnership is discovering new catalysts by mining an untapped resource,
pharmaceutical compound libraries. Using these libraries of knowledge, the team
is mining data to find new catalysts and to gather information on what
properties make a good catalyst. Analysis of the collected data by researchers
at Pfizer and UW-Madison, with the assistance of Professor Matthew Sigman at the
University of Utah, guides the prediction of new catalysts and catalyst
selection. The newly discovered catalysts are being made available to
researchers through a partnership with Millipore-Sigma. This combination of
experimental and computational training is preparing students to advance the use
of data science in chemistry, an area that is rapidly growing in importance.
This training includes students who are currently underrepresented in chemistry
through partnerships with existing and new UW-Madison programs: the Chemistry
Opportunities Program, Partners for Graduate School Experience in Chemistry, and
the American Chemical Society BRIDGE to the Doctorate
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UW-Madison team, led by Professor Weix, and
the Pfizer team, led by Dr. Hansen, are systematically searching the very large
Pfizer compound library for new ligands using an iterative experimental and
computational approach inspired by fragment-based drug discovery. The goals of
this collaboration are to discover new privileged ligands and to develop broadly
applicable parameters and models. Diverse potential ligands sourced from the
compound library are being screened against known reactions with different metal
and ligand requirements to find new ligand core structures. These core
structures are then being optimized using conventional methods. The data
gathered is analyzed, in collaboration with Professor Sigman, to provide an
understanding of which properties (if any) are universal for useful ligands and
to predict improved ligands. The impacts of this this research program extend to
the development of new ligands and versatile ligand precursors that are
immediately made commercially available from Millipore-Sigma. The research may
also result in better parameters and models that are useful for constructing a
more diverse array of ligand types. The large data sets are helpful for
developing new computational approaches made available through data
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.