* 1900188
* Spatio-Temporal and Site-Specific Chemical Dynamics at Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Steven Sibener, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 664,292.00

Chemical reactions at surfaces are everywhere, from the corrosion of metals to
the fabrication of computer chips. However, compared with studying reactions in
gases and solutions, chemical reactions at surfaces present unique challenges.
The reactivity, for example, can depend on how fast reactant molecules collide
with the surface, as well as the direction of approach. To complicate matters,
surfaces are structurally imperfect at the atomic level and are littered with
defects, including missing atoms, islands, and steps, each of which can react
differently. Moreover, once the reaction occurs, it can shift nearby atoms
around, changing the surface structure. With support from the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism A program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Steven J. Sibener at The University of Chicago is studying chemical
reactions between highly reactive reagents such as oxygen and hydrogen atoms, as
well as other energetic species, with metal and semiconductor surfaces. Working
with his students, Professor Sibener directs atomic and molecular beams with
known speed and direction at either bare surfaces, or surfaces decorated with
molecules. The team then uses powerful microscopies capable of resolving
individual atoms to monitor the reactivity at different sites, as well as how
the surface structure changes in response to the reaction. Their discoveries
could have broad implications for advanced materials fabrication, nanoscience,
electronic materials, heterogeneous catalysis, combustion, and the design of
protective coatings. The research team also participates in community outreach
at local schools and museums to introduce the residents of Chicago's south-side
to scientific issues that are essential for understanding our modern
technological world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program uses a combination of
supersonic molecular beams, in situ scanning tunneling/atomic force microscopy,
and surface spectroscopies to examine the site-specific chemical reactivity of
clean and molecule decorated surfaces. Reactive scattering measurements are
carried out with concurrent in situ atomic-level imaging. This program opens a
direct path to understanding, with atomic resolution, spatio-temporal
correlations in interfacial reactivity. It has focus on forefront issues in
surface chemical dynamics that include adiabatic and non-adiabatic gas-surface
interactions, atomically-resolved reactivity under non-equilibrium conditions,
thin film growth and passivation, and geometry-constrained reaction studies with
precise steric control over incident collision conditions. Such assessment of
molecular reactivity as a function of known molecular orientation and local
adsorption site is revealing remarkably detailed information on molecular
reactivity and reaction potential energy surfaces suitable for quantitative
comparison with theory and simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.