* 1900384
* Geometric and Electronic Structure Contributions to Bond-breaking and Bond-making Reactions of Mid-valent Manganese-Oxygen Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Timothy Jackson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

In many organisms, important chemical reactions, such as defense against toxic
free radicals and the biosynthesis of DNA, are performed by enzymes that require
the metal manganese. A thorough understanding of the functions of these enzymes
requires knowledge of intermediates formed during the chemical reactions. At
present, scientists have a limited understanding of how the enzyme creates an
environment around the manganese center to control the reactivity of particular
intermediates. In this project, Professor Timothy Jackson of the University of
Kansas is using synthetic chemistry to make models of these enzyme
intermediates, with the goal of understanding how particular variations to the
manganese environment control chemical reactivity. The identification of
principles of reactivity for these systems are required to allow scientists to
both better understand the function of the manganese enzymes and to use these
enzymes as inspiration to develop synthetic counterparts. Professor Jackson is
also actively engaged in developing public poster projects for a General
Chemistry course that serve a dual purpose of displaying student learning and
increasing public scientific literacy. This project also offers unique,
professional training activities by having graduate and undergraduate students
participate in joint academic-industrial meetings and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics, and Mechanisms B program, Professor Timothy Jackson of the University
of Kansas is elucidating foundational principles governing the bond-breaking and
bond-making reactions of MnIII-hydroxo and MnIII-alkylperoxo complexes. These
complexes mimic intermediates proposed in the mechanisms of various manganese-
dependent enzymes, including manganese superoxide dismutase and manganese
lipoxygenase. X-ray diffraction, X-ray absorption, electronic absorption, and
magnetic circular dichroism methods are combined with electronic structure
computations to define structural and electronic properties of MnIII-hydroxo and
MnIII-alkylperoxo adducts and determine how the physical properties of these
complexes are modulated by Lewis acids, hydrogen-bonds, and/ or variations in
supporting ligands. The combined experimental and computational approach is
employed to develop new structure-reactivity relationships for these manganese-
oxygen intermediates of biological relevance. Professor Jackson is actively
engaged in combining STEM education and outreach by increasing public scientific
literacy through the incorporation of STEM outreach projects in a General
Chemistry course, in support of the broader impacts of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.