* 1900984
* Research Initiation Award Grant: Study of Satellite Radio Resource Management by Differential Game Models
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Wei Wan, Claflin University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 237,599.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Claflin University has potential broader impacts in a number of areas.
The goal of this project is to study optimal control strategy in satellite
communication system to allocate power among competing user terminals, who share
a frequency-selective interference channel, and would be competing for limited
radio resources; as well as to enhance teaching and learning at the university
by involving undergraduate students in mathematical modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differential game (DG) models will be used to solve for
optimal control strategies, because of special features of the system -
competitive and dynamical. The major components of this dynamic game are as
follows: In a frequency-selective Gaussian interference channel model, there are
K transmitters and K receivers in the system. Each transmitter and receiver pair
will be viewed as a user or a player. The whole frequency band is divided into N
frequency bins. In frequency bin f, player k allocates power in a pattern of
some function, which is referred to as player k's control. With this control, if
treating interference as noise, the data rate player k can achieve at time t is
a function of time. Player k's objective is to maximize the data gain in a
specific period of time interval, which is an integration of the data rate
function over this time interval. The dynamics of the system is the rate of
change of channel gain, which is a function of controls and noises. Thus, all
players are combined in a same dynamic system, using their controls to realize
their own data needs. Under the assumption of nonexistence of collaboration
between players, a non-cooperative differential game model will be constructed
to solve for optimal power allocation strategy for each player. Furthermore,
cooperative and hierarchical competition models will also be studied for
different types of competition. Mathematical analysis will be conducted to
analyze the optimality condition of DG models. Numerical methods will be
developed to solve models. The broader impacts of the project will be to
directly supply satellite communication controllers with a power allocation
strategy design, and to generalize solution methods developed for solving DG
models and improve applicability of differential game models. This project will
be conducted in collaboration with the Institute for Mathematics and its
Applications at the University of Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.