* 1900911
* CIF: Medium: Delay, Reliability, Rate Tradeoffs in Wireless Broadcast Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Daniela Tuninetti, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,439,805.00

Greater demands are being placed on our wireless networks: not only must they
support a growing number of voice and data applications where data rate is of
prime importance, but wireless networks are also increasingly being used in
delay- and reliability-sensitive technologies including tele-medicine, tele-
conferencing, interactive-gaming, and sending delay-sensitive control
information for spectrum sharing, real-time energy management, and autonomous
vehicles. However, arbitrarily high data rates, low delays and high
reliabilities cannot be achieved simultaneously over noisy and time-varying
wireless channels. This research will seek to characterize, in a technology-
agnostic manner, the fundamental (Delay, Reliability, Rate) tradeoffs in
communications over the last-hop of wireless networks, where one base-station
wishes to communicate independent messages to many users. The results will
provide fundamental performance benchmarks and algorithmic prototypes for
industries working towards these ambitious goals. The project also seeks to
broaden participation through activities designed to increase enrollment and
engagement of students from under-represented groups in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The (Delay, Reliability, Rate) tradeoffs will be
characterized from information and communication theoretic perspectives. From an
information theoretic perspective, the capacity region has long been the central
focus, characterizing the number of messages that can be reliably (with
vanishingly small probability of error) be communicated to the users
simultaneously as the number of channel uses (and hence delay) tends to
infinity. Such metrics ignore latency constraints present in practical systems.
This research aims to characterize the set of messages that can be communicated
to each user in a broadcast setting when the delay is finite and one tolerates
some error. Transmission schemes must be carefully re-thought to incorporate
these latency and reliability constraints, in particular when the channels to
the users change over time as in a wireless channel. The information theoretic
study will be complemented by more practically motivated communication theoretic
(Delay Reliability, Rate) tradeoffs for the tractable multi-layer erasure
channel (that extends simple erasure channels studied in the communications and
networking communities) and then the practically relevant Gaussian fading
broadcast channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.