* 1900015
* Localization and Diffusion in Open and Many Body Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Jeffrey Schenker, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The main focus of this project is the study of the effects of disorder on
quantum systems. In a broader context, the work draws inspiration from the basic
scientific question: "What are the effects of disorder?" This is a fundamental
question relevant to any scientific model, even one in which disorder is not
explicitly included. After all, any real world system is subject to a small
amount of noise, and experience shows that even weak disorder may have a
profound effect on the behavior of the system. The equations studied in this
project arise in the theory of disordered materials, but are of general interest
because of the fundamental nature of both wave motion and disorder. Progress in
understanding the solutions to these equations will improve basic understanding
of models of theoretical physics and applied mathematics. In addition, a central
goal of the research is pedagogical: to introduce students to a fundamental
subject and convey to them that mathematical and theoretical physics are
vibrant, growing fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will proceed through
a program of research on the effects of disorder in physical models. The main
focus of the research is in understanding the evolution of quantum systems
subject to intrinsic disorder. When disorder is weak, the expectation is that a
diffusive evolution of the wave function results. At stronger disorder, it is
known that localization of the wave function can occur, although the exact
nature of localization in many body and open quantum systems is poorly
understood. Two key goals are 1) to analyze the diffusion of waves in a weakly
disordered medium over arbitrarily long times, and 2) to clarify the nature of
localization in many body models. In recent years the PI and various post-doc
and student collaborators have considered the problem of wave diffusion in time-
dependent random media, with the time dependence generated by a Markov process.
For such models the diffusive propagation, e.g., for the tight binding
Schrodinger equation, can be established by spectral analysis. One aim of the
present project is to approach the time independent equation as a perturbation
of these time dependent equations, which have the virtue of sharing the expected
qualitative behavior. In parallel, we will study disorder induced localization
in polaron type models of a interacting systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.