* 1900567
* Molecular Mechanisms of CO2 Signal Transduction in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Wouter-Jan Rappel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,265,184.00

Plant leaves have thousands of microscopic adjustable pores in their leaf
surface, called stomata. These stomatal pores in the surface of leaves open and
close to regulate the necessary uptake of carbon dioxide into plants from the
air. However, these stomatal pores also are the main pathway by which plants
lose water, by evaporation. A typical plant loses 200 to 500 water molecules
through these stomatal pores for every carbon atom that is absorbed
(assimilated) by the plant for growth. The opening and closing of stomata is
regulated by signals that include the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) in
the air. The concentration of CO2 in the air is now 50% higher and rising,
compared to only 150 years ago, meaning that plants could theoretically more
efficiently take up CO2 from the air, while losing less water. However,
important mechanisms and genes that mediate this agronomically relevant CO2
response of stomatal pore aperture regulation remain unknown. This project will
characterize newly found key genes and proteins and define cellular networks
through which elevated carbon dioxide controls the closing of stomatal pores and
how low CO2 controls the opening of stomatal pores. This research can develop
the knowledge necessary for the breeding of plants with improved growth
properties and enhanced water use efficiency. The ability to manipulate the
response of stomatal pores to carbon dioxide is important for unfavorable
weather conditions, agricultural ground water depletion and droughts that are
becoming more frequent in several of the major agricultural regions in the US as
well as globally. The scientists will pursue an outreach program with research
internships, professional preparation and mentoring with the public Preuss
School for disadvantaged high school students in San Diego County, as well as
training and professional preparation of visiting underrepresented summer
research interns with UC San Diego's ENLACE program and with Howard University.
Project personnel will be active within community outreach work that brings
science and innovation close to the public and the investigators will
participate in a recently launched outreach program through presentations and
discussions with underrepresented students at inner city high schools in San
Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a combination of cell
biological, biochemical, molecular genetic, mathematical modeling, genomic and
systems biological approaches to identify new critical molecular components of
the CO2 signaling network and characterize how this network operates to regulate
stomatal pore apertures. The focus of this project is to identify how the CO2
stimulus is transmitted into the stomatal movement network, with these goals:
(1) Biochemical mechanisms and network principles will be determined by which
newly identified genes and the encoded proteins mediate early CO2 sensing and
signal transduction. (2) New hypotheses will be investigated on how cell-to-cell
signaling in leaves affects CO2 control of stomatal movements by combined
computational modeling, genetics, metabolomics and molecular cell biology. (3)
Newly isolated "chill" mutants that have cooler leaf temperatures and are
defective in the dynamic CO2 response of grass stomata will be mapped and the
underlying gene and protein of at least one rate-limiting gene will be isolated
and its functions in stomatal movements of the specialized dumbbell-shaped guard
cells of grasses will be determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.