* 1900045
* Reactions of Interfacial Electrons Initiated by Collisions of Sodium Atoms with Water Microjets in Vacuum
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Gilbert Nathanson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2024
* USD 497,000.00

Many aspects of our natural world and industrial society rely on reactions that
occur in water. Probably the most reactive species in water is the electron
itself, surrounded by water molecules. It is called the "solvated electron" and
it has a fleeting existence, lasting only 1/1000 of a second in water. During
this short time, a solvated electron buried deep inside water can react with
molecules of all types, reaching 1600 recorded reactions so far. Much less is
known about solvated electrons at the surface of water, where it might be even
more reactive. With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Gilbert Nathanson of the
University of Wisconsin-Madison is exploring reactions of solvated electrons to
learn how its bulk and surface reactivity differ. Working with his students,
Professor Nathanson scatters a beam of sodium atoms off a narrow jet of water to
create the solvated electron, which then reacts with organic molecules at the
water surface. The group's discoveries could provide unusual routes to destroy
toxic waste that floats water surfaces, resulting in important societal
benefits. The project is also training graduate and undergraduate students to
become creative, critical, and independent scientists. Outreach efforts at local
science festivals, elementary schools, and senior centers stimulate excitement
and curiosity through hands-on surface chemistry experiments for all
ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a powerful nucleophile and reductant, the solvated
electron often breaks bonds and creates reactive free radicals at near
diffusion-limited rates. This research is directed at investigating how solvated
electrons react at the water-vacuum interface using gas-liquid scattering
experiments coupled with water microjets and mass spectroscopy. Among the
uniquely interfacial routes that are being explored are the escape of reaction
intermediates into the gas phase and reactions of solvated electrons with
functional groups on oriented surfactant molecules. Interfacial solvated
electrons are generated by collisions of sodium atoms with a water microjet.
These atoms ionize within the first few monolayers, where they react with
surface-active molecules. As one example, organic ammonium cations composed of a
benzyl group and three alkyl chains form monolayers at the surface of water.
Solvated electrons can break the benzyl-nitrogen bond, releasing the benzyl
radical and neutral amine into the interfacial region. This reaction is
monitored by evaporation of the radical and amine as a function of surfactant
packing, alkyl chain length, and counterion identity to learn how solvated
electrons react in the abruptly changing surfactant-water environment. These
studies reveal the competition for surface and bulk reaction sites as solvated
electrons are released sodium atom ionization within or below the surfactant
layer. Parallel studies are exploring a negatively charged monolayer of benzoate
anions and a monolayer of the alkylated amino acid cysteine, a zwitterion that
releases hydrogen sulfide following solvated electron
attack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.