* 1900060
* Main Group Catalysts for Activation Chemistries
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Alexander Radosevich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Alexander Radosevich of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology who is studying a new class of catalysts
based on lightweight, inexpensive, and abundant nonmetal elements. Catalysis
plays a central role in the scalable, economical, and sustainable synthesis of
chemicals, including fuels, drugs, and materials. The development of new
catalysts based on inexpensive and earth-abundant elements underpins emerging
reaction chemistries and advances society's goals for sustainability. In this
project, Dr. Radosevich and his students are creating new phosphorus-containing
compounds that react with simple and naturally occurring compounds such as
alcohols and ammonia. The specific reactions being pursued in this research
include schemes to remove oxygen from alcohols and electrochemically oxidize
ammonia, both of which may contribute to the renewable production of chemicals
and the conversion of energy, respectively. Graduate and undergraduate
researchers working with Dr. Radosevich are receiving training in a broad set of
spectroscopic, physical, and synthetic chemistry techniques. Achieving these
training objectives contributes to a vital workforce that underpins the economic
competitiveness of US chemistry-based industries. Dr. Radosevich and his
research group participate in a number of outreach efforts advancing the goal of
broad participation in science. Dr. Radosevich's laboratory is also host to
numerous visiting international researchers at all levels of experience,
contributing to ongoing US leadership in international scientific
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Radosevich is pursuing the experimental
physical, thermodynamic, and mechanistic foundations for the development of a
broad new class of redox active nonmetal catalysts based on phosphorus. This
work centers on the proposition that enforcing nontrigonal geometries on
tricoordinate phosphorus compounds will yield the structural and electronic
conditions necessary to support catalytic reactivity initiated by O-H and N-H
activation. The experiments establish new main group-based approaches to alcohol
deoxygenation and ammonia oxidation at nontrigonal tricoordinate phosphorus.
Specific areas being addressed include delineating the role and magnitude of
substituent effects on the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)-lowest
unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) electronic structure of nontrigonal
tricoordinate phosphorus compounds and establishing trends in experimental bond
enthalpies for pentacoordinate alkoxyphosphoranes through bond cleavage to open-
shell tetracoordinate phosphoniumyls. The research also develops elementary
reaction chemistry at nontrigonal tricoordinate phosphorus catalysts supporting
a new N-N bond forming reaction pursuant to N-H activation. Together, these
studies are providing a detailed, experimental quantification of the impact of
nontrigonal distortion on electronic structure in tricoordinate phosphorus that
are enabling p-block redox catalysis for a range of small molecule conversion
reactions. Apart from the scientific objectives, this project supports the
technical training and development of undergraduate and graduate students,
facilitating the maintenance of a well-trained domestic chemical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.