* 1900847
* RI: Medium: End-to-end Computational Sensing
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Federico Capasso, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Animals see in many different ways. This is especially true in invertebrates and
small reptiles, where evolution has produced vision systems that are
particularly small, specialized, and efficient. Mimicking this specialized
efficiency requires what engineers call "computational sensors," meaning sensors
whose optics and algorithms work synergistically to improve accuracy while
reducing sensor size and power requirements. This project will explore the
creation of a new generation of visual sensors that use metasurfaces for their
optics. Metasurfaces are ultrathin translucent sheets patterned with nanoscale
structures that are tailored to interact with light in specific ways. In
addition to being smaller and lighter than conventional optics, they allow
unprecedented control of light's various properties, including phase, spectrum,
and polarization. The project will create mathematical tools and software tools
that allow engineers to create new visual sensors using metasurfaces. It will
also use these tools to create prototypes of small visual sensors that mimick
the depth-sensing capabilities of jumping spiders, which are remarkably small
and efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will increase the variety of
optics that can be considered during sensor design. It will also enable new
optics to be learned automatically instead of having to be manually designed.
Both of these will follow from the unified consideration of optics and
computation, which this project will accomplish by treating metasurfaces as
optical processing layers that precede the usual computational layers of a feed-
forward network. The project will create mathematical tools that allow
metasurface shapes to be optimized by back-propagation, in conjunction with
optimizing the parameters and hyper-parameters of post-capture computations. At
the systems level, the project will produce prototypes of passive snapshot depth
sensors and snapshot RGBD sensors that are very small and power efficient. These
sensors will use thin, millimeter-diameter metasurfaces and minimal amounts of
post-capture computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.