* 1900177
* Excellence in Research: Co-axial Flow Mixing and Control using Ultra-High Frequency Actuators
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* John Solomon, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 573,538.00

Innovative fuel-air mixing technologies are essential to the continual
advancement of faster and more reliable aircrafts for both national defense and
air transportation. This project will focus on a novel fuel injection scheme to
enhance and control mixing of a fluid (fuel) with a fast moving air. The
proposed scheme consists of two co-axial nozzles: a central nozzle surrounded by
an annular one, through which air and fluid are injected simultaneously. While
the fluid is supplied through the annular nozzle in a steady stream, the central
nozzle injects air in a pulsed manner to enhance mixing. The innovative concept
for the proposed injection system is in its ability to pulse the central air jet
at very high frequencies (20,000-30,000 pulses per second). It is anticipated
that the fluid (fuel) and the high frequency pulsed air will be mixed more
effectively in this manner. To investigate this, an experimental fluid mechanics
research lab will be equipped with new capabilities utilizing the state-of-the-
art, advanced laser-based flow diagnostics that are required for this study. The
project will also use educational plans that have been developed based upon
established learning theories to provide more effective research experience to
underrepresented students in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major goals of
this project include design, development, and characterization through
fundamental studies of an active co-flow injection system for enhanced fuel-air
mixing at high speeds. The proposed system consists of a supersonic actuation
air jet at the inner core that provides large mean and fluctuating velocity
profiles in the shear layer of a steadily-injected annular fluid, where the
fluctuations occur at a designated and controllable ultra-high frequency. It is
expected that the mixing of air with the co-flowing fluid can be improved and
controlled using resulting stream-wise vortices that are tailored to the mean
flow in this manner. The specific tasks include quantitative characterization of
mixing through measurement of seed particle density distribution using planar
laser-induced florescence (PLIF) and velocity and vorticity field measurement
using particle image velocimetry (PIV). Using these data, the diffusive mixing
characteristics of the system (e.g., the timescales of evolution, interfacial
area generation and mixing efficiency) will be studied and correlated to the
relevant non-dimensional parameters involved. Specific educational activities
include targeted infusion of advanced topics useful in research to an
undergraduate level fluid mechanics course which provides additional support,
and access to students whose pre-college situations may otherwise preclude
success in engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.