* 1900078
* Quantitative Studies of Chiral Induced Spin Selectivity in Amino Acids and Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* David Waldeck, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2023
* USD 452,986.00

Electrons are one of the basic particles that make up atoms and molecules. Two
key features of an electron are its negative charge and its spin (the electron
spins about an axis, like a spinning top). For a long time, scientists have
known that an electron's motion through molecules depends on how it's charge is
attracted to the positively-charged nuclei and repelled by the other electrons.
It was recently discovered that the direction of an electron's spin could alter
the ability of an electron to move through a chiral molecule, in a process
called spin-filtering. A molecule is chiral when it's mirror images cannot be
superimposed on one another; Our right and left hands are examples of chiral
objects. The recent finding that the electron's spin can also affect its motion,
particularly when interacting with a chiral molecule, opens new possibilities in
chemistry. In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanism-A program of the Chemistry Division, Professor David Waldeck of the
University of Pittsburgh and his students are using electrical and
electrochemical methods to correlate the spin filtering properties of chiral
molecules with their molecular structures. Their discoveries could have
important implications for controlling chirality in chemical reactions, which
could benefit the development of new pharmaceuticals and the creation of better
catalysts for advanced manufacturing. Students working on this project benefit
from collaborative and multidisciplinary activities with other scientists in
Pittsburgh and Israel. Professor Waldeck is also building a network of middle
school and high school science teachers to promote interest and learning in
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The chiral induced spin selectivity (CISS) effect
challenges the conventional wisdom about the magnitude of spin-orbit coupling in
organic molecules and raises interesting implications for the role of chirality
in electron transfer processes. While numerous experiments demonstrate CISS for
a range of molecules, the need exists to perform quantitative measurements of
the phenomenon and correlate it with other molecular properties. The
experimental studies explore the spin-filtering that arises from CISS. Hall
probe measurements are used to quantify the magnetization that arises from films
comprising chiral molecules, both with and without chiral secondary structure.
The researchers also measure spin polarization and compare it with intrinsic
molecular properties, such as their chiro-optical response and their
polarizabilities. Electrochemical measurements are used to quantify the spin
filtering in electrochemical charge transfer reactions through chiral molecules
and compared it with Hall probe studies on the same molecules. Given that spin
can be an important constraint for chemical transformations and many
biomolecules are chiral, the CISS effect could have important implications in
both chemistry and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.