* 1900491
* RUI: Switchable Molecules and Materials Through Coordination of Verdazyl Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* David Brook, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2024
* USD 310,000.00

In this Research at Undergraduate Institution (RUI) project funded by the
Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor David Brook of the Department of Chemistry at San Jose State
University is studying a series of transition metal-containing molecules and
materials with switchable magnetic structures. By switching between different
magnetic states as a result of external influences such as temperature, light
and electrical potential, these molecules and materials may have applications as
sensors, and in information storage and molecular computing. High school
students, undergraduate students, and master's level graduate students will play
a role in the research. They will gain broad experience in experimental
chemistry, from organic and inorganic synthesis to the use of numerous
analytical techniques including spectroscopy, mass spectrometry,
electrochemistry, magnetochemistry, and X-ray crystallography. Students will
participate in national and international research collaborations and will have
the opportunity to make measurements at major user facilities in the US and
Spain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition metal and f-block element coordination
compounds of verdazyl radical ligands have the potential to form molecules with
labile electronic structures (i.e. the molecule can switch between electronic
states that differ in magnetic or other properties). The research involves the
exploration and exploitation of this unusual property with several goals in
mind. The first goals it o understand the factors in the metal-ligand
interaction that give rise to electronic lability, while the second goals is to
electronically couple labile ions with conducting counterions to form new
materials with novel magnetoresistive behavior. The team will study verdazyl
complexes of f block elements (both lanthanides and actinides) in order to
develop new single molecule magnets and using principles of self assembly to
synthesize and study extended clusters of electronically labile metal centers,
exploring the interactions between neighboring metal
ions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.