* 1900542
* FET: Medium: Collaborative Research: An Efficient Framework for the Stochastic Verification of Computation and Communication Systems Using Emerging Technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Hao Zheng, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 304,955.00

Synthetic biology and nanotechnology place increasing demands on design
methodologies to ensure dependable and robust operation. Consisting of noisy and
unreliable components, these complex systems have large and often infinite state
spaces that include extremely rare error states. Stochastic model checking
techniques have demonstrated significant potential in quantitatively analyzing
such system models under extremely low probability. Unfortunately, they
generally require enumerating the model's state space, which is computationally
intractable or impossible. Therefore, addressing these design challenges in
emerging technologies requires enhancing the applicability of stochastic model
checking. Motivated by this problem, this project investigates an automated
stochastic verification framework that integrates approximate stochastic model
checking and counterexample-guided rare-event simulation to improve the analysis
accuracy and efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on verifying infinite-state continuous-time Markov chain models with rare-event
properties. It addresses the scalability problem by first applying property-
guided and on-the-fly state truncation techniques to prune unlikely states to
obtain finite state representations that are amenable to stochastic model
checking. In the case of false or indeterminate verification results, stochastic
counterexamples are generated and utilized to improve the accuracy of the state
reductions. Furthermore, it mines these critical counterexamples as automated
guidance to improve the quality and efficiency for rare-event stochastic
simulations. This verification framework will be integrated within existing
state-of-the-art stochastic model checking tools, and benchmarked on a wide
range of real-world case studies in synthetic biology and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.