* 1900348
* Active Learning Modules to Support Problem-Based Learning: Effects on Engineering Retention and Academic Outcomes of At-Risk Students
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Jeremy Ernst, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2021
* USD 474,798.00

In response to the Nation's need to improve the preparation of undergraduate
students so they can succeed as productive members of the future STEM workforce,
this project expands and explores an instructional approach that has shown
promising results in increasing the success of undergraduate engineering
students in an introductory course - engineering design graphics. The
overarching purpose of the project is to refine a transferable active learning
framework and the associated instructional resources to promote engineering
persistence, academic success, and engagement. Such an instructional approach is
critical and has strong implications for student persistence in engineering
degree programs. The impacts of this project will include: (a) promoting the
design and development of effective STEM learning and teaching knowledge and
practice; (b) broadening the implementation of effective instructional practices
and innovations; (c) enhancing retention of STEM students by addressing high
failure rates in introductory classes; and (d) increasing the persistence of all
demographic groups in the first two years of college.

More specifically, the project's approach will involve the use of active
performance learning modules. The investigative team will explore the factors
that affect program persistence in order to create a curricular approach that
will improve the student experience, particularly for at-risk students, such as
female students, underrepresented minorities, and first-generation college
students. The instructional approach of this project will be disseminated to
other two- and four-year institutions and will include recommendations for
identifying at-risk students and for improving student engagement and retention.
A mixed-methods design will enable the investigative team to collect and analyze
information from students related to: program persistence, self-efficacy,
academic success, and engagement. The project will have implications not only
for effectiveness of student learning, but also for the retention of students in
engineering.