* 1900626
* Predicting chiral crystallization
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Michael Gruenwald, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2023
* USD 446,285.00

Michael Gruenwald at the University of Utah is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) Program in the
Chemistry Division to perform theoretical and computational research on the
crystallization of chiral molecules. Objects are called chiral if they cannot be
superimposed with their mirror images -- just like the left and right hands of
humans. Many molecules such as amino acids (in DNA) and sugars that are
important for the functions of the human body are chiral. They exist in right-
handed and left-handed pairs, called enantiomers. Notably, when it comes to
medicine, only one enantiomer is wanted in many drug applications. Often one
chiral form is beneficial and the other may have no activity or may be harmful.
Laboratory syntheses of drugs frequently result only in mixtures, and it is
difficult and costly to separate enantiomers. For a small fraction of drug
molecules, crystallization can be used to produce solids from solution that
contain only one of the enantiomers. Crystallization, when it works, separates
entantiomers cheaply and efficiently. The Gruenwald research group is exploring
separations that use crystallization to understand how they are guided by such
aspects as molecular shape and interaction forces. Computational models are
being developed to help predict when crystallization to form pure enantiomers
will happen; This understanding has great potential value for drug development
and other chemical syntheses. The models at the heart of this work are used in
extensive educational outreach to introduce chemical principles to young
students. An educational workshop is being created that leverages the strong
visual connections between chiral molecules, their crystal structures, and
artwork by M.C. Escher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research supported by this award
aims to understand why racemic or other mixtures of chiral molecules in solution
spontaneously form enantiopure crystals. Molecular models and computational
methods are being developed to reveal the driving forces and guiding principles
for the formation of both enantiopure and racemic crystals. Computationally
efficient models are used to consider a broad range of molecular shapes and
interactions within molecular dynamics computer simulations, including specific
methods of trajectory sampling as well as coarse-graining. Large data sets of
computational crystallization experiments are created, and models will be
characterized according to their propensity to form enantiopure or racemic
crystals. Of particular interest is the development of computational methods
that can enumerate all low-energy crystal structures of these models and thus
determine the thermodynamic landscape for chiral crystallization. By determining
distributions of small molecular clusters, fundamental differences in the
nucleation dynamics of enantiopure and racemic crystals can be identified.
Statistical models are being developed that allow one to predict the likelihood
of enantiopure crystallization from knowledge of racemic and enantiopure crystal
structures. One ultimate aim is to inform computational screening procedures to
pre-determine the likelihood of a racemic mixture to separate and thus to allow
the rational synthetic modification of molecules to enhance the separation.
Another is for the molecular models and methods of crystal structure enumeration
developed here to be useful for future studies of the self-assembly of chiral
and non-chiral building blocks on different length scales, including proteins
and inorganic nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.