* 1900040
* 2019 Graduate Student Combinatorics Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* George Wang, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 02/29/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The 2019 Graduate Student Combinatorics Conference will be jointly hosted by
Drexel University and the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia from April
5-7, 2019. This is a conference hosted by graduate students for graduate
students organized at various universities across the country since 2005. The
goal of this event is to provide students in combinatorics valuable conference
experience. For many participants this conference serves as an excellent
opportunity to start giving research talks, and for all participants it serves
as a chance to meet fellow students and future collaborators. In addition to
contributed talks by student participants the conference includes invited
speakers who are leading experts in various areas of combinatorics.

This year's invited speakers are Sami Assaf, Jozsef Balogh, and Robin Pemantle.
Assaf is a an expert in algebraic combinatorics, and also serves as a role model
for young women in mathematics. Balogh is an authority in probabilistic
combinatorics and its applications to (hyper)graph theory. Pemantle is well-
known for his extensive work at the crossroads of discrete probability and
combinatorics. More information can be found on the conference website at:
https://sites.google.com/view/gscc2019/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.