* 1900621
* HBCU-Excellence in Research: Dynamics of Orographic Effects on Major Wildfires that Occurred in the Southwest United States under Diverse Mesoscale Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Michael Kaplan, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 620,253.00

Major wildfires are a growing natural hazard, posing a devastating threat to
life and property. The 2018 wildfire season was the deadliest and most
destructive wildfire season on record in California, having led to over 100
fatalities and caused more than $3.5 billion in damages. There is a great
deficit in our understanding of how fundamental atmospheric processes and their
interactions with complex terrain and fire heat can produce a rapid spread of
wildfire over downslope regions of complex terrain, such as those in the
southwest U.S. As a result, it remains challenging to forecast, even a few hours
in advance, the gusty, extremely dry wind surges responsible for rapid fire
spread over downslope regions. New findings from the project could be used to
improve the representations of the atmospheric environmental conditions for fire
weather forecasts by the U.S. Forest Service (USFS) and the National Weather
Service. Improved fire weather forecasts have the potential to increase public
safety and reduce loss of life and property. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
results derived from this project will enhance the contents of graduate and
undergraduate courses. The project will educate and train graduate and
undergraduate students at North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NCAT), one of
very few Historically Black Colleges and Universities conducting atmospheric
science research. In addition, NCAT investigators plan to visit and present
results to high-school teachers and students to broaden their Earth and
environmental science knowledge as well as to recruit students into meteorology.
A research and education network will be built up among the NCAT, Embry-Riddle
Aeronautical University, USFS, and Argonne National Laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the research project, four historic and devastating
wildfires that occurred in northern, central and southern California and central
Arizona, as well as several significant fire events observed under real-world
settings (major scientific field experiments), will be studied extensively. The
research approach will involve simulating the complex interactions among the
atmosphere, terrain, and the fire itself with state-of-art convection-permitting
mesoscale computer models. For the field experiment case studies, very high-
resolution sensors will provide observational data on the fire-atmosphere
interactions for comparison with the model simulations. These simulation and
observational techniques will enable the research team to diagnose how weather
systems interact with the terrain and produce very gusty winds that in turn
create a favorable environment for wildfire spread in communities on the edge of
major developed regions of the southwestern U.S. The computer models allow the
fire and winds to interact and will enable the study of atmospheric motions that
contribute to the intensification and spread of these devastating wildfires.
This will lead to better predictions of fire intensity and motion in future
wildfire events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.