* 1900035
* Bonding and Reactivity in Low-Valent Dinickel Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Joseph Sadighi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2023
* USD 453,365.00

Bonding and Reactivity in Low-Valent Dinickel Complexes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
remarkable property of nickel compounds is their ability to break strong
chemical bonds. Indeed, some proteins contain nickel centers that react with
carbon dioxide, which has very strong bonds. Catalysts based on nickel are
widely used in energy-related chemistry. The research project led by Professor
Joseph P. Sadighi at the Georgia Institute of Technology builds on these themes
of strong bonds and energy-relevance. The project focuses on pairs of nickel
atoms. The nickel atoms are linked in pairs using bridging atoms or bridging
groups. The linkers that are explored in this work include hydrogen, nonmetallic
elements, or another metal. The project examines bridging centers that are
weakly bonded to each nickel center. These unusually weak bonds should make the
complexes sufficiently stable to be isolated, yet unstable enough to be highly
reactive. A deeper understanding of these compounds is providing insights into
the design of catalysts for breaking strong bonds. The graduate and
undergraduate researchers who carry out this research are introduced to concepts
of bonding and reactivity, and to an array of synthetic and spectroscopic
techniques. The group also participates in a Georgia Tech program to recruit
high school students from demographics underrepresented in science. The students
are introduced to research through a summer and then through the academic year.
This training prepares students to contribute to the future of science in the
United States as teachers, or as researchers in academic, industrial, or
government laboratories. The PI has extensive contacts with currently serving or
recently transitioned veterans, and provides advice and encouragement to those
returning to full-time study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nickel has been the subject
of remarkable recent advances in metal-element bonding, and in bond-breaking and
bond-forming reactions that enable catalysis. This research presents
architectures derived from the interaction of two nickel(0) centers with a Lewis
acid to form a bridging ligand. When the Lewis acid is a proton, this
interaction creates a rare linear hydride bridge; The [Ni---H---Ni]+ core is
held together by a three-center, four-electron bond, analogous to that in the
bifluoride ion. One aim is the synthesis of a series of related hydride-bridged
dinickel complexes, enabling an assessment of the hydridic character of the
bridging hydrogen, and a detailed study of the complex's reactivity toward the
C-CN bonds of nitriles. Another aim explores the formation of bridges derived
from Lewis-acidic main group species such as carbocations, boranes, alanes, or
organometallic fragments. Finally, the insertion of copper(I) or gold(I) cations
between the nickel centers would afford heterometallic systems with a single net
bond across three metal centers. The hypothesis underpinning these aims is that
the [Ni---E---Ni] ensembles are sufficiently stable for isolation or
characterization, yet display reactivity distinct from that of mononickel
complexes [Ni-E], nickel alone, or the bridging element alone. Students who work
on this project learn concepts of bonding and chemical synthesis. They acquire
technical skills in the preparation of air-sensitive complexes. They are trained
in analysis using modern instrumentation. These researchers include graduate
students, undergraduates, and high school students. The program identifies
underrepresented minority students interested in scientific research. This
training prepares students for technical careers in education, research, and
industry. In another form of outreach, Professor Sadighi advises fellow veterans
on their return to full-time study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.