* 1900235
* Atomically Dispersed Metal Catalysts for Electrochemical Hydrogen Evolution
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Shaowei Chen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2023
* USD 526,329.00

Professor Shaowei Chen of the University of California-Santa Cruz is supported
by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry to investigate
the use of individual metal atoms embedded within a carbon matrix as a new
catalytic material for the industrially important hydrogen evolution reaction.
Embedding metal on the atomic scale represents full utilization of the catalytic
material and affords maximal interactions with the supporting carbon substrate.
This provides an option for deliberate manipulation of the electronic properties
of the metal atoms and hence the electrocatalytic activity of the catalyst. The
hydrogen evolution reaction is a critical process in water electrolysis for the
generation of hydrogen, a clean and sustainable energy source. Platinum-based
nanoparticles have been used extensively as the catalysts of choice for this
reaction. Yet the high costs and limited natural reserves of platinum have
greatly hampered the wide-spread application of such electrochemical
technologies. Thus, it is of both fundamental and technological significance to
develop viable alternative electrocatalysts that are of low-cost and high-
performance. The project offers an opportunity for students to be trained in an
interdisciplinary research environment in renewable energy research. Project-
related educational material is integrated with several outreach activities
geared towards broadening participation of women, undergraduate and high school
students in scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to develop effective strategies for the preparation of high-performance
single atom catalysts (SACs) for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in
alkaline media. HER is a critical process in electrochemical water splitting to
generate hydrogen, a clean and sustainable energy source. The project is
primarily motivated by a recent breakthrough in the laboratory of the principle
investigator, where ruthenium single atom catalysts embedded within nitrogen-
doped carbon are found to even outperform platinum in alkaline HER. To further
enhance the electrocatalytic activity, the proposed research will focus on the
following tasks: (i) maximization of Ruthenium SAC concentration by thermal
engineering of the catalysts; (ii) preparation of SACs with other metals, such
as Iridium, Rhodium, and Palladium; and (iii) preparation of bimetallic SACs
with the initial focus on Ruthenium and Gold. A suite of analytical surface
techniques is used to characterize the catalytic materials. Theoretical modeling
and simulations based on density functional theory calculations with structural
models relevant to experimental data are carried out in parallel so as to
unravel the atomic sites that are responsible for the HER electrocatalytic
activity and aid in catalyst design, structural engineering, and ultimately,
catalyst optimization. It is anticipated that the project outcome may facilitate
the rational design and engineering of effective SACs that rival commercial
platinum/carbon catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.