* 1900866
* CNS Core: Medium: Towards Logically Centralized Interdomain Routing Control
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Lixin Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Interdomain routing is the top-level protocol that holds the entire Internet
together. Fundamental improvements to its robustness, security, and
manageability will benefit anyone who relies on the Internet today. The Border
Gateway Protocol (BGP), the Internet's standard inter-provider routing protocol,
has been widely recognized as suffering from a number of fundamental problems
including intermittent routing unavailability; security problems; management
headaches; and most importantly difficulty evolving to meet these challenges.
This project seeks to address such long-standing problems by offloading BGP's
work to the cloud by enabling 'interdomain routing as a service', a radically
different approach compared to today's practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to develop an interdomain routing infrastructure that is
capable of incorporating de facto interdomain routing capabilities as well as
enhancements proposed by researchers or practitioners to address BGP's long-
standing problems. The proposed approach is a logically centralized interdomain
routing architecture that enables operators to offload BGP-style route
computation to a cloud service. Logical centralization of control and management
has been enormously successful for enterprise networks as evidenced by the
success of software-defined networking (SDN) approaches; however, interdomain
routing today is largely untouched by the transformative SDN trend. The project
will conduct research on the design, analysis, and implementation and evaluation
of CIRCA -- a logically centralized interdomain routing architecture -- that
represents a fundamental paradigm shift in the way BGP is implemented and
managed today by offloading the work of "thin client" routers to the cloud. The
technical research thrusts in the project include demonstrating the feasibility
of the CIRCA approach at Internet scales and quantifying benefits such as
significant reduction in convergence delays, improved end-to-end reachability,
more expressive routing policies, what-if analysis capabilities, and improved
security against control plane attacks. The project will develop a systematic
open-source prototype and engage the research community and network operators
through workshops and forums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.