* 1900422
* Hyperpolarized Multi-Spin Systems as Qubits for Quantum Information Science
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Michael Wasielewski, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2022
* USD 566,761.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Michael R. Wasielewski of the
Department of Chemistry at Northwestern University is developing a fundamental
understanding of how to control charge and spin transport through organic
molecules. Such control is critical to the future of electronics, computers, and
quantum information science (QIS). The degree of control over molecular
structure and properties afforded by this research makes it possible to develop
molecules and materials that take advantage of electron spin changes to
implement new strategies for computer of the future that may have speeds and
encryption technologies far beyond the current models. The Wasielewski research
group volunteers in the Science In The Classroom program (SITC), with 3rd/4th-
graders at an elementary school in an historically under-served and diverse
community in Chicago. Approximately one third of the classes served by SITC are
multilingual, and learn English as a second language alongside the regular
curriculum. By volunteering with the same class of students for the academic
year, Northwestern students mentor and inspire young scientists. The research
team also participates in the program "Letters to a Pre-Scientist" which focuses
on creating personal connections between middle school students from
underprivileged schools and scientists to encourage the younger students to
consider science as a career by writing letters as a pen pals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photogenerated molecular excited states and electron
transfer reactions are playing an increasing role in quantum information science
(QIS). This project will address several goals based on what are known in the
QIS field as the DiVincenzo criteria, which are essential for exploiting multi-
radical assemblies as spin qubits that target QIS applications. Professor
Wasielewski and his group use two spin-selective photophysical processes to
hyperpolarize electron spins to generate well-defined initial quantum states of
spin qubits and determine the dephasing mechanisms of the spin qubits. The team
then manipulates and addresses specific spin qubits to demonstrate quantum gates
and uses both microwave and visible photon pulses to move (teleport) spin
coherences between two sites. Finally, the team establishes strategies for
scalable spin qubit arrays based on DNA hairpin structures. They use laser
excitation to generate the initial hyperpolarized spin qubits and time-resolved
pulse electron paramagnetic resonance (pulse-EPR) spectroscopy to observe,
manipulate and control the coherent spin states of these
qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.