* 1900998
* Research Initiation Award: Structure-Property Relationships of Non-Fullerene Acceptors for Photovoltaic Applications
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Bhoj Gautam, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 03/31/2024
* USD 298,701.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Fayetteville State University has potential broader impacts in a number
of areas. The goal of the project is to obtain a better understanding of the
thermal, optical, and electronic properties of organic semiconductors. Such
understanding will provide guidelines for the design, synthesis and fabrication
of highly efficient polymer solar cells to the renewable energy industry.
Undergraduate students will gain research experiences and the research will be
integrated in an undergraduate course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals
of the project are to (1) investigate the conditions for optimum solar cell
coverage, (2) examine the impact of polymer conformation, molecular architecture
of acceptors, and nano-morphology on charge generation, (3) understand the
interface electronic properties in connection with charge separation dynamics,
and (4) determine the importance of charge and thermal transport in non-
fullerene polymer solar cells. Optical spectroscopy, charge transport
measurements and morphological and structural characterizations will be used for
completion of the project. The findings from this research will provide future
directions for polymer and non-fullerene acceptor synthesis and the design of
high efficiency organic electronic devices for solar cell applications.
Investigation and improvement of these structures not only furthers our
understanding of photophysical processes in organic semiconductors, but also
impacts the world by providing inexpensive, renewable, green
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.