* 1900344
* Development of Molecular Simulation Methods to Compute Phase and Interfacial Properties of Complex Fluids
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jeffrey Errington, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 394,442.00

Jeffrey Errington and Andrew Schultz of SUNY at Buffalo are supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop computational methods and tools to predict
properties of complex molecular systems. This project is co-funded by the
Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering in Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Program in the Division of
Engineering. The project focuses on phase (gas, liquid, solid) and interfacial
(e.g. where air and water meet) properties. The properties play a key role in
many natural phenomena and in numerous industrial processes. Of particular value
to scientists and engineers is an understanding of the relationship between the
microscopic interactions, for example at the atomic level, and the macroscopic
behavior it exhibits. Such information can be used to tune the molecular-level
details of a system to obtain a desired behavior. In principle, molecular
simulation provides an ideal tool for studying the phase and interfacial
behaviors of complex fluids. Although tremendous advancements have been made in
this area, there is still a huge need for efficient and effective computational
methods. Professors Errington and Schultz and their groups are developing robust
new strategies for interrogating the phase and interfacial properties of complex
fluids via molecular simulation. Examples that illustrate the need for such
methods include the design of separation technologies, energy storage devices,
carbon capture strategies, and surface coatings. The results of this research
will be implemented in software that is freely available to the broader research
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is to
develop molecular simulation methods that enable one to deduce the bulk and
interfacial properties of complex fluids. Two methodological advances are being
pursued: (1) a new rigorous strategy for computing the bulk liquid-vapor
saturation properties of fluids and (2) a force-based strategy to determine the
spreading interface potential within an isothermal-isobaric ensemble. For the
first, virial pressure measurements are collected at multiple densities that
span the liquid-vapor coexistence region, and subsequently used to construct a
volume probability distribution within the isothermal-isobaric ensemble. The
method provides the same level of information as commonly-used flat histogram
approaches, does not require molecule insertions/deletions, and can be
implemented within a molecular dynamics framework. The second methodological
advance is aimed at increasing the accessibility of the spreading interface
potential method. The interface potential provides important insight regarding
qualitative and quantitative aspects of a system's wetting behavior. The general
approach provides a means to determine the contact angle of a liquid droplet on
a solid substrate in a mother vapor. The project addresses challenges associated
with implementing the method within the commonly-used isothermal-isobaric
ensemble. The standard approach results in highly elongated simulation boxes
that are difficult to work with in practice. The research team has identified a
means to significantly reduce the size of the simulation box required via use of
a virtual box. The approach leverages force-based strategies to compute the
interface potential. When combined with previous developments, this advance
provides a rigorous, efficient, and accessible approach for determining the
wetting properties of model systems. In a third effort, tools are developed to
facilitate coupling of Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics algorithms within a
single molecular simulation framework. Such a coupling enhances the efficiency
of the methods noted above. Specifically, the group is contributing additional
Monte Carlo move types to the publically- and freely-available LAMMPS Molecular
Dynamics Simulator. These contributions are expected to be beneficial to the
broad LAMMPS user community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.