* 1900285
* Generation and Solution Reactivity of Small Molecule Sulfur-based Signaling Agents
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* John Toscano, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B Program
support of the research of Professor John P. Toscano of the Chemistry Department
at Johns Hopkins University. The research involves the generation and solution
reactivity of biologically-relevant, sulfur-based, small molecules such as
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and hydropersulfides (RSSH). Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is a
signaling agent whose effects in the body have been well documented. For
example, H2S acts as a neuromodulator in the brain and may have applications in
the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's
disease. The chemical mechanisms responsible for these effects are poorly
understood. Recent reports indicate that the biological activity of hydrogen
sulfide may actually be attributed to hydropersulfides and so this will also be
tested. The project gives broad, comprehensive training to both graduate and
undergraduate students, preparing them for future jobs in both industry and
academia. An afterschool science outreach experience for middle school students
in Baltimore, MD is in development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydropersulfides are
involved in important post-translational modifications in several enzymes and
proteins. In addition, small molecule hydropersulfides such as cysteine
hydropersulfide and glutathione hydropersulfide have been detected in tissues,
cells, and plasma at significant concentrations. Unfortunately, hydropersulfides
are inherently difficult to study in aqueous solution, as they are unstable and
decomposes rapidly into a variety of species. As a result, hydropersulfides are
typically generated in situ. Although several strategies for hydropersulfide
generation have been reported, there is still an unmet need for the development
of new methods for the efficient and controlled production of hydropersulfides
without the involvement of exogenous reagents. The development of novel
hydropersulfide precursors and protein persulfidating reagents is a focus of
this project. Previous work has demonstrated that another small molecule
biological signaling agent, nitroxyl (azanone, HNO), elicits much of its
activity through modification of protein thiols. Given the expected reactivity
of hydrogen sulfide and hydropersulfides, reaction with HNO is anticipated and
may be relevant to the observed biological reactions. The mechanism of this
reaction and the resulting products will be investigated thoroughly. Likewise,
the reaction of hydrogen sulfide with HNO will also be examined. The mechanisms
and products of these reactions, utilizing standard analytical tools as well as
membrane inlet mass spectrometry, will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.