* 1900451
* Excellence in Research - Collaborative Research: Fate and transport of neonicotinoid insecticides in the environment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Guihong Bi, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 645,600.00

Neonicotinoids were first used commercially starting in the 1990's. Since that
time they have become the most widely used insecticides in the world. This
widespread use has led to concerns regarding the potential for neonicotinoids to
impact human and ecological health. Currently there are gaps in our
understanding of neonicotinoid reactivity in the environment that hinder our
ability to assess these impacts. This project will help address these gaps
through a comprehensive study of the environmental fate and transport of
neonicotinoids. The specific objectives are to understand how seven important
neonicotinoid insecticides move, accumulate, and/or degrade in agricultural
soils, surface water, and groundwater. Results will be used to develop and
validate models to predict the long-term impacts of these compounds in the
environment. The research will be carried out by a collaboration of researchers
and students at Jackson State University and Tennessee State University,
broadening participation and the diversity of the environmental engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neonicotinoids have become the world's most
widely used insecticides since they were first commercially used in the early
1990s. Such widespread use has led to concerns regarding the potential for
neonicotinoids to impact human and ecological health. This project will use a
systematic and comprehensive approach to study the environmental fate and
transport of the most widely used neonicotinoids in agricultural soils. To
achieve this goal, the team will 1) examine the sorption and degradation of
seven globally important neonicotinoids including imidacloprid, thiamethoxam,
clothianidin, dinotefuran, acetamiprid, thiacloprid, and nitenpyram in three
typical agricultural soils using laboratory batch tests; 2) investigate the
transport and dissipation/accumulation of these neonicotinoids in soil
environments in laboratory column tests, greenhouse simulation tests, and
controlled field tests with multiple plant growing cycles; 3) investigate the
dissipation/accumulation of neonicotinoids in surface water and groundwater at
laboratory and pilot scale; and 4) study the long-term environmental impacts of
neonicotinoids using fate and transport models verified with experimental data.
The scaled-up greenhouse and field test data will advance understanding of the
behavior of neonicotinoids in the environment at a level of breadth and depth
necessary to verify the fate and transport simulation model. This model will
allow the prediction of the long-term environmental impacts of the use of
neonicotinoids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.