* 1900563
* SHF: Medium: Collab Research: Synthesizing Verified Analyzers for Critical Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* David Van Horn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2023
* USD 598,039.00

The reliability of a complete software system hinges on the reliability of each
tool used to construct it. Among these tools are program analyzers which are
automated tools for verifying the absence of specific classes of errors such as
unsafe memory accesses. While used both for program optimization by compilers,
and for eliminating software defects by software developers, program analyzers
by themselves are not verified: their reliability is largely assumed and, in
current practice, they inhabit a software's trusted computing base. This project
develops (a) foundational theories for synthesizing program analyzers directly
from their specifications; (b) practical implementations of program analyzers;
and (c) rigorous evaluations of both foundational techniques as well as
implementations via a mixture of formal methods, software development, and
empirical case studies. Underlying these results is the potential for widespread
adoption of these tools in practice thus leading to higher reliability of
software more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's techniques and tools
will enable the deductive synthesis of sound program analysers in proof
assistants in an interactive, mostly-automated style, and using the
calculational framework of abstract interpretation with Galois connections. The
investigators evaluate this approach by first comparing to existing tools: Fiat,
an existing tool for semi-automated deductive synthesis in the theorem prover
Coq but which does not support Galois connections, and Constructive Galois
Connections, an existing framework for embedding Galois connections in Agda
language but which does not support automation. The investigators compare these
results with existing on-paper derivations of correct-by-construction program
analyzers, as well as existing information flow analyzers which were not derived
using the abstract interpretation framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.