* 1900417
* Mechanism of Alkene Oxidation by Photodeoxygenation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ryan McCulla, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 440,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B Program,
Professor Ryan McCulla of Saint Louis University investigates the chemical
pathways for biological oxidation. Highly reactive atomic oxygen is formed from
certain ring-containing molecules when they are exposed to ultraviolet or
visible light. This reaction - known as photochemical cleavage - can be
carefully directed so that the atomic oxygen is formed in very specific places
within biological cell membranes. Once the atomic oxygen is formed and released,
it can attack carbon-carbon double bonds in other biomolecules. Knowing more
about how and when light can be used to generate atomic oxygen and how this
oxygen attacks other molecules (in a process called oxidative stress) may enable
scientists to develop new disease therapies that are initiated by light instead
of other chemicals. Oxidative stress has been associated with cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, and smoking cigarettes. This research facilitates the
investigation of the physiological effects on the cell membranes arising from
oxidative stress. In the long term, this work may have beneficial impacts on the
health and well-being of society. In addition to helping to develop fundamental
science, Professor McCulla encourages the full participation of underrepresented
minorities in science. As part of this project, high school students from the
Jennings School District and/or the St. Louis Public School District are
involved in an intensive summer research experience. Additionally, over 300
middle school and high school students from the Jennings School District are
encouraged to pursue their interest in a STEM career during the Jennings Science
and Technology Day activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alkenes are rapidly
oxidized by atomic oxygen. The overall objective of this research is to reveal
how the process of photo-deoxygenation, alkene structure, and local environment
influence the mechanism of oxidation and the distribution of oxidized products.
To determine if the initial oxidation step occurs through a charge transfer or
radical pathway, cyclopropylcarbinyl probes, transient absorption spectroscopy,
kinetic isotope effects, and computational methods are used. Determining the
nature of the initial step is crucial to understanding how conditions influence
the observed lipid oxidation products. The products observed for lipids within a
membrane are also expected to be sensitive to the site of atomic oxygen release.
To probe this hypothesis, atomic oxygen precursors that are expected to
specifically release atomic oxygen within the interior or exterior of the lipid
bilayer are prepared and their lipid oxidation profiles are determined. While
atomic oxygen is photo-released by a number of heterocyclic oxides, photo-
deoxygenation has been observed to generate oxidized products not associated
with atomic oxygen. Characterizing this mechanism and the associated alkene
oxidation products expands the potential applications of photo-deoxygenation.
The mechanistic detail obtained from these studies lays a foundation for
understanding how lipid oxidation by photo-deoxygenation affects cellular
processes. The fundamental knowledge could be used to improve
phototherapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.