* 1900710
* Research Initiation Award: A Symmetry-Adapted Perturbation Theory Approach to Reaction Force Analysis
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Wallace Derricotte, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 224,936.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The project seeks to
use symmetry-adapted perturbation theory (SAPT) to investigate the underlying
forces that drive chemical reactivity. Moreover, the project will create an
interdisciplinary research environment to facilitate collaborative research
between students in multiple disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
investigate an approach for reaction force analysis of chemical reactions using
symmetry-adapted perturbation theory. In this approach, SAPT will be used to
decompose the reaction force into physically motivated contributions from
electrostatics, induction, exchange-repulsion, and dispersion. The primary
objectives are to implement and test this method on model chemical reactions and
to make this method widely available by implementing it in a free open-source
python-based toolkit called pyREX (python Reaction Energy eXtension). Findings
from this study will enhance existing knowledge on the primary forces that
facilitate chemical reactions, specifically the contribution of individual
noncovalent interactions to the activation energy. The development of pyREX as a
free and opensource software will ensure that the code is widely available to
the broader quantum chemistry community and will encourage collaborations with
users of the code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.