* 1900819
* Catalyst Project: Diversity of ecosystem services provisioning in coastal socio-ecological systems
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Sigrid Smith, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,835.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, and improve research and teaching at the
institution. This project at Delaware State University will study ecosystem
services for coastal ecosystems. Undergraduate students participate in this
project as researchers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Ecosystem services, or the
benefits that humans receive from ecosystems, are an important justification for
conservation and restoration investments. However, past studies are conflicted
regarding how to assess and when to expect synergies and tradeoffs among
services. Further, few studies have examined these relationships in coastal
socioecological systems. This project aims to quantitatively map a broad suite
of services provided by Delaware's coastal ecosystems, including cultural
services such as birding use, beach use, park use, boating; provisioning
services, such as fisheries; and regulating and supporting services such as
flood mitigation and biodiversity preservation. Spatial models for the total
service delivery and diversity of service delivery will be developed based on
biodiversity indices and compared at multiple spatial scales. In addition,
service bundles or distinct groups of co-occurring services will be identified
and examined across spatial scales and with different land uses using
multivariate statistics. The project will contribute a general framework to
evaluate the co-delivery of ecosystem services, and the project will provide an
assessment of the delivery of services in highly valued coastal
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.