* 1900141
* Cobalt-Catalyzed Cycloadditions and Hydrofunctionalizations of Alkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Thaliyil RajanBabu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 485,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Thaliyil RajanBabu of The Ohio State
University. Professor RajanBabu is developing efficient and selective reactions
that can offer practical approaches to the synthesis of organic molecules for
medicinal, agricultural, or material applications. In this context, new
reactions involving the use of abundantly available and sustainable feedstock
starting materials such as ethylene, butadiene, isoprene, methyl acrylate,
earth-abundant metals such as cobalt and nickel, and ligands that bind to those
metals are being examined. This research is solving two significant challenges
in this area, namely, activation of stable molecules and their subsequent
selective incorporation into other molecules. It is also providing outstanding
opportunities for fundamental discoveries in chemistry. The interdisciplinary
nature of this research, which covers the areas of organic, inorganic and
organometallic chemistry, and employs the techniques from analytical, physical
organic, and computational chemistry, also provides a useful platform for
training undergraduate and graduate students. The RajanBabu group is involved in
outreach activities with Columbus public schools, the Ohio Science Olympiad, and
the REEL (Research Experiences to Enhance Learning) program at OSU. The later is
transforming the undergraduate laboratory experience by incorporating state of
the art instrumentation and providing experience on the use of this
instrumentation to solve challenging chemical problems. Other outreach
activities of Professor RajanBabu include giving lectures at universities
including predominantly undergraduate institutions, industrial research centers,
and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1,3-Dienes and enynes are classes of
readily accessible substrates that have been used only rarely as precursors in
intermolecular asymmetric C-C and C-G (G = a main group element) bond-forming
reactions. The RajanBabu group recently reported the first examples of highly
enantioselective cobalt(I)-catalyzed heterodimerization of a diene and an
acrylate. A study of the reaction mechanism points to a new highly reactive low-
valent cationic cobalt (I) species as a possible catalyst for this reaction.
Preliminary results suggest that there are other reactions that could be
catalyzed by a similar species. The RajanBabu group is developing these
reactions, including asymmetric hydroboration, hydrosilylation, and
hydroacylation. The proposed research is providing powerful tools for more
efficient and selective synthesis of biologically relevant targets and their
congeners, and adding to our repertoire of environmentally benign processes. At
a fundamental level, the scope and limitations of these reactions and their
mechanistic studies are revealing new ways of achieving chemo-, regio- and
stereoselectivities of important organic reactions. The REEL program at OSU is
introducing an advanced kinetic experiment using in situ IR spectroscopy to the
undergraduate laboratory. The experiments are carefully chosen so that all
students from a small class can collect data individually for a few minutes from
an on-going reaction (borohydride reduction of a ketone, for example), and, do
the kinetic analysis later, before submitting a full report for evaluation. This
is introducing them to kinetics and spectroscopy, two topics in which few of our
students currently get practical training in their regular laboratory classes,
even though these topics are mainstays in both physical and organic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.