* 1900097
* Using Solvent-Free Mechanochemistry to Improve the Selectivity of Traditional Solution Based Chemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* James Mack II, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 485,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor James Mack II of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Cincinnati is developing environmentally benign ways to conduct
organic synthesis. Solvents, typically volatile organic compounds, represent
roughly 85% of the total mass used in pharmaceutical manufacturing. As a result,
many companies have developed guidelines to ensure the utilization of
environmentally benign solvents in the synthesis of drugs. In addition to the
amount of waste produced using solvents, solvents themselves are costly to
acquire. The goal of this project is to understand how to conduct chemical
reactions in the absence of such solvents in order to significantly reduce the
total amount of harmful waste produced during a chemical reaction. The method of
mechanochemistry used in this project can be performed by scientists at various
levels, making it a useful tool to introduce the concepts of green chemistry to
a broad audience. Professor Mack II has an excellent history of mentoring
students from underrepresented minority groups and is continuously reaching out
to the community and the students with the support of this grant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to environmental concerns, there are other
significant benefits of performing solvent free mechanochemistry. In solution,
the rate and selectivity of a reaction are both tied to temperature; however,
under solvent-free mechanochemical conditions the rate and temperature can be
independent of each another. In this project, increased selectivity of chemical
reactions will be performed through unique control over the temperature, mixing,
and redox potential of reagents. In solution, there is limited control on the
mixing rate of reagents which can have a significant effect on the overall
kinetics and selectivity of a chemical reaction. This project seeks to
understand how greater control over mixing in a solvent-free system can affect
the kinetics and selectivity of various chemical reactions. Using examples of
enantioselective versions of the Morita-Baylis Hillman reactions, a three-
component coupling reaction and a Diels-Alder reaction, new methods of
selectivity are expected to be observed under mechanochemical conditions that
are not available to synthetic chemists in solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.