* 1900165
* Improving Mechatronics Education by Pairing Mechatronics Courses with General Education Math and Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Markus Pomper, Roane State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,793.00

By 2024, in the area surrounding Roane State Community College, employment in
electrical and electronics repair of commercial and industrial equipment is
expected to increase by five percent. In contrast, the national growth rate is
only two percent. Regional employers report that they have difficulty finding
"business-oriented" or "well-rounded" technicians to fill their positions. In
particular, many candidates do not have the necessary knowledge, skills and
abilities, such as critical thinking, applied knowledge, and complex problem-
solving skills. Based on a recent survey of employers, defining and solving
problems, particularly numerical problems, and thinking critically were among
recent graduates' weakest skills. To better meet industry needs for a highly-
skilled technical workforce, this project will pair mechatronics courses with
general education courses in math and science. The general education courses
will be enhanced with mechatronics-related problems and examples, thus providing
a context that is relevant to the students' career goals. Local area employers
will be integrally involved in course development and provide examples of
complex mechatronics issues that can be incorporated into problem-based learning
scenarios within the courses. It is expected that these paired courses will
result in mechatronics graduates who are better prepared both academically and
technically for work in mechatronics fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roane State
Community College aims to improve the technical skills of mechatronics students
by designing and implementing three co-requisite course pairs. Each course pair
will include a mechatronics course and one of the following: (a) a general
education math course, (b) a learning support (developmental) math course, or
(c) a general education science course. The project expects that these
curricular changes will increase students' attainment of related learning
outcomes, the number of students completing the general education core courses
and programs, and employer satisfaction with graduates' knowledge, skills, and
abilities. The co-requisite course pairs may provide replicable examples for
enhancing mechatronics education at other institutions. In addition, the process
used to develop this co-requisite model for teaching general education and
mechatronics may be extended to other career-technical areas at Roane State
Community College and at other colleges and universities. This project is
expected to increase the degree completion rate of first-generation students for
whom math and general education courses often pose a major hurdle to degree
attainment. Because both faculty and industry partners will be involved in the
development of the co-requisite courses, graduates of the program should be
better prepared to meet employer expectations for mechatronics technicians in
the workplace. Furthermore, the implementation plan and training materials could
be adapted to co-requisite pairings in other post-secondary STEM education
programs. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.