* 1900136
* Photocatalysis with Ferroelectric Light Absorbers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Frank Osterloh, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 485,000.00

Photocatalysis with Ferroelectric Light Absorbers&lt;br/&gt;Replacing polluting
fossil fuels with clean alternatives is one of the grand challenges of the
modern world. A more sustainable energy economy may be achievable with
photocatalysts that can produce hydrogen fuel from water, using sunlight as the
only energy input. Hydrogen is regarded as a "green" fuel because it releases
its stored energy by re-forming water. A problem of known photocatalysts is that
their energy conversion efficiency is low, that is, they absorb a lot of energy
from sunlight but only some of this energy is converted to a usable fuel. This
project studies the use of "ferroelectric" light absorbers to increase the
energy conversion efficiency. The new ferroelectric light absorbing materials
are studied using microscopic, optical, electrical, and chemical methods. The
research is conducted by a postdoctoral associate and by graduate students. All
team members are trained in the preparation of the materials and in the
application of modern instruments and techniques for their characterization. New
internship positions for undergraduate students from underrepresented groups are
also created. Chemistry shows at local schools and on campus motivate children
to study the natural sciences, tackling important societal problems like clean
energy. Experimental demonstrations are distributed as online materials to
educate the public about sustainable fuel
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Osterloh of the University of
California, Davis, is studying ferroelectric effects in a set of photocatalyst
materials derived from the perovskites M:ATiO3. Here, A is an earth alkaline
element and M is a transition metal ion. These materials are relevant to the
development of third generation photovoltaic devices and photocatalysts for the
production of sustainable energy. The compounds are synthesized with solid state
and hydrothermal methods from abundant elements, and they are characterized with
electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and
UV/vis spectroscopy. Site-selective modification with water oxidation and
reduction co-catalysts is applied to fabricate ferroelectric photocatalysts for
the overall water splitting reaction. A combination of dielectric polarization
experiments, surface photovoltage spectroscopy, photocatalytic, and
electrochemical measurements is used to determine the extent to which
ferroelectric dipoles can enhance photochemical energy to fuel conversion with
these materials. Additionally, the project trains graduate, postgraduate and
undergraduate students in the preparation of inorganic materials and advanced
methods for characterizing their morphology, structure and photochemistry.
Outreach events are conducted to engage and motivate the next generation of STEM
students for research in catalysis. Online materials are disseminated to educate
the public about sustainable energy production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.