* 1900933
* III: Medium: Learning-based Synthesis of Data Processing Engines
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Samuel Madden, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

Modern data-processing systems are designed to be general-purpose systems, in
that they can handle a wide variety of applications and data. Unfortunately,
this general-purpose nature causes these systems to achieve below-optimal
performance for every single application and user. Rather technical compromises
have to be made to support a wide range of use cases, often leading to orders-
of-magnitude worse performance than what a highly customized system would be
able to achieve. At the same time, developing a database system from scratch for
each individual application and user is neither economical nor practical. The
goal of this project is to explore how machine learning can be used to
automatically customize a database system for a specific application or user to
achieve so called 'instance-optimality'. If successful, this project will
transform the way that modern database systems that underpin the Internet and
many enterprise computing systems are built, resulting in systems with much
better performance or systems that are able to process large datasets using much
less hardware than current systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concretely, the
project investigates to what extent learned models can automatically instance-
optimize the various components of a large-scale data processing system: 1) data
indexing, where a model can predict the location of a key in a database; 2)
algorithms, including sorting and joins, where a model can predict where in a
sorted list a record should go, or where joining tuples are in another relation;
3) optimizers, where a model can predict the optimal plan to use for processing
queries on data, and 4) storage layout, where a model can predict the optimal
layout of data for a particular query workload. This raises a number of
intellectually deep questions, including what types of models work best, what
theoretical guarantees we can give about the performance of these models, how
such generated systems will compare to hand-tuned systems, how such systems can
exploit new hardware such as TPUs/GPUs and how program synthesis will work with
such modelled data, advancing the fields of databases, machine learning, and
program modeling and synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.