* 1900036
* Investigating Summer Bridge Programs Designed to Accelerate Mathematics Preparation for STEM Degrees
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Keith Russell, Northern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,943.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by studying the effectiveness of summer bridge programs at
improving academic achievement and persistence of STEM students. The project
will focus on improving the mathematics preparation of incoming students before
they enter their first year of college. The project will compare the impact of a
two-week residential summer bridge program to a nonresidential, online version
of the program. Students in both bridge programs will be able to strengthen
mathematics skills by using an adaptive online testing program called ALEKS PPL
(Assessment and Learning in Knowledge Spaces Placement, Preparation, and
Learning). The project anticipates that the bridge programs will improve student
success in mathematics courses. As a result, it has the potential to to
diversify STEM majors at the University by increasing the number of students who
declare a STEM major and improving first to second-year retention of students
enrolled in STEM programs. Results from the research will inform activities at
the University, but also have the potential to improve STEM recruitment and
retention activities across the country, particularly in states that are moving
away from developmental mathematics coursework to remediate
deficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to quantitative
research about STEM summer bridge programs by using empirical data to test the
impact of a residential bridge program compared to a nonresidential version
using a randomized controlled study design (30 students assigned to each for two
years for a total of 120 students in the study). Research questions will be
answered by analyzing the performance of STEM students in the two programs,
considering the average difference in ALEKS scores, time spent in ALEKS
modules,year one and year two retention rates, and improvement of initial
mathematics placement. The project builds upon previous effective bridge
programs described in the literature, as well as recent successful projects at
Northern Kentucky University focused on improving recruitment and retention of
STEM students. Students in both bridge programs will use ALEKS PPL, an approach
that has resulted in improvements in mathematics placement by one course for
students who spend ~30 hours working on the ALEKS learning modules. Students
participating in the residential program will also be exposed to STEM-related
research experiences that highlight the importance of mathematical content
knowledge. All students will be supported throughout their first year through a
seminar series that has demonstrated success in STEM programs at Northern
Kentucky University. The seminar series will help students: assume
responsibility for their own learning both in and out of the classroom; acquire
academic, personal, and social skills essential to success in college and
beyond; develop effective communication skills; establish a supportive cohort
with fellow students; and create a four-year plan that leads to graduation. In
addition, these seminars also assist students in exploring STEM career options
and career-preparation activities. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.