* 1900039
* CDS&amp;E: D3SC: Understanding and Discovering Two-Dimensional Electrocatalyts Using Grand-Canonical Density Functional Theory (DFT) and Machine Learning
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Yuanyue Liu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 419,974.00

A major challenge in renewable energy is the inefficient interconversion of
electrical and chemical energy. New electrocatalysts are needed to solve this
challenge. Two-dimensional (2D) materials are only one or a few atoms thick and
as such, they serve as desirable, high surface area electrocatalysts for energy
conversions. In this project, Dr. Yuanyue Liu is using computer simulations to
provide a fundamental understanding of the capabilities of 2D materials as
electrocatalysts. His simulations use artificial intelligence to accelerate the
discovery process. Dr. Liu is training students in computational chemistry,
catalysis and energy conversions by actively engaging them in multidisciplinary
research and integrating his research findings into the classroom. Dr. Liu is
working with the Faculty Technology Studio to create educational videos that
illustrate electrocatalysis applications. These videos are being used in various
outreach programs to increase the interest of K-12 students and underrepresented
groups in pursuing science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Yuanyue Liu at the University of Texas at Austin
is developing an improved understanding of the electrocatalytic mechanisms of 2D
materials (an emerging class of electrocatalysts). By performing grand-canonical
density functional theory (gc-DFT) calculations and coupling the calculations
with machine learning, the team searches for new 2D electrocatalysts with better
performance. Conventional DFT calculations often neglect the effects of varying
charge and constant potential in electrochemical reactions, yet these parameters
are found to be critical for 2D materials. The gc-DFT includes these effects and
thus can elucidate the mechanisms of 2D electrocatalysts for reactions such as
hydrogen evolution, oxygen reduction/evolution, and carbon dioxide reduction.
Machine learning models are used to uncover the underlying factors that govern
the catalytic activity and selectivity. The models also predict better catalysts
from the large 2D materials library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.