* 1900583
* Clay Minerals Society Conference Support for U.S. Graduate Student Attendance at a Joint Meeting with European-clay Conference in 2019
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2019,10/31/2019
* Lynda Williams, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 10/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This funding is to support U.S. based STEM students to travel to, and
participate in, an international conference of the Clay Minerals Society (CMS),
joint with the European Clay Conference. The benefits to society include
exposure of U.S. students to diverse groups of scientists, interacting via
Workshops and Field Trips in additional to the formal technical program. The
reason for this joint meeting is to expand the interactions of U.S. clay
scientists, largely funded by the National Science Foundation, with other
nations, and to be aware of advances made by clay scientists funded by European
and Asian Science Foundations. This international conference convenes clay
scientists worldwide to share research progress, and to question, dispute,
defend, and collaborate on research questions at the forefront of clay science
research that benefits the U.S. public. This international conference is well-
known for promoting the science of U.S. based researchers, who learn from the
research of international scientists as they present their research progress.
The goal is to benefit the science and education of U.S. students, and in doing
so to promote successful clay science research worldwide, which benefits the
U.S. public by producing future scientists that are knowledgeable of
international colleagues and research advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support
will assist U.S. based students with travel expenses to attend the Euroclay 2019
conference held in Paris, France. This international conference will promote
student interaction with worldwide leaders in the field of low-temperature
geochemistry and geobiology, with specific emphasis on scientific research
involving clays and clay minerals. Assistance with the student travel,
accommodation and registration fees for the Conference, Workshops and Field
trips will technologically advance STEM education via a variety of instructional
venues including: Field Trips to: 1) study a classical field area of the
Kimmeridgian and Tithonian mudrocks in the Boulonnais related to energy
resources, 2) visit research facilities for next generation mineral research
including the ANDREA underground Deep Geological Repository for High-Level
nuclear Waste in a claystone, and to the SOLEIL, a state-of-the-art synchrotron
facility employing electromagnetic radiation over wavelengths from infrared to
X-rays, 3) attend historical tours of Marie Curie?s life and contributions to
scientific methods upon which modern clay science was developed. Workshops
include 1) Advances in bentonite research: from the mine to smectite
characterization and 2) Clay minerals and catalysis. Over 25 technical sessions
will be presented over 5 days focusing on modern clay science advances from
energy resources to mineralogy, modeling of nanoparticles, environmental
pollutants, critical zone research, clays and the origins of life, diagenesis,
geomaterials engineering, photochemistry and functionalization of clays for
human health. All of these topics are a focus of NSF funded research and provide
students a showcase for research advances on an international
stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.