* 1900519
* Collaborative Research: Microlocal Concentration and Propagation in Spectral Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Yaiza Canzani, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2023
* USD 313,300.00

In nature, solutions of wave-type equations appear in phenomena as far reaching
as wave functions of quantum particles, the acoustics of concert halls, and
scattering of gravitational waves. In these situations, there are certain
fundamental frequencies and vibrational modes associated to the underlying
geometry of the space. These frequencies and modes play an essential role in the
understanding of the behavior of wave phenomena. They appear, for example, in
the acoustical design of concert halls and the vibration of instruments. This
project develops tools, based on propagation phenomena, to study the delicate
relationship between the geometry of the space and behavior of the corresponding
modes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide new insight into the
structure of vibrational modes for general spaces. Many quantitative regularity
results (as measured by L^p norms) are already known for spaces with non-
positive curvature. However, these types of estimates are unavailable under less
restrictive geometric assumptions. The main goals of this project are two fold:
(1) to describe the concentration phenomena that result in L^p norm growth for
individual modes, and (2) to use this understanding to produce estimates for
modes and frequencies based solely on dynamical properties of the underlying
manifold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.