* 1900377
* Excellence in Research:  InnovAtive Methods and Advanced Science at Alabama State University (IAM-ASU)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Qiana Matthews, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 547,128.00

Exosomes are small vesicles that are released from donor cells and internalized
by a recipient cell. These vesicles carry proteins, DNA and RNA. It is thought
that they are important for cell-to-cell communication, and may be important for
development of disease. Some viruses will use exosomes to spread infections. In
other cases, exosomes from virus-infected cells can trigger anti-viral responses
to help combat virus infections. Adenovirus is a virus that causes the common
cold. The goal of this proposal is to examine how adenovirus infection alters
the formation and composition of exosomes by comparing exosome formation in
uninfected and infected cells in vitro. In addition, work will be performed to
ask if there is a connection between altered exosome formation and severity of
adenovirus infection. These studies will provide new information on the
interaction between the host cell and viruses, and will lead to a greater
understanding of exosome biogenesis and virus infections. This promotes the NSF
mission because it promotes the progress of science. This project will also
support the education of undergraduate and graduate students. Therefore, it
fulfills the mission of the NSF to support education and diversity in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exosome signaling pathways are likely to be an
additional entry pathway for viruses as well as an additional mechanism by which
viruses promote infection and pathogenesis. These proposed studies will evaluate
how the common cold virus, adenovirus, affects the host organism via exosome
biogenesis and composition in cell culture conditions and in animals. This
proposal will focus on clarifying interactions between adenoviruses and
exosomes. There are over 56 adenovirus serotypes infecting a variety of
vertebrate and invertebrate species, making adenovirus a good virus model for
this project. This proposal will test the hypothesis that exosome biogenesis,
composition, and trafficking are altered by external factors/stimuli such as
viral infections, thus leading to altered exosome biogenesis, composition,
trafficking, and cellular uptake. The objectives to achieve the goal are: 1) to
evaluate the in vitro impact of virus infection on exosome biogenesis, 2) to
evaluate the in vitro impact of virus infection on exosome composition, 3) to
evaluate the impact of exosomes on in vitro adenovirus infection, 4) to evaluate
the in vivo impact of virus infection on exosome biogenesis. This proposal has
high intellectual merit; the proposed research could significantly advance
scientific knowledge in the field of virology and exosome biology. Broader
impacts of this study include: 1) directly positioning the principal
investigator to develop and sustain a new research program at Alabama State
University and 2) training of under-represented undergraduate and graduate
students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Integrative Organismal Systems (IOS) Symbiosis and
Self-Defense (SDS) program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competititve
Research (EPSCoR),the Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate
Program (HBCU-UP) and Historically Black Colleges and Universities Excellence in
Research (HBCU-EiR) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.