* 1900209
* Development of Novel Stereocontrolled Synthetic Methods Using Hydroxy- and Amino-azoalkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Don Coltart, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 10/31/2019
* USD 46,936.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Don Coltart of the University of Houston
to develop novel ways of constructing nitrogen- and oxygen-containing
heterocycles. Heterocycles are cyclic or ring-shaped molecular structures found
in many compounds, such as pharmaceutical drugs. The vast majority of nitrogen
and oxygen-containing heterocycles that are found in existing pharmaceuticals
have a flat or disk-like structure. Moving away from these relatively simple
flat heterocycles to ones that have greater three dimensionality may be
beneficial in improving efforts aimed at developing new medicines. As a means of
addressing this, the Coltart research group is developing a variety of synthetic
tools and strategies to enable such three-dimensional nitrogen- and oxygen-
containing heterocycles to be made effectively and simply. The educational
aspects of this project are directed at the training of both graduate and
undergraduate students in hands-on laboratory research. Professor Coltart also
increases the awareness of early career undergraduate science students with
regard to nontraditional career pathways in the chemical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Coltart and his students develop novel
approaches to the synthesis of saturated and partially saturated (SPS) N- and
O-heterocycles using 3-amino-1-azopropenes and 3-hydroxy-1-azopropenes (AAPs and
HAPs, respectively). These are compounds can be applied to the synthesis of
biologically important natural products, drugs, and other compounds. The Coltart
research group established that AAPs and HAPs exhibit 1,3-dipolar reactivity and
can be coupled with partner dipoles to provide SPS N- and O-heterocycles,
respectively. Numerous partner dipoles are available to engage AAPs and HAPs and
are being used to generate a wide range of such heterocyclic compounds in a
stereocontrolled way, including gamma-lactones, gamma-lactams, tetrahydrofurans,
and pyrrolidines. Broader impacts of this work include the recruitment of
students from under-represented groups to the chemical sciences, as well as an
outreach program to educate undergraduate science students about the very broad
range of nontraditional career opportunities available to them with a chemistry
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.