* 1900170
* Quantum dynamics methods for fluctuating systems in quantum environments: Development and application
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Seogjoo Jang, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 415,840.00

Seogjoo J. Jang of Queens College, City University of New York, is supported by
an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in
the Division of Chemistry for developing and applying quantum dynamics methods
for fluctuating systems in quantum environments. For example, think of a
molecular substance, like sugar, dissolved in a glass of water. One could think
of the electrons in the sugar molecule as the quantum system and the vibrations
of the atoms in the sugar molecule as the quantum environment. The fluctuations
are caused by the motions of the solvent molecules. Because of the counter-
intuitive nature of quantum mechanics, it can be difficult to predict or
understand the behavior of quantum systems without elaborate calculations.
However, even after almost a century since the theory of quantum mechanics was
founded, reliable quantum dynamics calculations beyond simple models and systems
remain notoriously difficult to solve. Building on their earlier computational
research, Professor Jang and coworkers are establishing systematic computational
approaches appropriate for very large systems in realistic environments.
Accurate descriptions of the dynamic behaviors of such quantum systems has
significant implications for designing novel energy conversions, imaging, and
information processing devices. Applications of these methods can elucidate
quantum effects that remain important in noisy environments and can help develop
new kinds of novel quantum devices. Professor Jang is working on a book on
molecular excitons, which are important for solar energy conversion and imaging,
and a review article on quantum dynamics methods. He is also dedicated to
organizing conferences on cutting edge topics, and is developing new types of
undergraduate level classes integrating experiments and
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Jang's group is developing and
applying theories and computational methods for the dynamics calculation of
quantum systems subject to general time dependent fluctuations while interacting
with quantum environments. Accurate descriptions of the interplay of these two
complicating factors has significant implications for long-range energy and
charge transfer processes in complex molecular environments, and is one of
central issues in quantum thermodynamics, information processing, and
conductance. On one hand, this theory is pursued through master equation
approaches, by combining the polaron transformation or modular coarse-graining
with systematic higher order expansions. On the other hand, path-integral based
theories and simulation methods are generalized for fluctuating systems. These
methods are then applied and tested for the dynamics of delocalized excitons in
light harvesting complexes and nanotubes, and for proton or proton-coupled
electron transfer reactions in dynamic molecular environments. Outcomes of this
research can elucidate spatio-temporal dynamics of delocalized excitons in
complex environments and can provide key insights into the interplay between the
effects of quantum environments and time dependent fluctuations in the dynamics
of protons and loose electrons Professor Jang is working on a book on the
dynamics of molecular excitons and a comprehensive review article on quantum
master and Fokker-Planck equations. He continues organizing conferences and
workshops on topical issues such as excitons, quantum information, machine
learning, and chemical sensing, and is also designing new small group chemistry
courses that can integrate experiments and
computation/modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.