* 1900883
* CHS: Large: Collaborative Research: Participatory Design and Evaluation of Socially Assistive Robots for Use in Mental Health Services in Clinics and Patient Homes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Megan Richardson, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 604,197.00

A significant concern in the United States relates to mental health disorders,
especially depression; the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) has
estimated that 17.3 million adults aged 18 or older (7.1% of the adult
population in the U.S.) had at least one major depressive episode in 2017. The
primary goal of this project is to enable patients and clinicians working
together with researchers to design a socially assistive robot to provide
support for, and as an intervention to alleviate the symptoms of, depression.
The robot, Therabot, currently takes the form of a dog and is intended to serve
as a pet-like companion. The project will allow both patients and clinicians to
customize the capabilities and behaviors of the robot in order to improve
patient health and well-being. The effectiveness of the modified robots will be
evaluated in clinical settings and by means of longer-term use in patient homes.
Project outcomes will include advances in healthcare robotics and improvements
in human-robot interaction, thanks to a combination of onboard sensors that
provide additional information to clinicians along with artificial intelligence
to customize the interactions of the robot with the patient. This activity is
also expected to transform mental healthcare interventions, and to reduce
healthcare costs for mental health concerns by allowing many patients to remain
in their homes longer with the aid of their assistive support robot. This
research topic is of interest to a diversity of students, as well as clinical
practitioners, and will promote educational training and opportunities in the
areas of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ Participatory Design
(PD) methods to develop an adaptable socially assistive robot platform by
extending the features and capabilities of Therabot. Appropriate therapeutic
interventions will be identified and their effectiveness evaluated using this
platform to address the needs of individuals diagnosed with depression. The main
research contributions are to apply PD methods to socially assistive robots for
mental health with particular focus on bridging therapy in clinical and home
settings, to further the technical development of adaptable robotic systems, and
to provide an extension to the Interactive Social Engagement Architecture and
Toolkit for long-term interaction outside of the laboratory. The project will
develop PD activities to expand the design of Therabot which, unlike off-the-
shelf systems, can be amended to suit the changing needs and preferences of
diverse patients and clinicians over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.