* 1900701
* Research Initiation Award: Metagenomic Approach to Assess Water Quality and Microbial Load Variability of an Urban Watershed
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Ethell Vereen, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 362,865.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The study will enhance
the understanding of the composition, diversity, and richness of bacterial
communities by evaluating the microbial community, characterize variability in
time and space and compare microbial community between an urban watershed and an
unimpacted watershed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of microbiome studies
based on DNA sequencing has led to more thorough investigations of the effect of
environmental conditions on microbial community composition. Despite recent
advances in sequencing technologies, identifying the ecological mechanisms that
underlie microbial community structure and functional diversity remains a major
challenge. This challenge is particularly important for highly dynamic
ecosystems such as flowing-waters of urban systems. This project will provide
new information on how microbial communities persist and change within an urban
watershed using metagenomic techniques. It is expected that temporally, the
microbial community in the fall and winter months will be distinct from the
microbial community in the spring and summer months, while spatially, the
microbial community immediately downstream from anthropogenic inputs will be
distinct from natural systems. The findings from this study will improve our
understanding of the way urbanization shapes stream microbial communities and
provide insight of how microbial communities persist and change within an urban
watershed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.