* 1900380
* High-Valent Metal-Oxo Species: Beyond the Oxo Wall
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Nicolai Lehnert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B Program of
the NSF Chemistry Division, the collaborative research team of Professor Lehnert
of University of Michigan and Professor Shearer of Trinity University
investigates different Cobalt- and Nickel-based oxo complexes to improve the
understanding of the structural and electronic properties of these unstable
species. Metal-oxo species are often implicated in enzymatic and synthetic
catalysis and play key roles in hormone biosynthesis, drug metabolism, and in
photosynthesis. In the chemical and pharmaceutical industry, reactive metal-oxo
complexes are used as catalysts for the production of chemical feedstocks and in
the synthesis of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals. Currently, scientists are
lacking a detailed understanding of the properties of late-transition metal oxo
species, which show great potential for applications in chemical catalysis, but
which are underutilized as scientists cannot control their reactivity well.
Professor Lehnert is the director of the D-RISE program, which provides 7-weeks,
full-time summer research opportunities to high school students from Detroit
that belong to underrepresented minority (URM) groups in science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) disciplines. The activities include funding for one
high school student to participate in D-RISE. Professor Shearer conducts
research exclusively with undergraduate students recruited through mechanisms
that aim at increasing the participation of URM students in the sciences (in
particular, Trinity University's McNair Scholar's program).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Lehnert and Professor Shearer are developing an
understanding of the structural and electronic properties of a number of high-
valent Co- and Nickel-oxo complexes. Especially the effect of the spin state on
the electronic properties of these complexes is underappreciated; yet, as
demonstrated for iron-oxo complexes, the spin state has a pivotal influence on
the reactivity of these species. In the case of Co-oxo complexes, spin state
also provides a potential pathway for a true violation of the "oxo wall", a
concept that is considered a holy grail in high-valent metal-oxo chemistry.
Another important dichotomy of metal-oxo complexes is the question of whether
they are best represented as metal-oxo or metal-oxyl species, and how this
influences their reactivity. Therefore, the research on the fundamental
properties of high-valent Co- and Nickel-oxo complexes addresses many important
fundamental questions about high-valent metal-oxo complexes with general
(conceptual) implications for this area of research. The proposed research has
broad implications with respect to further developing late first-row transition
metal catalysts for water oxidation and the functionalization of organic
molecules. In particular, bioinspired catalysts for the functionalization of
organic molecules are highly sought after as industrial catalysts for the
production of chemical feedstocks and pharmaceuticals. This project employs a
large array of spectroscopic and theoretical methods, including electron
paramagnetic resonance, magnetic circular dichroism, resonance Raman, and X-ray
absorption spectroscopy. Theoretical methods (density functional theory and
multi-reference quantum-chemical calculations) are used to interrogate the
spectroscopic results, and connect them to electronic structure and reactivity.
Professor Lehnert is actively engaged in STEM outreach programs focused on
recruiting underrepresented minority (URM) high school students from Detroit to
STEM fields. Professor Shearer's laboratory works exclusively with undergraduate
(UG) students, which are recruited through mechanisms that aim at increasing the
participation of URM UG students in the sciences (in particular, Trinity
University's McNair Scholar's program). Both of these activities support the
broader impacts of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.