* 1900430
* Development of Zwitterionic Nickel Catalysts for Carbonylative Polymerization and Copolymerization of Ethylene and Cyclic Ethers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Li Jia, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 502,000.00

The pollution caused by plastic waste lingering on the Earth's surface is a
problem of massive scale. A key challenge in replacing current nondegradable
plastics with those that are degradable is simple economics: the raw materials
needed to make degradable plastics are often more expensive than those used in
today's nondegradable plastics. Raw materials that are inexpensive, readily
available, and have low environmental impact are thus highly desirable in the
quest for sustainability. In this project, Dr. Jia and his team at the
University of Akron are developing catalysts that produce plastics that are
degradable in the environment and derived from low-cost raw materials. The
catalysts are based on the earth-abundant metal, nickel, adding another
sustainable feature to his group's research. Dr. Jia is actively engaged in
outreach activities to engage students in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These activities include summer research
internships in Dr. Jia's laboratory and are directed at providing scientific
research opportunities for high school students, in particular those who are
economically underprivileged, thereby encouraging their interest in STEM
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the NSF Division of Chemistry, Dr. Jia of the University of Akron is
developing novel catalytic carbonylative polymerizations for the synthesis of
polymers with various organic carbonyl functional groups in their backbones from
co-monomers with vastly dissimilar reactivities (e.g., ethylene and ethylene
oxide). The research is focusing on the mechanistic understanding of these
catalytic polymerizations, the development of nickel catalysts following
zwitterionic design principles, and the evaluation of the performance of the new
catalysts. Dr. Jia is actively engaged in STEM outreach programs. His outreach
activities focus on providing opportunities to students with economically
underprivileged backgrounds and recruiting them into STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.