* 1900301
* Density Functional Theory of Molecular Fragments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Adam Wasserman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 460,808.00

Professor Adam Wasserman of Purdue University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to improve the accuracy and efficiency of electronic structure
calculations of properties of molecular systems based on density functional
theory (DFT). Dr. Wasserman and his research group are developing a novel
density functional theory of molecular fragments, which are parts of larger
molecules. They are investigating how the electronic properties of molecules and
materials can be calculated from the electron density distortions that occur
when chemical bonds are broken or formed. This is important for several reasons:
First, the focus on fragments leads to the possibility of carrying out large-
scale calculations on parallel supercomputers, allowing for studies that would
not be feasible otherwise with present-day computer technology. Second, the
focus on fragments allows for new methods that outperform commonly used modern
approximations in DFT, especially for systems dominated by so-called strong
electron correlations. Third, the focus on fragments allows for accurate
computer simulations of systems when chemical bonds are stretched. These systems
are ubiquitous in molecular intermediate species of importance to catalytic
processes, whose study is beyond the reach of present-day DFT. In addition to
training undergraduate and graduate students and developing open-source codes
for the scientific community, Dr. Wasserman organizes specialized symposia and
develops inter-cultural projects that increase Hispanic participation in
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By adopting a new perspective on DFT
without abandoning its core principles, Dr. Wasserman and his research group are
improving the accuracy of density-embedding calculations that involve the
stretching and breaking of chemical bonds. This is being done via two fronts:
(1) The development of physically-motivated approximations to the non-additive
pieces of the exchange-correlation energy functional; and (2) The improvement of
semi-local Kohn-Sham DFT through new approximations to the non-additive piece of
the non-interacting kinetic-energy functional. The work involves applications of
the many-body theory of open quantum systems and implementations into broadly
available quantum-chemistry software packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.