* 1900463
* Collaborative Research: High-resolution electrochemical and Correlated microscopic characterization of 2D electrocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Michael Mirkin, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2022
* USD 240,000.00

Professor Michael Mirkin of CUNY Queens College and Professor Huolin Xin of the
University of California-Irvine are supported by the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Division of Chemistry to study two-dimensional materials, such as flat
nanosheets of transition metal chalcogenides as electrocatalysts for speeding up
the electrocatalytic production of hydrogen from water. The knowledge obtained
is applicable to other important chemical reactions relevant to alternative
energy production and storage technologies. The project seeks to develop a
unique microscopy technique that allows for the high-resolution imaging of the
reactive site. This imaging is conducted using two techniques: transmission
electron microscopy (for atomic-scale structural information) and scanning
electrochemical microscopy (for electrochemical information). Correlating the
data of the two complementary techniques provides information on the nature of
the catalytic nanosheet edges, defects and atomic steps. The information is
needed to understand the catalytic activity of these materials. The project
provides training for a diverse group of students in renewable energy related
science and technology, including mathematical modeling and data processing and
mining. Area middle school students are exposed to science research through
hand-on experience in the investigators' laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this collaborative research is to visualize and quantify
active sites on two-dimensional (2D) catalyst surfaces via high-resolution
(i.e., equal or less than 10 nm) reactivity mapping by scanning electrochemical
microscopy (SECM) in combination with scanning transmission electron microscopy
(STEM) techniques. By using very small nanoelectrode probes and significantly
increasing the SECM resolution the researchers map and quantitatively measure
activities of the nanosheet edges, defects and atomic steps on 2D
electrocatalysts and assess the effects of phase transformations and surface
functionalization. The methodology is developed for multi-technique imaging of
the same nanoscale portion of the catalytic surface to obtain spatially resolved
mechanistic information about heterogeneous processes on 2D electrocatalysts.
The nature of the active sites is elucidated by correlating the SECM activity
maps with atomic scale structural and bonding information obtained by STEM and
spatially resolved electron energy loss spectroscopy (STEM-EELS) with one-to-one
correspondence. These approaches investigate two important classes of 2D
materials - transition metal dichalcogenides and MXenes. The objective of the
research project is to advance the understanding of factors influencing the
activity/stability of 2D electrocatalysts and to help put forward new strategies
for improving these properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.