* 1900295
* Development of Computational Methods and their Applications to Studying Nuclear Quantum Dynamics of Complex Molecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Vladimir Mandelshtam, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 479,884.00

Vladimir Mandelshtam of the University of California, Irvine, is supported by
the by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
division of chemistry to conduct research in the area of theoretical chemistry.
He and his research group develop new computational methods that take advantage
of advances in high-performance computers. They use these new methods to study
important and interesting properties of complex molecular systems at the atomic
level, for example large molecular clusters. Currently they are applying these
new approaches to learn about the structure, dynamics, and spectroscopy of water
clusters, ion-water clusters, and hydrogen clusters . The computer programs
resulting from this project are made available free of charge to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Mandelshtam's research in Quantum
Dynamics is concerned with the development of a novel approach under the general
title "Quasirandom Distributed Gaussian Basis" (QDGB) and its applications to
computations of vibrational spectra of molecules and clusters. QDGB combines the
relatively old idea of using a Gaussian basis with the new ways of distributing
this basis by using a quasirandom sequence that samples a particular
distribution function optimized for the system in question. Another important
aspect of the approach involves the new ways of computing the required
multidimensional integrals involving the potential energy matrix elements using
quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC). QMC is also based on quasirandom sequences. Unlike the
standard MC it has superior convergence properties. QDGB is then used to study
vibrational spectra of polyatomic molecules and clusters. In addition,
Mandelshtam's research in Statistical Mechanics is concerned with applications
of the Diffusion Monte Carlo (DMC) method to study energetics, structure, and
nuclear quantum and isotope effects in molecular
clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.