* 1900803
* CNS Core: Medium: Reimagining the Storage Stack for Emerging Memory Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Michael Scott, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,134,561.00

Technological innovations are leading to increasing numbers and varieties of
data storage devices. Important application domains are simultaneously becoming
more data centric, and many of the most significant design challenges revolve
around access to large, richly structured sources of information. To help
programmers manage the complexity of data and devices, this project is
developing new ways to organize and access data, to automate its movement and
placement, and to protect it from accidental loss or
corruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging programmer specifications of
application behavior and of performance, protection, and fault tolerance
objectives (and by inferring these where possible), developed techniques will
efficiently and automatically move data among devices including 3D-stacked and
new nonvolatile alternatives with differing bandwidth, latency, and persistence
properties. Fast, convenient access to byte-addressable nonvolatile memory will
be provided through a new persistent segment abstraction. Targeted platforms
will range from individual mobile or desktop machines to rack-level systems with
"disaggregated" memory blades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As computing moves into the
era of big data, techniques to manage large, fast, persistent memories have the
potential to facilitate breakthroughs across the whole range of human endeavor,
in government, industry, science, the arts, and entertainment. Students will
gain experience with memory technologies and management techniques through new
instructional modules in operating systems, programming languages, and parallel
and distributed computing courses at the University of Rochester. Efforts to
increase participation among traditionally underrepresented groups, in both the
laboratory and the classroom, will complement existing department activities,
including participation in the ABI/HMC BRAID
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software and data developed under the project
will be made publicly available under standard open-source licenses using
platforms such as GitHub, and will be accessible for at least three years past
the end of the grant. They will be shared with industrial contacts at Google,
Facebook, IBM, Intel, AMD, Oracle, and others. Publications associated with the
project will be made available at
http://www.cs.rochester.edu/u/sandhya/publications.html and at
http://www.cs.rochester.edu/u/scott/papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.