* 1900294
* Ion-Radical Chemistry in a Controlled Experiment
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Heather Lewandowski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2024
* USD 620,210.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Heather Lewandowski and
her research group at the University of Colorado at Boulder is using laser
cooling and trapping techniques to study chemical reactions between molecular
ions and neutral free-radical molecules. Molecular ions are molecules that are
either missing electrons (and therefore are positively charged) or have extra
electrons (making them negatively charged). Neutral free-radical molecules are
not charged, but have electrons that are unpaired. The charge on a molecule and
whether or not it has unpaired electrons greatly influences the chemical
reactivity of the molecule. The Lewandowski laboratory has developed laser
cooling and ion trapping instruments that can precisely control the speed and
energy with which the ions and radicals collide. The ability to control
collisions allows the team to evaluate how charge and unpaired electrons affect
the speeds and outcomes of chemical reactions. This work bridges the communities
of molecular physics, physical chemistry, and astrochemistry. The students
working on this project gain valuable knowledge and skills in advanced laser
optical techniques and computational chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on determining reaction rates and mechanisms for reactions
between sympathetically cooled molecular ions trapped in a radio-frequency trap
and a neutral free radical molecular beam decelerated using time-varying
inhomogeneous electric fields. Typically, neutral molecules include OH, CH and
NH3, while the ion species are varied to study a large range of astrophysically-
and atmospherically-relevant reactions. After a reaction experiment has taken
place, all of the ions in the trap, including all product ions, are ejected into
a time-of-flight mass spectrometer for mass-to-charge identification. By varying
the reaction time, the reaction rate is determined. The experimental data are
interpreted with the help of high-level theoretical calculations of the
potential energy surface. The broader impacts of this work include training of
students in interdisciplinary research using both molecular physics and physical
chemistry techniques and perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.