* 1900590
* RUI: Molecular Insight into Cation Motion within Zeolites
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Daniela Kohen, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2024
* USD 183,416.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Daniela Kohen of Carleton College,
is using state of the art computational techniques to study behavior within
zeolites (molecular sieves). The goal of these studies is to provide a basic
understanding of the processes that underlie the use of molecular sieves as
filters to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. In some of these
materials, cations (atoms that have lost electrons) act as selective trapdoors,
allowing some, but not all, gases to diffuse through. Computer simulations allow
gaining microscopic insight into this interesting behavior. These studies offer
a singular opportunity to gain fundamental understanding that can assess and
guide the design and identification of materials useful in a variety of
industrial processes. At Carleton College, a predominantly undergraduate
institution, Professor Kohen actively engages undergraduate students in
chemistry research. The students involved in this research study chemistry
through the lens of molecular simulations, which provides them with a powerful
tool to give new meaning to familiar concepts, as well as training that allows
them to become proficient with complicated computations, an important benefit
given the ever-increasing needs of our technological
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zeolites are an attractive option for carbon
dioxide capture in many industrial processes due to their variety and stability.
However, some of their fundamental behaviors are not understood, which limits
the ability to rationally design new materials or to improve existing ones. The
shortage of experimental techniques that allow for the direct observation of
cation motion, combined with the deficiency of appropriate computational models,
has significantly limited understanding of cation motion at an atom by atom
level. This understanding is not only of fundamental interest, but these motions
can also be intimately related to behaviors that give zeolites useful properties
in many practical applications. This project is an in-depth computational study
of the motions of cations within zeolites. It aims to gain detailed microscopic
understanding by a careful combination of well-established molecular dynamics
simulation tools (where all atoms are treated as interacting objects) with
recently developed ab initio molecular dynamics techniques (were atoms as
treated as protons and electrons interacting with each other). Recent
developments in computational techniques enable a systematic study of the
dynamics of the cations and how they relate to zeolite geometry and chemical
environment. This project characterizes and then compares cation dynamics within
different zeolite families. These families are chosen to capitalize on existing
experimental data and aim to contribute to fundamental understanding needed to
develop critical applications. In addition to the research itself and its
potential applications of our findings, a key component in the proposed
activities is the training of undergraduates as active researchers that focus on
fundamental understanding of behavior within thought-provoking and promising
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.