* 1900783
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Physics and Learning Integration Using differentiable rendering
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kavita Bala, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Using image measurements to understand and acquire properties of the physical
world (such as the shape of an object, the reflectance of a surface, or the
lighting in a room) is a critical capability for many sciences including
medicine, material fabrication, remote sensing, robotics, autonomous navigation,
architectural design, computer graphics, and computer vision. At a high level,
these properties can be found by taking images and using computational
algorithms to infer unknown parameters from the measurements. Broadly, the
inference algorithms can be classified into two categories. On the one hand,
physics-based algorithms try to analytically model and then invert the physics
underlying the process of how a scene of certain parameters produces measured
images; these algorithms are generally accurate but require a lot of
computation. On the other hand, data-driven algorithms use supervised datasets
to learn how to directly map measurements to unknowns; these algorithms are
computationally efficient but are not guaranteed to produce accurate
predictions. This project aims to transform physical acquisition pipelines, by
creating general-purpose computational tools that combine the advantages of
physics-based and machine-learning-based techniques, and that are simultaneously
efficient, accurate and robust. By developing the theory and computational tools
for this integration of simulation and learning, the project has the potential
for transformative impact in application areas like industrial quality control,
material science, oceanography, and biomedical imaging. Widespread adoption of
project outcomes will be encouraged by making new software publicly available,
as well as by offering tutorials and workshops in computer graphics, vision, and
imaging conferences. The project also includes an education and outreach program
that is tightly coupled to the research objectives, and which takes the form of
courses, summer workshops, and lab visits for K-12 students intended to
introduce them to science at an early stage and encourage STEM education.
Additionally, the project will contribute towards broadening participation in
computing through targeted involvement in existing programs in the participating
institutions that focus on outreach to female students, first-generation
students, and students from traditionally underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to transform physical
acquisition pipelines by creating general-purpose computational tools that
enable efficient and robust inference. This will be achieved by coupling
physics-based and learning-based approaches, in a way that combines their
complementary strengths of accuracy, generality, and efficiency. Three core
areas of research will contribute to this. First, the project will develop
inference pipelines that synergistically combine neural networks with analysis
by synthesis optimization, in order to efficiently produce high-fidelity
estimates of physical parameters. Neural networks will be trained in a physics-
aware manner, by using physically-accurate renderers as layers in their
architecture; this will allow the neural networks to simultaneously leverage
supervised information and physical knowledge when making predictions. Second, a
new class of physically accurate differentiable renderers will be created, which
will enable this tight integration of physics and learning without the need to
sacrifice computational efficiency. Instead of images, differentiable renderers
will estimate their derivatives with respect to scene parameters; this
estimation will be performed in a physically accurate way, using physical
simulation algorithms derived from first principles and benefiting from
innovations targeting improved efficiency. Finally, the advantages of the
developed inference tools will be demonstrated in a diverse range of
applications such as autonomous sensing, material science and fabrication, and
biomedical imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.