* 1900788
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Statically Controlled Asynchronous Lane Execution (SCALE)
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* David Whalley, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2024
* USD 751,904.00

Enabling better performing systems benefits applications that span those running
on mobile devices to large data applications running on data centers. The
efficiency of most applications is still primarily affected by single thread
performance. Instruction-level parallelism (ILP) speeds up programs by executing
instructions of the program in parallel, with 'superscalar' processors achieving
maximum performance. At the same time, energy efficiency is a key criteria to
keep in mind as such speedup happens, with these two being conflicting criteria
in system design. This project develops a Statically Controlled Asynchronous
Lane Execution (SCALE) approach that has the potential to meet or exceed the
performance of a traditional superscalar processor while approaching the energy
efficiency of a very long instruction word (VLIW) processor. As implied by its
name, the SCALE approach has the ability to scale to different types and levels
of parallelism. The toolset and designs developed in this project will be
available as open-source and will also have an impact on both education and
research. The SCALE architectural and compiler techniques will be included in
undergraduate and graduate curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SCALE approach
supports separate asynchronous execution lanes where dependencies between
instructions in different lanes are statically identified by the compiler to
provide inter-lane synchronization. Providing distinct lanes of instructions
allows the compiler to generate code for different modes of execution to adapt
to the type of parallelism that is available at each point within an
application. These execution modes include explicit packaging of parallel
instructions, parallel and pipelined execution of loop iterations, single
program multiple data (SPMD) execution, and independent multi-
threading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.