* 1900168
* Catalyst Award: Visible-range heterojunction nanofiber photocatalysts for water splitting: The effect of co-catalysts
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Keerthi Senevirathne, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2023
* USD 149,414.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University will investigate the effect of
heterojunction photocatalytic systems that encompasses metal oxides and
phosphides on water splitting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this
project are (1) to use co-electrospinning technique to synthesize multicomponent
heterojunction nanofiber photocatalysts and correlate the heterojunction
composition with activity of water splitting and (2) to identify the of the role
of low-cost core-shell type monolayer nanoparticle co-catalysts in enhanced
photocatalytic activity. In order to produce heterojunction photocatalytic
systems, a versatile polymer-assisted electrospinning technique coupled with
microwave-assisted polyol reduction method will be employed. The structural and
physico-chemical properties along with photocatalytic activities will be
evaluated by performing numerous analytical techniques including X-ray
diffraction (XRD), electron microscopy (SEM &amp; TEM), surface analysis (BET
and XPS), elemental analysis (EDS), and light-induced water splitting analysis.
The potential contributions and outcomes of the successful completion of this
project are: (1) development of methodology for preparation of heterojunction
metal oxide and metal phosphide photocatalytic systems, (2) establishment of
structure-activity relationship in terms of photocatalytic water splitting, and
(3) development of facile protocol to synthesize core-shell type nanoscale co-
catalysts. Moreover, the results would provide insight on how to reduce the cost
factor of expensive noble metal co-catalysts and utilize them along with cheap
metals to achieve the same or greater catalytic activity in comparison to noble
metal only co-catalysts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.