* 1900445
* Research Initiation Award: Robust Management of Earthen Levee Stability in the Face of Uncertainty for Resilient Geotechnical Infrastructures
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Lei Wang, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,997.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. This
award to the University of the District of Columbia (UDC) has potential broader
impacts in a number of areas. The goal of the project is to advance the
fundamental understanding of robustness as a performance indicator for
geotechnical infrastructures and establish an informed decision support
framework for robust management of earthen levees against multiple hazards. The
research will be integrated into geotechnical engineering courses at
UDC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a robust management
methodology to address the infrastructure robustness under multiple hazards and
advance the state-of-practice in adaptive management of geotechnical
infrastructures. The cornerstones of the robust management methodology are three
tightly integrated concepts: engineering robustness against multiple hazards,
Bayesian inference, and multi-objective based decision-support. Firstly, an
original quantitative robustness metric will be formulated for assessing the
capability of earthen levees to withstand hazard events such as floods and
earthquakes. Then a novel probabilistic framework will be established for
robustness and reliability assessment of earthen levees. Finally, an intelligent
decision support framework will be created to turn numerical simulation results
and performance data into robust management capability. The research is expected
to fill a knowledge gap in geotechnical engineering by transforming the
robustness concept into an effective decision support tool for geotechnical
infrastructure management. The results of the research will lead to an
innovative solution for resilient geotechnical infrastructures in the face of
uncertainty, which can protect the public and benefit society through safer
engineering practice for risk reduction and
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.