* 1900482
* Fluorescent Probes for the Detection of Ethylene
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Brian Michel, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Ethylene is an important chemicals in modern society, with impacts ranging from
the production of plastics and other chemicals to playing a significant role in
the food supply chain as the primary ripening hormone of some fruit. As a
result, there has been a significant effort to detect this small molecule via
instrumentation and with molecular recognition. While these efforts have led to
some sensitive approaches for ethylene detection, methods for detecting ethylene
in complex environments (such as inside a plant cell) do not currently exist. In
this project, Professor Michel of the University of Denver is developing new
small molecule probes that increase fluorescence upon reaction with ethylene. An
understanding of the relationship between the structure of the probe and its
signaling property in a specific environment are critical to the sensitive
detection of ethylene. Fluorescent and color-producing probes have the unique
ability to produce color within otherwise invisible chemical processes. This
research is being developed into an integrated lecture-lab module for
undergraduate organic students to provide context to underrepresented topics.
Professor Michel develops outreach demonstrations at local high schools. Due to
the desire to understand and control ethylene in the fruit supply chain, this
research may have a broader impact on society by increasing the understanding of
the molecular roles of ethylene in the ripening processes; thereby preventing
premature food spoilage and reducing agricultural waste. Further, the graduate
and undergraduate students working on this project are underrepresented
minorities who are gaining a unique skill set due to the interdisciplinary
nature of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Michel of the University of Denver is developing new small molecule
fluorescent probes for the detection of ethylene. Due to the relatively small
and unreactive nature of ethylene under the confined conditions of living
systems, an organometallic-based approach is being developed, which requires a
fundamental understanding of the relationship between the ligands bound to the
metal center and stoichiometric reactivity with ethylene. This research
determines the optimal probes for a particular application, such as the
detection of ethylene in relevant biological systems including A. thaliana and
E. coli. Detection of ethylene in these organisms is being investigated with
probe modifications tailored to the specific goals and challenges presented by
these systems. The detection of gaseous ethylene in the atmosphere including
from ripening fruit is also being investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.