* 1900416
* Probing the rules governing domain formation and protein partitioning in membrane
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* John Straub, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 509,997.00

Professor John E. Straub at Boston University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) Program in the
Chemistry Division to perform theoretical and computational research on
predictions of the structure of the lipid membrane. The lipid membrane plays a
key role in the organization and function of the cell. The systematic
investigation of lipid membranes is essential to our understanding of
fundamental aspects of cellular function, including cellular transport and
signaling. At the present time, state-of-the-art computational models fail to
capture key aspects of membrane structure and function. The Straub group is
developing novel theoretical models of membrane and membrane proteins that
aspire to a new level of realism in the computational modeling of the cell. As
such, the successful development of the methods and their applications may be
transformative to the field. This project includes the training and mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate research students as well as the development of
simulation methods, codes, and datasets. A complete textbook on the topic
"Mathematical Methods for Chemists" is being developed that will be made freely
available to instructors and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program of
analyzing multi-component protein mixtures partitioning with lipid domains in
heterogeneous membrane surface structure is extremely challenging. For direct
comparison with experiment, it is necessary to perform all-atom simulations, so
the free energy calculations use Umbrella Sampling and Energy Representation
methods for speed and accuracy and Simulated Tempering in dihedral space and
free volume space for enhanced conformational sampling. The multi-component
mixtures are complex, containing cholesterol, sphingolipids, glycolipids and
other agents important in determining lipid phase domains. The goal of this
research is to enable the first de novo studies of membrane domain formation and
membrane protein partitioning using atomistic models. The models are validated
against average experimental measurements of nanoscopic membrane structures in
membrane mixtures and protein partitioning between lipid
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.