* 1900746
* Dynamics and Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* HanFeng Li, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 224,996.00

This project is concerned with two mathematical fields. One of these studies
various algebras in the analytic setting, which were originally invented by von
Neumann to study quantum mechanics in physics. The other field studies the long
time behavior of systems under evolution, such as the status of the solar system
after one billion years and, more generally, symmetries of systems. Although
these two fields look very different, in the last several years some surprising
connections between them have been discovered, especially about infinite
symmetries that can be approximated by finite symmetries. These connections have
led to applications to both fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator aims to deepen the connections between operator algebras and
dynamical systems. This includes the connection between the torsion-type
invariant involving the first field and entropy invariant from the second field,
and the study of Sylvester rank functions motivated by earlier investigations of
connections between these two fields. The principal investigator will also study
an embedding problem in the second field using mean dimension and Bernoulli
actions. This project will help us understand the geometry and dynamics of
various spaces and algebras. The newly-founded theory of invariants for sofic
group actions, including both entropy and mean dimension, is developing rapidly.
This research will give us a better understanding of this theory. Operator
algebras have been found to be a powerful tool in the study of algebraic actions
of non-abelian groups, replacing the commutative algebra tool in the study of
algebraic actions of abelian groups. The project on the connection between the
torsion-type invariant and entropy already has applications to the first theory
and the entropy theory of such actions. Discoveries made under this project
would lead to more applications and strengthen our understanding of a variety of
mathematical phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.