* 1900787
* Excellence in Research:  A Novel High Throughput Forward Osmosis Membrane for Produced Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Raghava Kommalapati, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Hydraulic fracturing operations for shale gas and oil production consume high
volumes of fresh water eventually generating flowback water and produced water
as byproducts. Much of this water is disposed of through deep-well injection
which, if handled improperly, can cause environmental hazards. Ideally, produced
water would instead be treated and discharged to the environment. Due to high
levels of organic contaminants and various salts present in produced water,
there is a lack of efficient and mature technologies for this application.
Reverse osmosis is ineffective for treating produced water because the osmotic
pressure caused by the high salinity repels the hydraulic pressure used in
reverse osmosis. Forward osmosis is an emerging technology that is suitable for
treating produced water since it is a naturally osmotic process. Forward osmosis
membranes have shown promising performance for separating organic pollutants and
salt from some wastewater and for treating produced water at high salinity.
However, to apply forward osmosis technologies to produced water treatment at
the industrial scale, there are technical challenges that must be addressed,
including: (1) relatively low flux of commercially available forward osmosis
membranes, (2) membrane fouling caused by deposition of organic matter during
forward osmosis, and (3) ammonia loss from the water feeding side of the
membrane when ammonia-carbon dioxide is used as draw solute in the forward
osmosis process. The project will develop a unique dual-skinned forward osmosis
membrane designed to overcome these challenges. Computational modeling will be
applied to describe the mechanisms by which flux is improved and fouling is
mitigated. Research and education will be integrated through educational
activities and training of undergraduate and graduate students. These activities
will prepare students to become community-engaged scholars as well as future
policymakers through a service-learning pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this research is to make it possible to efficiently treat shale oil and gas
produced water at the industrial level. Toward this goal, the project will
investigate a novel high throughput forward osmosis membrane design that is
optimized for treating high-salinity produced water. The forward osmosis
membrane will consist of an intermediate nanofibrous support layer and double
ultrathin skins on both sides of the support layer. The support layer will be a
porous nanofiber textile containing polyetherimide and graphene oxide. To reduce
membrane fouling and to repel ammonia loss from the feeding produced water side,
the membrane skins will be coated with zwitterionic polymers, which are highly
hydrophilic. Membrane synthesis, characterization, and performance evaluation is
integrated with molecular dynamics simulation to fabricate and optimize a
membrane for produced water treatment using the forward osmosis process. The
performance and stability of the developed membrane for treating produced water
will be examined over the long-term, and the environmental and economic impacts
of the new produced water treatment process will be evaluated through a life
cycle assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.