* 1900540
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of Ion Currents in the Oxyfuel Cutting Flame and their Links to Critical Process Parameters
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Alexandrina Untaroiu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2023
* USD 271,403.00

The award seeks to address serious persistent challenges in providing process
feedback to better control and fully automate the oxyfuel cutting process.
Though it is more than a century old, oxyfuel's (or 'flame-cutting's')
unparalleled performance on thick steel has rendered it an enduring favorite in
shipyards, building construction, rail, defense, and countless other heavy
industries. The harsh operating environment (open flames, extreme heat) limit
the ability of contemporary sensor suites to provide reliable data essential for
process feedback control and automation. A potential solution to this problem is
motivated by preliminary measurements demonstrating that electrical events
called 'ion currents' associated with the flame itself can reliably indicate
vital process states. The research will probe the underlying physics of the
flame via modeling and experimental efforts. If successful the work could
realize reliable cost-effective control and automation of the oxyfuel cutting
process, a capability of great interest to many core US industries involved in
construction, and major equipment manufacture for defense and energy
applications. This is a collaborative research, whereby the experimental work
will be undertaken at a predominantly undergraduate institute, while most of the
modeling efforts will be conducted at the partner university. Engaging
undergraduate students in industrially relevant research projects will hopefully
encourage and promote advanced manufacturing beyond those immediately involved,
and encourage broader participation. Collaboration with the partner university
and the industrial partner, IHT-Automation, will also increase the workforce
preparedness of both the graduate student and undergraduate students working on
this project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work tests the validity of a reduced-
order ion transport model that considers standoff distance, work-surface/kerf
chemical activity, and flame chemical activity with respect to the resulting
current-voltage characteristic between the oxyfuel cutting torch and the
workpiece. A novel spinning disc Langmuir probe technique will establish a
spatially resolved map for the ion densities in the flame. Using these data as a
reference, a multi-dimensional computational fluid dynamics simulation will be
built on recently developed reduced chemical kinetic models to fully resolve the
formation and transport of charged species throughout the flow. Subsequent
analysis of the modeling and experimental results will validate or reject a
highly simplified one-dimensional transport model relating the current-voltage
characteristic of the flame to critical events. These include drift in standoff,
ready-to-pierce, pierce success/failure, loss-of-cut prediction, drift in
fuel/oxygen ratio, flameout, and potentially others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.