* 1900993
* Ergodicity and the Number of Nodal Domains of Eigenfunctions of the Laplacian
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Junehyuk Jung, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 09/30/2020
* USD 149,998.00

The main research objective of this project is to investigate mathematically a
newly discovered link between two seemingly unrelated physical phenomena. For
instance, there are two physical experiments one can perform with a bounded,
smooth planar lamina. Firstly, one can hit a billiard ball and watch its
trajectory over a long time as it bounces off the boundary of the lamina.
Secondly, one can resonate the lamina and observe the modes of vibration as the
frequency increases. One of the oldest works regarding the latter experiment
includes Chladni's experiment in the 18th century. The PI and collaborators
recently discovered that there is an unexpected connection between the types of
trajectories one observes, and the geometry of patterns one obtains as a result
of vibration. In modern language, this is a study of the relation between
classical dynamics and corresponding quantum dynamics. The project aims to
further explore this newly found connection in various setup to expand our
knowledge about the impact of the presence of chaos in classical dynamics to the
corresponding quantum dynamics. This research involves training upper class
undergraduate students and graduate students, and developing a topic course for
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To be specific, the PI is interested in the impact of
ergodicity of geodesic flow on the geometry of nodal sets of eigenfunctions of
the Laplace-Beltrami operator. The PI proposes to investigate the geometry of
nodal sets in two contrasting cases: hyperbolic 3 manifolds with a cusp and
circle bundles over closed surfaces endowed with a metric that is invariant
under the circular action. The geodesic flow is always ergodic in the former
examples, and never ergodic in the latter examples. The complexity of the nodal
set will be measured by the zeroth and the first Betti numbers. The PI also
proposes to study the long-standing problem regarding the existence of embedded
eigenvalues of Hodge Laplacian. This is the first step to be done in order to
understand the interplay between ergodicity and eigenforms of Hodge
Laplacian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.