* 1900176
* Collaborative Research: Controlling the properties of oxide-encapsulated metals for interfacial catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Eranda Nikolla, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 01/31/2023
* USD 284,975.00

Solid catalysts play an important role in energy-efficient commercial processes
used to produce fuels, chemicals, and energy, and also in pollution mitigation.
Most commercial solid catalysts used today consist of metal particles supported
on high surface area support materials. Improvements in these catalysts are
needed to further improve their efficiency. Successful research in this area
results in lower energy consumption and reduced environmental impact of many
chemical processes. One approach to this goal is through control of the
interfaces between the metal particles and the support materials. In this
project, Dr. Nikolla (Wayne State University) and Dr. Medlin (University of
Colorado) are developing an understanding these metal/support interfaces with
the objective of discovering more active and efficient catalysts. Dr. Nikolla
and Dr. Medlin actively engage in outreach activities related to the education
of young students, especially those from underrepresented groups. For example,
they are developing workshops for underrepresented K-12 female students to
enhance their understanding and desire in pursuing higher education in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Dr. Nikolla and Dr.
Medlin are also designing activities to inform parents about STEM fields, so
that the parents can encourage their children to pursue STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Eranda Nikolla of Wayne State University and Dr.
Will Medlin of University of Colorado are developing an understanding of solid
metal/metal oxide interfaces in "inverted" catalytic systems with the objective
of enhancing catalytic activity and selectivity in chemical reactions. They are
synthesizing controlled metal oxide-encapsulated metal nanoparticles (i.e., M@MO
structures) with systematic variations in structure and composition of both the
metal and metal oxide components. The research team correlates these synthetic
variations to the surface chemical properties and catalyst performance.
Fundamental insights from experimental model catalysts coupled with advanced
characterization and computational studies on inverted catalyst systems are
being used to advance the understanding of interfacial chemistry. The
encapsulated catalyst systems are also being investigated as a platform for
controlling the near-surface environment around the reactive interface through
functionalization of the oxide pores with organic ligands. Dr. Nikolla and Dr.
Medlin are actively engaged with educational and research outreach activities
aimed at inspiring and informing undergraduate and K-12 female students from
underrepresented groups regarding STEM fields and research in the area of
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.