* 1900551
* Theoretical Studies of Intermolecular Forces
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2022
* Krzysztof Szalewicz, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 10/31/2022
* USD 555,324.00

Professor Krzysztof Szalewicz of the University of Delaware is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to study forces acting between molecules. Although such
forces are about ten times weaker than the chemical bonding forces acting inside
molecules, they determine properties of most materials and living organisms.
Intermolecular forces can be calculated using methods developed by Szalewicz and
coworkers. A global analytic function fitted to results of such calculations is
called its force field. Once the force field is known for a molecular cluster,
condensed phase, or biological aggregate all properties of such systems can be
predicted by solving the classical or quantum equations for atomic motions. One
goal of this research is to increase the understanding of the dependence of
these properties on specifics of intermolecular forces, which provides guidance
in designing new materials. Another goal is to improve algorithms and
computational methods to make first-principles predictions for systems several
times larger than it is now possible. The physics-based force fields to be
calculated hold promise for transforming the field of biomolecular simulations
and of materials modelling and design. Such force fields are also relevant for
metrology standards and for interpreting spectroscopic or scattering
measurements, provide data for constructing models of the atmosphere, and help
to understand processes in interstellar molecular clouds. The new crystal
structure predictions methods can assist pharmaceutical industry in finding
polymorphic forms of drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
Szalewicz's research is to increase the first-principles-based understanding of
physical, chemical, and biochemical phenomena that depend on intermolecular
forces. High-accuracy intermolecular force fields can be computed using
symmetry-adapted perturbation theory (SAPT), which was co-developed by
Szalewicz's group. SAPT provides a unique ability to interpret properties
dependent on intermolecular forces in terms of the four fundamental physical
mechanisms that lead to the electrostatic, exchange, induction, and dispersion
contributions to the interaction energies. SAPT based on monomers described by
density-functional theory (DFT), a method denoted as SAPT(DFT), is as accurate
as SAPT, but computationally more efficient. The developments of theory include
work on nonlocal correlation functionals which predict accurate dispersion
energies within the DFT framework, improved DFT methods that can be paired with
accurate dispersion energies, extensions of the automated force-field generation
method developed earlier in Szalewicz's group to flexible monomers,
multicomponent methods for crystal structure predictions from first principles,
and universal force fields based on ab initio computed monomer properties, a
step in the direction of physics-based biomolecular force fields. Several
applications of these methods to systems of current experimental, observational,
or technological interest are also pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.