* 1900476
* Advanced Time-Resolved Studies of the O-O Bond Formation Mechanisms: Interplay of the Metal and Ligand Redox Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Yulia Pushkar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism,B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Yulia Pushkar of the Department of
Physics and Astronomy at Purdue University studies the time-resolved mechanism
of dioxygen (O2) formation in artificial photosynthesis. In artificial
photosynthesis, solar energy is converted into chemical energy through
generation of the clean fuels hydrogen and oxygen, a process which requires
rearrangement of chemical bonds. Fundamental understanding of this process is
required for the development of new catalysts and devices which are able to
mimic natural photosynthesis. The development of artificial photosynthesis and
its large-scale implementation can address energy needs of modern society. This
research lies at the interface of physics, chemistry and materials science, with
results expected to impact diverse fields and contribute to fundamental science,
education and national energy security. Planned research and educational
activities are designed to increase participation of under-represented students
from economically disadvantaged backgrounds, improve experiences of female
students in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics), enhance
training of students via integration of research results into curricula and to
deliver teaching modules to schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in this
project focuses on the complex multi-electron chemical process of artificial
photosynthesis. A major project goal is to determine the structure, electronic
configurations and dynamics of the critical intermediates involved in water
oxidation. In this multi-scale approach, time-resolved techniques monitor the
evolution of structure and electronic states in newly designed ruthenium
catalysts, with a focus on the key mechanism of oxygen-oxygen bond formation and
its dependence on ligand structure. The relationship between molecular structure
and catalytic activity is tested by a combination of experiments and quantum-
mechanical computational models. Experimental techniques in this study of in
situ catalytic water oxidation are synchrotron-based X-ray spectroscopy,
including X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES), extended X-ray
absorption fine structure (EXAFS), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and
multi-wavelength kinetic resonance Raman spectroscopy. These experimental
techniques deliver information on the structure of the intermediates and their
electronic configuration as they evolve during the catalytic
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.