* 1900560
* Asymptotic vs. Uniform Approximation in Dynamical Systems and Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Dmitry Kleinbock, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 223,000.00

This project deals with certain algebraic dynamical systems and their
applications to number theory. A dynamical system here stands for an abstract
set of points together with an evolution law that governs the way points move
over time. Such abstract dynamical systems form the basis for models of a wide
range of important phenomena in science and engineering. It turns out that also
many problems in mathematics concerning simultaneous approximation of real
numbers by rational numbers can be understood in terms of the behavior of
dynamical systems. Furthermore, systems that arise in this context are of
algebraic nature, which makes it possible to use a wide variety of sophisticated
tools for their investigation. This research project aims to advance the
framework of algebraic dynamical systems in approximation theory, develop new
methods, and obtain far-reaching generalizations of results in the field.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the project and
introduced to new methods and techniques in number theory and dynamics. These
students will also supervise research projects within the framework of the
PRIMES program, an after-school research program for high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During recent years there has been an influx of new ideas
concerning connections between Diophantine approximation and dynamical systems.
This research project continues the study of phenomena in both homogeneous
dynamics and number theory in two directions: related to so-called asymptotic
and uniform approximation. Among mathematical tools to be employed are:
quantitative non-divergence on the space of lattices, Schmidt games and their
modifications, integral inequalities of Eskin-Margulis-Mozes, exponential
mixing, equidistribution properties, and geometry of
numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.