* 1900464
* Cyclopropenone-based Platform for Light-directed Drug Delivery, Photo-medicine, and Bio-imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Vladimir Popik, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 550,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Vladimir Popik of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Georgia (UGA) develops new photochemical
reactions which have potential applications for drug delivery and activation.
The fundamental chemistry is based on organic molecules which undergo light-
induced dissociation, and where carbon monoxide is one of the products. Since
the opacity of tissues limits the amount of light that can be delivered to
target areas in therapy, Professor Popik explores methods to boost the
efficiency of the photo-induced released of molecules with the body through a
quantum chain reaction. This is a process in which one packet (photon) of light
causes multiple molecules to be released. This strategy may allow for the
selective treatment of localized malignancies, while avoiding common side
effects of common chemotherapies. The project provides students with
interdisciplinary training at the interface of synthetic and physical organic
chemistry, as well as photochemistry and biochemistry. High school students
conducting summer internship in Professor Popik's laboratory via the UGA Young
Dawgs Program are exposed to modern scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantum efficiency of the
photodecarbonylation reaction of cyclopropenones in the crystalline state is
several times higher than in solution, and could exceed 400%. Professor Popik
explores the mechanism of the quantum yield amplification phenomenon and
parameters that control the energy propagation process in cyclopropenone
crystals. Harnessing the quantum chain reaction allows for the production of
several molecules of the product per one photon absorbed. Such photoreactions
are especially important in the expected applications, where light delivery is
hampered by the opacity or scattering properties of the medium. Nanocrystalline
suspensions of specially designed cyclopropenone derivatives permit practical
use of the quantum yield amplification. The covalent surface derivatization of
the crystals and control of the size of the crystals allows for the preparation
of stable suspensions or colloidal solutions and provides control over the
transport and bio-distribution properties of nanocrystals. Light-directed
delivery of bioactive substrates using cyclopropenone nanocrystalline
suspensions offers very high light sensitivity, ability to control bio-
distribution, and is accompanied by the release of carbon monoxide, which is an
important bio-active agent in itself as well as a valuable adjuvant for anti-
cancer antibiotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.