* 1900996
* CNS Core: Large: Collaborative Research: Towards an Evolvable Public Key Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Bryan Parno, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2024
* USD 190,819.00

The importance of the Transport Layer Security (TLS) public key infrastructure
(PKI) to the success of the Internet cannot be overstated. From social
networking to banking, from mobile devices to cloud computing, the PKI allows
communicating parties to be sure of whom they are communicating with, that their
communication is confidential, and that their communication has not been
tampered with. Despite its incredible importance, the PKI has been notoriously
difficult to evolve to meet new security concerns and Internet demands. This
project introduces new, deployable alternatives to key parts of the PKI to make
it more evolvable, manageable, and secure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
three primary thrusts. The first introduces a key enabling technology behind the
subsequent thrusts, called assertion-carrying certificates (ACCs). ACCs expand
today's certificates with the capability of including a small amount of code (in
the form of assertions) to be evaluated as part of the certificate validation
process. The second thrust applies ACCs to enable certificate authorities to
more readily evolve to new demands for certificate delegation and automated
issuance. The third thrust applies ACCs and trusted execution environments to
enable web-hosting services like content delivery networks to securely manage
their customers' cryptographic keys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Correct operation of
the PKI is paramount to ensuring a secure, authenticated Internet. Recent
efforts have proven that progress towards a more secure PKI is possible, but a
more fundamental focus is needed to address the underlying challenges. This
project will do just that by developing a new, extensible approach to
constraining when identities on the Internet should be trusted. This project
will make it straightforward and safe to extend the basic abstractions offered
by the PKI, thereby enabling it to evolve to meet changing
trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's code and data will be made publicly
available and maintained at https://securepki.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.