* 1900420
* Reduced-Scaling Quantum Mechanical Response Theory for the Spectroscopic Properties of Molecules in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Thomas Crawford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 02/28/2023
* USD 510,000.00

Professor T. Daniel Crawford, of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program to develop computational tools to predict the
optical properties of chiral molecules in solution. A chiral molecule has the
same atoms connected in a different order. Chiral molecules cannot be super-
imposed on their mirror image. There is a "left-handed" and a "right-handed"
form each of which turns the waves of light into different directions.
Understanding chiral molecules is especially important to the pharmaceutical
industry as one chiral form may be of great medicinal value, while the other
form may be of no value or toxic. The accurate prediction of the optical
properties of chiral molecules dissolved in liquids is a daunting task for
computational chemistry. While computer models of simple molecular properties
are well established, interactions of chiral molecules with light present unique
challenges even for state-of-the-art computational methods. In this research
project, Professor Crawford and coworkers develop robust and accurate
computational techniques that take less time than current methods. These
computational tools allow researchers to understand the relationship between
chiral molecular structures and their interactions with light. The new tools
provides the chemistry community with a deeper understanding how molecules
interact with light. This research program benefits the larger field of
computational science through the education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students in the fundamental theory and development of quantum
chemical methods. Software developed during this project is included in PSI4, a
widely used computational chemistry package that is freely available to the
community. Dr. Crawford is one of the lead developers of
PSI4.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daniel Crawford and coworkers advance the high-
accuracy modeling of chiroptical properties in the liquid phase by streamlining
coupled cluster theory through complementary approaches. They build upon
reduced-scaling methods to develop production-level implementation of an
"extended local-pair-natural-orbital" approach, in which the correlation domain
for each pair of localized occupied orbitals is constructed based on natural
orbitals computed via an approximate second-order field-perturbed density. The
Crawford group is extending their recent collaborative work on the development
of a "diagrammatic" stochastic coupled cluster approach that exhibits a hundred-
fold reduction in the memory costs for the solution of high-accuracy coupled
cluster methods (through quadruple excitations). Following their demonstration
that the introduction of a time-dependent external electric field yields
substantially greater wave function sparsity than that of the field-perturbed
wave function, they are developing a locally correlated real-time coupled
cluster approach that can take advantage of existing linear-scaling frameworks.
Development of these new models involves numerous, well-established
collaborations with both experimentalists and
theorists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.