* 1900248
* Development of Catalytic Metal-Coupled Electron-Transfer (MCET) for Sustainable Chemical and Electrochemical Oxygen Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jerome Robinson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation,
Professor Jerome Robinson of Brown University is working on energy storage. This
theme is relevant to the efficient use of "intermittent energy" from wind and
solar sources. This project focuses on the storage of energy in the form of
peroxides, compounds with oxygen-oxygen bonds. The use of oxygen is attractive
since it is one of the most abundant elements in the earth's atmosphere. Current
industrial routes to peroxides are energy-intensive. The project is also
addressing small-scale applications relevant to personalized-energy storage. The
research team designs metal catalysts to produce peroxides using electro-
chemical means. This project provides hands-on training opportunities in the
areas of renewable energy and green chemistry for scientists at the graduate,
undergraduate, and high-school levels. Initiatives focusing on broadening
representation and increasing retention in historically underrepresented groups
in chemistry are being advanced through summer research opportunities and
cohort-based mentor and researcher training
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient and controlled delivery of electrons
and protons are critical to many sustainable energy applications. Despite
significant advances and intensive research interest, achieving high selectivity
and activity at low overpotentials with earth-abundant catalysts remains a
formidable challenge. With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Jerome Robinson of Brown University is advancing
the fundamental understanding of catalytic metal-coupled electron transfer
(MCET) to enable the sustainable and selective reduction of oxygen to peroxide
using earth-abundant catalysts. To achieve this goal, this project is focused on
developing electrocatalytic MCET processes for the reduction of oxygen to
peroxide, identifying and optimizing conditions for turnover of the Lewis-acid
activator, and managing potentially competitive pathways such as proton-coupled
electron transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.