* 1900985
* Banach Spaces with a Focus on Sobolev-Style Spaces, Frame Theory, and Quantum Graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Javier Chavez-Dominguez, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 154,264.00

Banach spaces are a useful and powerful abstract framework to understand real-
world data such as images, sound, or experimental results, and they do so in at
least two different levels. First, for a particular instance of data, a Banach
space provides a way to rigorously quantify various characteristics of that
data. At a second level of abstraction, studying the structure of the whole
space consisting of all possible instances of data has been crucial to the
solution of certain problems, such as the prediction of the future behavior of
the system being modeled. For this project, the spaces under consideration come
from both signal processing (which deals with the problem of storing information
about an object by considering it as a sum of simpler ones) and Quantum
Information Science (which studies a mathematical framework for communications
where one can encode information not as a string of 0s and 1s as today's
computers do, but rather in the state of a quantum-mechanical system). The PI
seeks to advance the knowledge of some spaces coming from the two aforementioned
practical settings -- as well as related analytical considerations -- via
fundamental research, including research conducted by undergraduate students
under the PI's supervision. In addition, through his outreach and mentoring of
postdocs, the PI will contribute to growing and diversifying the group of
students and researchers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
divided into three parts. The first is inspired by an uncertainty principle in
time-frequency analysis, which is related to Sobolev-style inequalities and
spaces associated to finite graphs endowed with an extra "magnetic" structure.
The name comes from the fact that the presence of a magnetic potential in some
quantum-mechanical models of bonds between atoms is modeled not just with a
graph, but also with an additional assignment of a complex number of modulus one
to each edge of the graph. The second part of the project seeks to generalize
the theory of frames, i.e. overcomplete bases, from the Hilbert space setting to
the general Banach space one, where we no longer enjoy the advantages of having
a large group of symmetries. Significant work has already been done in this
direction, but mostly in the infinite-dimensional setting, and the PI will
continue developing the nascent theory of frames on finite-dimensional Banach
spaces. The third part is focused on quantum graphs, which are linear spaces of
complex-valued matrices that come from Quantum Information Theory and can be
considered as generalizations of classical combinatorial graphs. The PI will
investigate quantum versions of a variety of classical results in graph theory,
particularly those related to the aforementioned Sobolev-style
inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.