* 1900823
* Excellence in Research: Cominuscule Quantum Schubert Cells and Faddeev-Reshetikhin-Takhtajian (FRT) Bialgebras
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Garrett Johnson, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2024
* USD 307,974.00

This project investigates a series of interrelated problems in quantum algebras
and noncommutative ring theory. The term quantum group is used to describe a
large class of algebras which can be thought of as deformations of classical
groups and algebras. Some important examples of quantum groups include the
quantum enveloping algebras of semisimple Lie algebras and the quantized
coordinate rings of algebraic groups. Quantum groups originated in physics, but
have since played important roles in multiple areas of mathematics, such as
topology and statistical mechanics. The original path to constructing the
quantized coordinate ring of an algebraic group is through a universal bialgebra
construction due to Faddeev, Reshetikhin, and Takhtajian. The bialgebras arising
from this construction are now commonly referred to as universal FRT-bialgebras.
Quantum Schubert cell algebras are another family of algebras of interest in
this research project. These are certain subalgebras of the negative (or
positive) part of a quantized enveloping algebra. They have played important
roles recently in the context of quantum cluster algebras and braided symmetric
algebras. We will study relationships between FRT-bialgebras and quantum
Schubert cell algebras as well as their ring-theoretical properties. This
project expands opportunities for student research involvement drawn from the
predominantly underrepresented minority student population at North Carolina
Central University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In several important cases, quantum
Schubert cell algebras may be regarded as quantized versions of unipotent Lie
algebras. The most famous examples of quantum Schubert cells are the algebras of
quantum matrices. Other important examples include the algebras of quantum
symmetric matrices and quantum anti-symmetric matrices. In this research project
we will study ring-theoretic properties of these types of algebras, such as
their quantum determinants, quantum minors, and quantum
Pfaffians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.