* 1900187
* Collaborative Research: Excellence In Research: Computational Framework and Data Science for Identification
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Albert Esterline, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,004,822.00

This project will enhance the data science capabilities and capacities at two
historically black colleges and universities: North Carolina A&amp;T State
University and Winston-Salem State University. These institutions will provide
graduate programs to their students and enable the future workforce. More
precisely, the project aims 1) to enhance research capabilities in identity and
data science and technology; 2) to enhance the capacity of North Carolina
A&amp;T State University and Winston-Salem State University to participate in
identity and data-science research; 3) to involve graduate and undergraduate
students, especially members of underrepresented minorities and females, in data
science and identity research; and 4) to strengthen the North Carolina A&amp;T
computer science doctoral and Master's programs and the Winston-Salem State
Master's program as well as to strengthen the pipeline to computer science
doctoral studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identity is an emerging critical research
field thanks in part to the digitization of life and the accompanying threats.
Data science helps by opening new opportunities for identifying and verifying
persons in both cyberspace and the physical world for such tasks as
authentication and intrusion detection. The project involves three thrusts.
Thrust I involves enhancing an existing computational framework for
identification. This thrust also involves extending the investigators'
enhancement of the single-sign-on WebID protocol to allow virtually any
authentication technique to be incorporated into the protocol, providing a
platform for experimenting with applications of authentication from the other
thrusts. Thrust II proposes authentication using periocular biometrics and
active authentication using behavioral biometrics, and Thrust III will mitigate
presentation attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.