* 1900876
* A Mechanism of Flash Sintering of Ionic Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Eugene Olevsky, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 04/30/2024
* USD 328,397.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Traditional densification of ceramics powders into a
functional component usually takes at least several hours. In 2010, a group of
scientists discovered that nearly instantaneous full densification can occur
(within five seconds) for certain ceramics when a high-level voltage or current
pass through a compact of these ceramic powders. Thus, this rapid densification
technique was named flash sintering. Since then, flash sintering has become one
of the most promising techniques for ceramics processing. However, the
mechanisms for this rapid sintering process are unclear; this project attempts
to reveal the underlying reasons. The experimental work in this study is
complemented by computational modeling, enabling a more comprehensive
understanding on the rapid densification mechanisms of flash sintering of
ceramic powders. This new knowledge then serves as fundamental guidance to
extend the flash sintering technique into a wider range of ceramic materials.
Graduate and undergraduate students (including minority and other
underrepresented students) are being trained in mechanical engineering and
materials science and engineering for careers in academia or high-technology
manufacturing. Virtual reality technology is used to provide an immersive and
interactive teaching and learning environment for materials sciences topics, and
helps to educate a workforce capable of using adaptive new technologies in a
rapidly changing society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The technique,
flash sintering, has demonstrated the ability to rapidly densify powder compacts
of ceramic materials. In this technique, an applied electric field initiates a
"flash" event and sintering occurs within a few seconds (at a threshold
temperature for a given applied electric field). Although flash sintering has
been observed in a variety of ceramic systems, the exact effects of electric
field or current on enhancing the densification rate and influencing the
microstructure evolution remain elusive, apart from the known thermal runaway
Joule heating ohmic mechanisms. A series of experimental and theoretical
modeling research activities are being carried out on ionic ceramic systems to
clarify the thermal and non-thermal factors of electric field in the flash
sintering process. In situ nanoscale imaging is used to observe the flash
sintering process of yttrium-stabilized zirconia ceramic systems as a function
of applied electric field, providing insights into the flash sintering
mechanism. In addition, multiscale atom-to-continuum modeling is being used to
simulate the flash sintering process of ionic ceramics in the presence of an
electric field. The modeling is revealing the rapid densification mechanisms of
flash sintering of ionic ceramics at the atomic level. Students are being
educated to become experts in the practice of experimental and computational
aspects of ceramic sintering technologies. As a result, graduates are being well
prepared to create sustainable engineering solutions to complex problems, and
thereby contributing to the cutting-edge of science and technology of ceramics
processing and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.