* 1900475
* Inverse Problems in Partial Differential Equations and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Plamen Stefanov, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2023
* USD 230,000.00

The primary focus of this project is on inverse problems of determining
parameters of media from remote measurements, in particular those arising in
Earth exploration, in cosmology and imaging of moving and changing media, in
medical imaging, and the sampling theory of linear and non-linear inverse
problems. The principal investigator will study the elastic earth model with
coefficients jumping across smooth surfaces and propagation and mode conversion
of pressure and shear waves in it. The goal is to show that one can recover
those coefficients stably from travel times of seismic waves. The principal
investigator will study problems of recovery of moving media and Lorentzian
metrics arising in relativity from remote observations. Tomography problems
arising in medical imaging will be studied as well. Finally, the principal
investigator will study the problem of finding the optimal sampling rate of
linear and non-linear operators with applications to Inverse Problems. The
interest to those is motivated by the fact that real life measurements are
discrete, they typically average over small detectors, and numerical simulations
are done on discrete grids as well.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator plans to do a full analysis of propagation, reflection,
transmission and mode conversion of elastic pressure and shear waves
(singularities) in isotropic elasticity with variable coefficients jumping
across smooth surfaces modeling the boundaries between the Mantle, etc. Some of
this analysis has been done in the flat constant coefficient case. The principal
investigator will study Rayleigh and Stoneley surface waves as well. Next, the
principal investigator will analyze the tensor tomography problem in Lorentzian
geometry and the non-linear problem of recovery of a Lorentzian metric from
remote observations. This problem is harder than its Riemannian counterpart
because signals moving faster than light are unrecoverable in a stable way. The
tomography problems arising in medical imaging, including Compton camera
imaging, will be treated as Fourier Integral Operators and its analysis would
require specific tools from that calculus. Finally, the principal investigator
plans to study sampling of images of linear and non-linear operators motivated
by practical considerations of ability to measure discrete data only. The
principal investigator will connect sampling theory with semiclassical analysis
and instead of looking into the "band limit" (the support of the Fourier
transform) he will relate the sampling requirements to the semi-classical wave
front set.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.