* 1900966
* Excellence in Research: Oxidative stress induced impact of cell-penetrating nanoparticles on cellular constituents in a cyanobacterial model
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Huan Chen, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2024
* USD 631,273.00

Adverse environmental hazards caused by fossil fuel use have sparked significant
interest in alternative energy technologies. As photosynthetic microorganisms,
cyanobacteria produce lipids, which can be converted to high-energy biofuels,
thus offering great potential for industrial and environmental applications.
This transformative research seeks to understand the unprecedented ability of
nanotechnological approaches to accelerate the development of biomass-derived
fuel production technologies for environmental sustainability. Iron
nanoparticles adsorb to cyanobacterial cell surfaces due to their high chemical
reactivity and can create oxidative stress leading to metabolic changes. The
goal of this study is to understand the unique effects of biological-
nanoparticle interactions at the cellular level and their impact on the
production of industrially useful molecules. Undergraduate and graduate students
will be mentored and trained on cutting-edge interdisciplinary research at the
home institution (Morgan State University) and the National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory (Florida State University). Research protocols generated from the
project will be incorporated in a 400-level undergraduate laboratory-based
educational course that the investigator teaches, providing rich research
experience for students who do not have the opportunity for individualized
research. Discoveries generated through this project will be disseminated
through presentations at national conferences, patents, peer-reviewed
publications, and outreach activities. A comprehensive understanding of the role
of iron nanoparticles in a model cyanobacterium will have far-reaching benefits
to advance research and promote discoveries across multiple disciplines
including bioenergy, environmentally safe remediation, and biosensing. The
research focuses on a major unsolved problem in the field of nanoparticle-
mediated impact in cyanobacteria, especially since these organisms are used as a
platform for bioenergy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to understand how
zero-valent iron nanoparticles which inertly penetrate cyanobacterial cells can
induce oxidative stress, and impact photosynthetic pigmentation, protein
regulation, and lipid profile. It will serve as a foundation for future
contributions by (i) evaluating the impact of nanoparticle-induced stress on
reactive oxygen species and pigment accumulation in cyanobacterium Fremyella
diplosiphon, (ii) deciphering differential protein regulation of antioxidative
enzymes in nano-treated F. diplosiphon using big data analytics, and (iii)
unraveling unique fatty acid methyl ester profiles and polar lipids using
comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography-time of flight and Fourier
transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry. The principal
investigator's research group proposes a hybrid system by incorporating iron
nanoparticles to enhance lipid production in cyanobacterial cells, leading to an
environmentally-safe alternative energy source. Through this innovative
approach, the project will provide a clear understanding of the impact of iron
nanoparticle-induced oxidative stress on protein and lipid domains when iron
nanoparticles non-antagonistically enter the cell. Unlocking the mechanisms of
nanoparticle-induced stress response on metabolic processes will offer
tremendous potential to understand their role in altering cellular constituents.
The team will provide interactive opportunities to students on the projects to
generate data, discuss results, write manuscripts, and present findings at
scientific conferences. This multidisciplinary project at the nexus of Biology,
Engineering, Nanotechnology, and Chemistry will equip the next-generation
researchers to address challenges in STEM fields. The proposed strategies will
generate fundamental knowledge of iron nanoparticle-mediated cell response and
provide new insights by studying oxidative stress-mediated effects on cellular
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.