* 1900135
* Reducing Quasiparticle Decoherence in Superconducting Quantum Circuits
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Eli Levenson-Falk, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 449,592.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum information science -the use of quantum
mechanics to perform novel computing, simulation, communication, and sensing -is
poised to revolutionize computing, biochemistry, condensed matter physics,
cryptography, and astronomy, as well as a host of other fields. One of the most
promising technology platforms is based on electrical circuits made of
superconducting materials and operated at cryogenic temperatures. Quantum
computers based on these quantum circuits have already been created and used for
simple applications. However, these circuits are limited by decoherence, the
loss or scrambling of quantum information due to environmental noise. A limiting
source of this decoherence is the presence of excess quasiparticle excitations
in the superconducting material. These quasiparticles are ubiquitous in quantum
circuits, but their origins and behavior remain poorly understood. In this
project, the PI is studying the mechanisms by which quasiparticles are created
and destroyed, characterizing different techniques for trapping quasiparticles
away from sensitive circuit elements, and using the knowledge gained in order to
mitigate their harmful effects on quantum circuits. The project also trains one
graduate student and one postdoctoral scholar in the rapidly expanding field of
quantum information technology, growing the workforce for both academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nonequilibrium
populations of quasiparticles exist in superconducting quantum circuits even at
very low temperatures, limiting the coherence of these circuits and causing
errors in quantum processors. The sources of these quasiparticles, their
behavior in quantum circuits, and the best methods for mitigating their effects
are all poorly understood. The goal of this project is to characterize these
sources and reduce the quasiparticle generation rate, to better understand the
mechanisms of quasiparticle annihilation and trapping and to increase the
annihilation and trapping rates, and to generally reduce quasiparticle-mitigated
decoherence. The experiments involved are based on high-fidelity measurements of
coherent superconducting circuits engineered to be sensitive to quasiparticles.
These include resonators incorporating phase-biased nanobridge Josephson
junctions, whose internal Andreev states serve as quasiparticle traps, as
sensitive non-saturating quasiparticle detectors. With these Andreev devices,
temporal and spatial correlations between quasiparticles are measured and
mechanisms of quasiparticle relaxation and excitation are characterized.
Transmon qubits with tunable frequency are used to measure quasiparticle energy
distributions; transmons engineered with quasiparticle-sensitive spectra are
used to measure quasiparticle density and transport characteristics. Finally,
tests of linear waveguide resonators' quality factors are used to measure
quasiparticle density and transport. All these devices are used to test ways of
mitigating quasiparticles, including radiation shielding, adding quasiparticle
traps, changing circuit materials, altering circuit design, and novel modes of
operation. The use of these circuits as quasiparticle-based detectors is also
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.