* 1900500
* RUI: Unusual Earth-Abundant Metal Complexes with Redox-Active Terpyridine Ligands for Reduction Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Guoqi Zhang, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 269,945.00

In this project, Dr. Guoqi Zhang of John Jay College of the City University of
New York is developing new catalysts for the synthesis of silicones. Silicones
are important to society as they are typically heat-resistant polymers used in
sealants, adhesives, lubricants, medicine, cooking utensils, and thermal and
electrical insulation. Silicones are currently industrially made using platinum
which is expensive, rare and environmentally-damaging to mine. This research is
focusing on replacing platinum with other more Earth-abundant and sustainable
metals. Dr. Zhang has designed new families of catalysts using metals such as
manganese, vanadium, and aluminum. Catalysts based on these inexpensive metals
have traditionally been ignored because they are usually unreactive and
unstable. Dr. Zhang is addressing these gaps using group attached to the metal
that enhance the reactivity of these metals. This project also provides hands-on
training for undergraduate students in both organic chemistry and inorganic
chemistry. Experience with modern instrumentation is gained by these students.
John Jay College, which has a large Hispanic student population, is an ideal
setting to train students who are underrepresented in scientific fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Zhang aims to investigate the synthesis, structures
and catalytic properties of base metal complexes supported by redox active
terpyridine ligands, as well as their catalytic properties relevant to silicone
preparation. Novel catalysts composed of Earth-abundant metals including
manganese, vanadium and aluminum and terpyridine-type ligands are being explored
for their unique structures and catalytic reactivity in reduction processes.
Their applications in catalytic hydrofunctionalization reactions are sought to
develop effective catalysts to replace platinum-based catalysts that are widely
used in industrial silicone production. Mechanistic studies are being carried
out based on a combined experimental and theoretical effort, in order to
understand the importance of ligand compartment and to establish the structure-
activity relationships. Dr. Zhang's active involvement in recruiting and
retaining minority students into scientific fields is helping to cultivate the
next generation workforce. This project is being done in collaboration with John
Jay's Program for Research Initiatives for Science
Majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.