* 1900340
* Mechanism-based development of new nickel-catalyzed stereospecific cross-electrophile coupling reactions of sulfonamides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Elizabeth Jarvo, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 595,587.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry
supports the research of Professor Elizabeth Jarvo in the Department of
Chemistry of the University of California, Irvine. Professor Jarvo is developing
new ways to make carbon-containing molecules used in agriculture,
pharmaceuticals, polymers and other materials. Traditional methods of making
these molecules rely on precious metals that are limited in supply and thus,
expensive and sometimes hard to obtain. Dr. Jarvo is trying to replace those
metals with more earth abundant nickel-based reagents that would be more
environmentally sustainable. With a focus on how the reaction occurs, the Jarvo
laboratory is gaining new insight into carbon-carbon bond forming reactions that
are important industrially. This project provides hands-on training to graduate
and undergraduate students. Professor Jarvo also organizes career-development
workshops that target female and underrepresented faculty and graduate students.
She co-organizes a day-long research symposium for Southern California
undergraduate students and participates in outreach programs that connect the UC
Irvine campus to nearby underserved middle
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Elizabeth Jarvo is developing
stereospecific cross-coupling and cross-electrophile coupling reactions of
benzylic sulfonamides using nickel catalysts. These new, catalytic methods
enable the synthesis of complex biologically active molecules. For example, the
work is defining stereoselective strategies for the synthesis of cyclopropanes,
a privileged moiety in medicinal chemistry. Importantly, mechanistic experiments
clarify the factors that govern reactivity of organonickel complexes to favor
two-electron reactions versus single-electron reactions, a long-standing
challenge in development of nickel-catalyzed reactions. Structural
characterization of organonickel intermediates provides experimental evidence
for the oxidation state of key catalytic intermediates and facilitates the
design of new catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.