* 1900317
* Chemical and Spectroscopic Studies of Nitrenium Ions and Related Species
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Daniel Falvey, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,001.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Daniel E. Falvey and his students
from the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Maryland,
College Park, are investigating the properties and behavior of a class of novel
molecular species called nitrenium ions. Nitrenium ions are highly reactive
substances with only two bonds to nitrogen and possessing a positive charge.
This differs from most nitrogen-containing structures, where nitrogen typically
has three bonds and a neutral charge. Under ordinary conditions, nitrenium ions
exist for only small fractions of a second. However, it is becoming increasingly
apparent that some processes in chemical synthesis, biology and the environment
might involve nitrenium ions as intermediates. Understanding and predicting the
outcomes of these reactions, therefore, requires accurate information on the
properties of nitrenium ions. Professor Falvey and his students are developing
methods for producing and observing nitrenium ions under well-defined laboratory
conditions. These methods are used to carry out detailed kinetic and
spectroscopic measurements on typical nitrenium ions. Experimental results are
compared to predictions from state-of-the art computer models, with a goal of
refining and improving these predictions. These results will then be available
to engineers and scientists who can use them to improve pharmaceutical and
agrochemical manufacturing processes, forecast the fate of pollutants in the
environment, and understand how the human body interacts with drugs and/or
toxins. Professor Falvey actively recruits a diverse group of students,
including women and students from traditionally underrepresented groups to
participate in these investigations. Students who are engaged in this research
gain hands-on experience, synthesizing and characterizing novel chemical
species, carrying out quantitative measurements on reaction rates and outcomes,
and computer modeling. These experiences prepare them for careers in academia,
industry and government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrenium ions are reactive
intermediates characterized by a dicoordinate nitrogen atom and bearing a formal
positive charge. Nitrogen-containing compounds are ubiquitous, as this element
is a component of pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, high-energy materials, and
industrial polymers. Nitrenium ions are intermediates that can form under
conditions when nitrogen-containing compounds are oxidized, and/or when the
nitrogen atom is substituted with good leaving groups. Nitrenium ions display a
wide range of reactivities. Simple alkylnitrenium ions are not even local minima
on the singlet potential energy surface, whereas amino-substituted examples are
indefinitely stable and can employed as Lewis acids and ligands in metal
complexes. Earlier work in Professor Falvey's lab established photochemical
methods for the generation of arylnitrenium ions, providing a means for
characterizing these species by laser flash photolysis and related methods. The
current effort extends these studies to non-arylnitrenium ions, including alkyl,
cycloalkyl and heteroarylnitrenium ions. These categories of nitrenium ions have
received far less attention, and little is known about their decay reactions, or
their stabilities. Some recent calculations indicate that cyclopropyl and
cyclobutylnitrenium ions will have non-classical sigma bonding similar to the
corresponding carbenium ions. Likewise, the sulfonylnitrenium ions appear to
have highly distorted structures, making them far less electrophilic than
intuition would suggest. Finally, there are several types of heteroarylnitrenium
ions and vinylnitrenium ions that have been predicted to have low energy triplet
states. This project aims to resolve fundamental questions about nitrenium ion
structure and reactivity. Methodology in this research includes synthesis of
photochemical precursors, analysis of stable products from the generated
nitrenium ions, spectroscopic and kinetic characterization of nitrenium ions
using laser flash photolysis, low temperature electron spin resonance studies of
triplet nitrenium ions, and computation studies of nitrenium ion electronic
structures and reaction mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.