* 1900456
* Measuring Student Engagement in Lower Division Engineering Mathematics Classes
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Aly Farag, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving undergraduate engineering education. It will do
so by designing, implementing, and testing a system to measure engineering
students' emotional, behavioral, and cognitive engagement in first- and second-
year engineering mathematics classes. Engineering programs suffer from a high
rate of attrition in the freshman year, primarily due to poor engagement of
students with their classes. The project plans to develop a sensor-driven,
computational approach to measure emotional and behavioral components of student
engagement. This information will be used to identify teaching strategies that
increase engagement, with the goal of enhancing student success and retention in
STEM education pathways. The project features a multi-disciplinary collaboration
between faculty and undergraduate researchers in engineering, the physical
sciences, psychological sciences, and education. The project will involve
approximately 300 students in first- and second-year engineering mathematics
classes and the experienced faculty who teach these courses. Findings from the
project could be a valuable step toward an early warning system to detect
student disengagement and anxiety in STEM and non-STEM courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals include: (i) establishment of a robust
network of non-obtrusive and non-invasive sensors in mid-size classes to enable
real-time extraction of facial and vital signs, which will be integrated and
displayed on instructors' dashboards; (ii) identification of robust descriptors
for modeling the emotional and behavioral components of engagement using data
collected by the sensor networks; (iii) pilot testing of the system's
effectiveness in gathering meaningful data for subsequent work on emotional,
behavioral, and cognitive metrics of engagement. The fundamental research
question to be addressed relates to improving student learning by the automated
capture of non-verbal cues of engagement: How can we use students' expressions
of engagement, based on non-verbal signs such as facial expressions, body and
eye movements, physiological reactions, posture, to enhance learning? Findings
from the project will constitute a foundation for multi-disciplinary research to
incorporate novel machine learning and artificial intelligence-based models for
measuring engagement in STEM classes. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.