* 1900017
* CDS&amp;E: D3SC: Accelerating Density Functional Theory Based Simulations and Materials Design with Machine Learning
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Le Song, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2023
* USD 449,999.00

Rampi Ramprasad and Le Song of the Georgia Institute of Technology are supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry to accelerate computer simulations of molecules and
materials. The award is co-funded by the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
program in the Division of Materials Research. Simulations based on Quantum
Mechanics are accurate, versatile and vital to molecular and materials
discovery. Unfortunately, for many real-world systems, they are also
painstakingly slow. Thus, scientists are often limited to studying idealized
systems at small scales. Ramprasad and Song are utilizing Artificial
Intelligence approaches to develop a new, transformative capability that
observes, distills and learns the behavior of the Quantum Mechanical equations
and notions of chemical (dis)similarity. Their new "Machine Learning" capability
is able to emulate Quantum Mechanical simulations, but at unprecedented speed-
ups of over eight orders of magnitude while still preserving accuracy. This
capability progressively improves in quality as it is periodically (or on-
demand) exposed to fresh data on new chemistries and molecular configurations in
regions of poor knowledge. In other words, the simulation capability can
systematically and continuously improve with experience. Several problems
currently beyond the reaches of traditional simulation methods may become
solvable. Through their research, pedagogical and dissemination efforts,
Ramprasad and Song are training the next generation of students who will require
skills in traditional STEM domains as well as in advanced data analytics. The
project is well-aligned with NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution Big Idea. This
effort is also aligned with the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) which has
propelled efforts to hasten the discovery cycle of new chemicals and materials
to satisfy a variety of critical technological needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific flavor of Quantum Mechanical
simulations that Ramprasad and Song are targeting in their work involves solving
the Kohn-Sham (KS) equation of density functional theory (DFT). Despite its
versatility, routine DFT calculations are usually limited to a few hundred atoms
due to the computational bottleneck posed by the KS equation. The Machine
Learning based DFT-emulation scheme that Ramprasad and Song are developing
assimilates the function of the KS equation efficiently using past example
reference DFT calculations. Once trained, the scheme by-passes the KS equation
entirely for future calculations, to directly, rapidly and accurately predict
the electronic structure of a molecule or material, given just its atomic
configuration. Novel rotationally invariant graph neural network representations
are being utilized to map the atomic environment around a grid point to the
electron density and local electronic density of states at that grid point. This
mapping is learned using a deep neural network trained on initial reference DFT
results at millions of grid points. Subsequently emerging new data will be
absorbed into the neural networks via multi-task learning and transfer learning.
The paradigm allows for the high-fidelity emulation of KS DFT, but orders of
magnitude faster than the direct solution; indeed, the machine learning
prediction scheme is strictly linear-scaling with system size. This capability
is being aimed at systems involving C, H, O and N, which encompasses a large
chemical space of technologically important polymers and molecules. The vision
is to enable a capability to efficiently design molecules and polymers with a
target electronic structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.