* 1900575
* Expanding representation in Noncommutative Algebra and Representation Theory: WINART2 Workshop
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Chelsea Walton, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 01/31/2020
* USD 11,398.00

This award supports the participation of underrepresented minorities in the
Women in Noncommutative Algebra and Representation Theory workshop (WINART2) at
the University of Leeds on May 20 - 24, 2019. Noncommutative algebra and
representation theory are two closely intertwined areas of research in Algebra
that have strong ties to many other fields in mathematics and quantum physics
such as conformal field theory, operator algebras, string theory, topological
field theory, and the various guises of noncommutative geometry. Noncommutative
algebra creates an algebraic framework for generalizing the study of polynomials
to other rings that fail to be commutative, and representation theory is a
powerful tool for investigating the action of an algebraic object on a space as
linear operators and matrices. As in many areas of mathematics, women have been
underrepresented in these areas of research. The goal of this workshop to bring
together some of the best experts and junior participants working on these
topics, particularly researchers from underrepresented groups, to collaborate on
research projects. This workshop will be the second of its kind for these
fields. Like the first WINART workshop (held at BIRS in March 2016), WINART2
will have a great impact on the research careers of those in attendance, and as
a result, it will positively impact the research area as a whole. Funding will
be prioritized for US-based junior participants.

There will be eight research groups present at the workshop led by a pair of
research leaders in Noncommutative Algebra and Representation Theory. Topics
include: cluster categories; tensor invariants under Hopf algebra actions;
algebraic, geometric, and categorical aspects of diagram algebras; Brauer and
partition algebras; geometric models and representation theory; Burnside rings
and Mackey functors for profinite groups; quantum symmetries- fusion categories
and Hopf algebras; and Hochschild (co)homology, quivers and Gerstenhaber
bracket. Further information can be found at the workshop website: http://women-
in-ncalg-repthy.org/conferences/winart2-workshop-may-2019/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.