* 1900085
* FET: Medium: Collaborative Research: Automated Analysis and Exploration of High-dimensional and Multimodal Molecular Energy Landscapes
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Erion Plaku, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 219,992.00

The activities in this project are inspired by central standing questions
hampering our ability to understand cellular mechanisms at a molecular level.
Decades of scientific inquiry have demonstrated that biological molecules are
constantly on the move, assuming different forms and switching between them to
interface with different molecular partners in the cell. Their motions can be
conceptualized as hops in an energy landscape that organizes the vast space of
forms assumed by a molecule by grouping together forms with similar energies
into states. Molecular energy landscapes govern the underlying dynamics of a
molecule and expose the relationship between form, changes to form, and
function. This project brings together concepts and techniques from engineering,
mathematics, and biology to advance algorithmic research on automated and
efficient analysis and exploration of molecular energy landscapes. In
particular, the proposed activities develop advanced, data-driven algorithms for
automated detection and extraction of global and local structures of a landscape
and utilization of such structures (and their characteristics) to advance the
state of computation of molecular energy landscapes. This project benefits
researchers of diverse sub-communities in computational and biological sciences.
The project will also result in open-source codes, online teaching modules and
tutorials, publicly-available data, workshops, software demos, and will provides
excellent opportunities to train under-represented students at the interface of
different disciplines and domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities in this
project support understanding of cellular mechanism at a molecular level and
advance the state of computation of molecular energy landscapes in support of
such understanding. The project advances algorithmic research in exploratory
landscape analysis in evolutionary computation, high-dimensional geometry and
spatial statistics, and stochastic optimization to address fundamental
challenges in automated, efficient analysis and exploration of high-dimensional
and multimodal landscapes. The primary focus is on molecular energy landscapes
that organize microstates of a molecular system, govern the underlying dynamics,
and expose the relationship between form, changes to form, and function. The
project puts forth data-driven techniques to uncover the underlying organization
of global and local structures of a landscape and exploit such structures to
formulate algorithmic design principles for effective computation of molecular
energy landscapes via stochastic optimization. The proposed activities will make
general contributions to evolutionary computation, stochastic optimization,
spatial statistics, and high-dimensional geometry. In particular, the work will
benefit researchers in these communities that have application-driven interests
in molecular modeling and modeling of complex, dynamic systems. The research
will be disseminated via various venues, including open-source codes in C++,
Python, and R so as to reach diverse communities of researchers and students,
online teaching modules, online tutorials, and publicly-available landscape-
related data. This interdisciplinary project creates excellent opportunities to
train under-represented students of all backgrounds at the interface of
optimization and search, geometry, statistics, and computational
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.