* 1900837
* Excellence in Research: Collaborative Research on Nanosensors to Develop Research Capacities at Interdisciplinary Materials Research and Education Laboratory (IMREL)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Bhoj Gautam, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,998.00

This Excellence in Research (EIR) project, proposed by three investigators at
Fayetteville State University (FSU), is to conduct interdisciplinary
collaborative research on nanosensors including physical, chemical and
biochemical sensors. A sensor is used to detect the changes in its environment,
such as temperature, waves, electric/magnetic/electromagnetic fields, chemicals,
etc., and a sensor made at the nanoscale may achieve higher sensitivities,
extended detection limits, enhanced mechanical, physical and chemical
properties, and high-throughput detection. This research includes three
subprojects: (1) nanoscintillators for fast X-ray detection; (2) conjugated
polymers and small molecules for optical sensing; and (3) highly sensitive
electrochemical and fluorescent biochemical sensors based on oxide nanofibers
for beta amyloid protein detection. The proposed research will be integrated
with the education of undergraduates at FSU. FSU is a Historically Black
University focusing on the education of African American students, with high
female, military or military-affiliated student populations. This project
carries with three project goals to: (1) build a strong collaborative research
team for research in physical, chemical and biochemical sensors; (2) enhance
infrastructure to support nanomaterials research; and (3) train the next
generation of materials scientists and STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics) professionals in nanosensors research. The integration of
research and education will improve the STEM educational quality of Materials
Science minors from multiple STEM departments based on evidence-based practices,
significantly enhancing the educational quality of undergraduates through the
research-oriented education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crosslinked with electronic
structures and optical luminescence properties of nanomaterials, this EIR
project will be conducted collaboratively: (1) research on physical sensors of
nanoscintillators for fast X-ray detection will investigate factors controlling
fast X-ray detection, and potentially identify new fast scintillator materials
with optimized tunable emissions through chemical doping; (2) manipulation of
optical properties of conjugated polymers and small molecules will provide
important insights into how these systems can be applied as chemical sensors,
and will provide directions for future design of cost-effective and highly
sensitive solid-state chemical nanosensors using these materials; and (3) using
oxide nanofiber scaffolds with high porosity and large surface areas, research
on immunosensor will allow highly sensitive, selective, rapid and repeatable
detection of beta amyloid. challenges of current enzyme sensors. The fast X-ray
detection is highly desirable in a wide range of scientific time-resolved
experiments to detect rapid pulsed radiations, such as the transient deformation
or transformation process under extreme conditions in materials research.
Optical sensing using conjugated polymer and small molecules will provide a
simplified strategy for solid-state chemical sensing and is highly desirable to
detect singlet oxygen, charge/ionic species and radicals. Immunosensors based on
oxide nanofibers hold several promises for applications in biological, food,
environmental and energy sciences. These advanced nanosensors will impact the
hazard detection, disease detection, environmental monitoring, and exo-
terrestrial monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.