* 1900765
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: ANACIN-X:  Analysis and modeling of Nondeterminism and Associated Costs in eXtreme scale applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Sanjukta Bhowmick, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2024
* USD 316,201.00

Nondeterminism (i.e., the properties of a scientific application to exhibit
different behaviors in numerical results and execution patterns during multiple
executions) is an increasingly entrenched property of high performance computing
(HPC) applications as the scientific community is moving their simulations on
larger and highly heterogeneous computing systems. Nondeterminism can
drastically increase the cost of scientific reproducibility in terms of
developer time and computational resources, debugging applications when moving
from a smaller to a larger scale or from one platform to another, and ensuring
fault-tolerance when executions may need to recover from a system fault. These
three challenges can ultimately compromise the amount and quality of scientific
discovery through computer simulations. Tools for addressing aspects of the
nondeterministic problem have emerged, including Record-and-replay (R&amp;R)
techniques that monitor and record changes in program states over one execution
(i.e., the recorded execution) of an application; and reproduce those changes,
and thus, the behavior of the application during a subsequent execution (i.e.,
the replayed execution). However, these tools impose overheads on the underlying
application and thus present HPC users with the problem of balancing tool
utility against tool overhead. HPC users may opt to not use the tool at all
rather than deal with unpredictable overheads. This project supports HPC users
by modeling the relationship between application nondeterminism and variability
in tool overhead, and uses this knowledge to identify hot spots in terms of tool
cost as well as regions in executions that trigger nondeterministic behaviors in
the applications. The aim of the project is to model nondeterministic executions
by determining points (motif) of nondeterminism in executions of HPC
applications and to apply the motif modeling with R&amp;R techniques, to study
the cost on R&amp;R techniques of certain motifs. The outcome of this project
impacts four communities of application developers with the identification of
sources of unintended nondeterminism and their management; the HPC research
community working on fault-tolerance, resilience, and reproducibility at
exascale; data center administrators who use evaluation tools for and with
application developers; and educators and trainers in resource constrained
environments to promote HPC without the need of accessing high-end, expensive
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the study of
nondeterministic HPC applications by studying the recording costs of Record-and-
replay (R&amp;R) tools and by defining strategy so that these tools can scale to
the exascale domain. In addition to the more commonly studied factors of time
and memory overhead, the project integrates power usage in the modeling. The
project relies on graph theory to develop expressive and scalable graph-based
representations of the dependencies between events in a program, and develops
algorithms to identify motifs in the graph that indicate points of
nondeterminism. These motifs are applied to quantify the associated costs of
nondeterminism, including developing metrics to measure dissimilarities between
different executions, modeling the costs of recording executions and assessing
the overhead of recordings. Based on these motifs, work on this project
generates 'fingerprints' (i.e., a holistic characterization of how and where
nondeterminism manifests during the application executions) of real world HPC
applications including N-Body problems (e.g., simulating particle, atomic, and
planetary interactions); (2) Graph analytics (e.g., Graph500 benchmark); (3)
Bioinformatics (e.g., mpiBLAST); and (4) Task-based data analysis application
(e.g., WordCount, Join, Octree Clustering on top of MapReduce Over MPI
frameworks). The fingerprints illuminate previously-overlooked similarities
between the nondeterminism that manifests across multiple classes of
applications and allow users to probe the relationship between process
communication patterns, the motifs of the actual resulting executions, and the
regions of those executions in which tool overhead accumulates for
nondeterministic HPC applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.