* 1900806
* EiR: Thermo-sensitive Therapeutic Laden Hydrogels to Induce Cartilage Tissue Regeneration
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Juana Mendenhall, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2023
* USD 644,467.00

Non-Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Cartilage is the firm connective tissue found in human
joints. The damage attributed to cartilage over time presents a tremendous
challenge for millions of Americans, and ultimately fosters the development of
osteoarthritis. Given this important need to mitigate the damage to cartilage,
it is critical that new therapeutic implantable materials are developed for
human joints. In order to discover, understand, and ultimately utilize new
biomaterial, fundamental knowledge of the behavior of these materials in a
complex mechanical stress and biological environment is required. This award
will support graduate and undergraduate training on the preparation and
evaluation of new therapeutic materials for cartilage tissue repair and will
further our understanding of how they respond under stressed environments that
lead to osteoarthritis. Additionally, students at Morehouse College will prepare
short films to engage society into learning about biomaterial science while also
hosting outreach activities for local Atlanta Public School students. This
activity will facilitate the development of a community of learners ranging from
K-12, undergraduate, post graduate, to adults.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Articular cartilage is a
highly ordered avascular connective tissue that lines the articular joints and
is known to withstand enormous biomechanical loads having a frictionless surface
for optimal mobility. However, articular cartilage is limited in its ability to
repair itself after defects from disease or injury. At the onset of injury or
disease, hypoxia (low oxygen) disrupt the avascular architecture giving rise to
the presence of reactive oxygen species that prevent healthy articular cartilage
cell proliferation throughout the three-dimensional cartilage tissue matrix.
Biomaterials that promote healthy 3D cell culture and proliferation under
hypoxia are currently not available. The objective of this project focuses on
the development of thermo-sensitive therapeutic laden hydrogels and the study of
hypoxia on cell viability and hydrogel structure and function prepared from 3D
printed bio-inks. This research entails the preparation, characterization, 3D
printing, biochemical analysis, and spatial mapping of thermo-responsive
therapeutic laden hydrogels that provide a new approach to regenerative tissue
engineering. The use of hybrid therapeutic hydrogels to improve cell
microenvironments and promote healthy extracellular matrix in 3D culture is of
particular interest. The governing hypothesis of this project is driven by
formulations of hybrid therapeutic laden hydrogels with robust structural
integrity, higher oxygen diffusion coefficients, and the structural mimicry of
articular cartilage zones via 3D printed bio-inks to provide cellular-protection
under hypoxia towards chondrogenesis. Using hybrid therapeutic laden hydrogels,
the Principal Investigator and research team evaluate how hypoxic induced
reactive oxygen species mitigate cell fate, ECM amounts, and effect biomaterial
properties. The effect of chemical modifications and the impact of structure and
function in hybrid therapeutic hydrogels are noted for improved tissue
engineering strategies. The research team approaches include using chemical and
polymer synthesis of preparation of hybrid therapeutic hydrogels, material
characterization, 3D-printing using flow-based direct ink write, static cell
culture of articular chondrocytes and mesenchymal stem cells under hypoxia and
normoxia, and mechanical stimulation regimes to assess chemical structure phase
changes, along with temporal and spatial localization of extra cellular matrix
proteins. Finally, new knowledge will be gained from this research by
contributions to the development of novel therapeutic hydrogels for cartilage
tissue engineering and regeneration by improving biomaterial properties to
endure under pathophysiological conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.