* 1901889
* Digitization PEN: Enhancing the SoRo TCN with collections of taxonomic, geographic, and historic significance from the Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Mare Nazaire, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 149,828.00

The Southern Rocky Mountain Region (SoRo) supports a rich and fragile flora of
diverse habitats and narrow ecological niches derived from unique geographic
origins and evolutionary histories. The Herbarium at Rancho Santa Ana Botanic
Garden (RSABG) has a unique, data-rich, and curated but currently inaccessible
collection of 60,700 vascular plant specimens from the SoRo region, the
digitization of which will tailor seamlessly with the ongoing Digitization
Thematic Collections Network (TCN) "Using Herbarium Data to Document Plant
Niches in the High Peaks and High Plains of the Southern Rockies - Past,
Present, and Future." Timely digitization of RSABG's significant collections
will be instrumental to enhancing the TCN and enable researchers to examine
contemporary patterns of distribution, identify signatures of diversification,
predict future environmental change, and help to mitigate negative impacts of
climate change and habitat alteration. Digitization includes 30,960 specimens
especially noteworthy for their relevance to science, collector, and taxonomy.
Integral to the project are the activities that involve graduate students and
undergraduate interns. Students will be trained in all aspects of collections
management and digitization. Undergraduate interns will participate in four
workshops that will serve to connect students to collections, biodiversity, and
conservation of the SoRo region. Additionally, through coordinated efforts with
California Polytechnic University, Pomona (CPP; a Hispanic Serving Institution),
undergraduate students in CPP's Form &amp; Function in Plants class will barcode
50% of the project specimens as partial fulfillment of their course objectives.
An exhibit at RSABG will highlight the activities and student participation in
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flora of the Southern Rocky Mountain
region (SoRo) is composed of plants with unique evolutionary histories driven by
orogenic factors and long- and short-term climatic shifts associated with
continental glaciations. Such abiotic factors have greatly influenced
elevational changes in community structure, large-scale geographic range shifts,
patterns of rapid diversification, and ecological niche evolution. These
histories and dynamic abiotic phenomena have yielded varied ecosystems and
geological substrates that support numerous endemics and/or narrowly adapted
species. The uniqueness of the SoRo region provides an excellent model area in
which to examine patterns of diversification, niche evolution, and endemism. As
part of the SoRo Thematic Collections Network (TCN), the Herbarium at Rancho
Santa Ana Botanic Garden (RSABG) aims to digitize and mobilize data from 60,700
herbarium specimens relevant to the SoRo region and contribute to the larger
goals of the project and strengthen the TCN. Specimens targeted for this project
include 30,960 especially noteworthy specimens based on their relevance to
science, collector, and taxonomy, and are emblematic of the unique strengths of
the RSABG Herbarium. A large cadre of students at different levels in their
academic career will participate in all aspects of the project, including
databasing, imaging, and georeferencing. All data resulting from this project
will be shared with iDigBio (idigbio.org) and the Global Biodiversity
Information Facility through SoRo's Symbiota portal as well as RSABG's Herbarium
web portal. Additional information about RSABG, its outreach activities, and the
results of this project is available online
(www.rsabg.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.