* 1901134
* CIF: Medium: Adaptive Diffusions for Scalable and Robust Learning over Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Athanasios Nikolakopoulos, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 702,232.00

Behind every complex system, be it physical, social, biological, or manmade,
lies an intricate network that encodes the interactions between its components.
Statistical learning over networks has the potential to unleash one's ability to
reason about the behavior of such systems; to understand their innate structure;
and, ultimately predict their evolution. In the era of 'data deluge,' fulfilling
this promise has not moved closer, as formidable challenges remain. These
include making effective predictions while relying on scarce training samples;
providing easily explainable outcomes in a transparent way; dealing with
unreliable data or malicious attempts to undermine the learning process; as well
as managing to handle massive-scale networks that can change over time in a
timely and resource-considerate fashion. Aspiring to address such challenges,
this project pioneers a scalable, expressive, interpretable, and robust multi-
purpose framework for learning over networks. The toolbox to be developed is
expected to boost state-of-the-art in data science, network science, graph
mining, and big data analytics. It should thus impact and effect technology
transfer to a broad range of emerging fields, from computational biology and
neuroscience to social-economic networks. On the educational front, the
multidisciplinary nature of this research will provide engaging experiences for
both undergraduate and graduate students, disseminate research findings, and
cross-fertilize ideas from diverse communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching approach in this project unifies learning over graphs under a
principled framework of random walk based diffusions with the goal of markedly
improving learning performance, while also ensuring scalability and reliability.
The research consists of three intertwined thrusts dealing with: (T1) Adaptive
diffusions for fast and effective learning over networks tuned to the task and
the underlying network topology; (T2) Scalable diffusions dealing with massive
and challenging networks; and (T3) Robust diffusions capable of learning from
untrusted data. The novel approach in T1 capitalizes on the 'landing
probabilities' of judiciously constructed random walks, and opens venues
leveraging meta-information, as well as nonlinear diffusion models, in order to
innovate a gamut of learning tasks over possibly dynamic graphs. The research
under T2 aims at massive and challenging graphs where a prohibitively large
landing probability space is necessary to ensure high prediction accuracy.
Finally, T3 aspires to cope with sophisticated adversaries employing graph
structure-aware approaches to infiltrate the network, and investigates lines of
defense even in settings where most data are malicious. Analytical and
experimental performance evaluation will assess the merits of the novel
approaches relative to node embedding and graph convolutional neural network
alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.