* 1901492
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Collaborative Online Learning and Control for Motor Prosthesis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Alan Fern, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 649,000.00

It is estimated that approximately 5.4 million people in the United States live
with some form of paralysis, defined as a central nervous system disorder
resulting in difficulty or inability to move the upper and/or lower extremities.
Many paralyzed individuals consider restoration of lost basic motor functions
such as grasping and walking as important abilities that could improve their
quality of life. The goal of this project is to develop and evaluate advanced
machine learning algorithms that enable quadriplegic individuals to control a
robotic hand with heterologous muscles (that is, muscles not typically involved
in moving the limbs; for example, muscles of the neck). To enable this research,
prospective algorithms will be initially evaluated in normally-enabled
individuals. The most promising algorithms will subsequently be evaluated in
quadriplegic individuals. This research is a first step toward providing benefit
to the paralyzed community by creating pathways toward the development and
commercialization of functional motor prosthetic systems. Paralyzed individuals
can be trained to use the system by planning the movements in their minds, much
like moving their natural limbs. Success of this research could lead to a
significant advance in improving function and quality of life for individuals
affected by stroke or spinal cord injury. High-School students as well as
undergraduate and graduate students will be trained on this multi-disciplinary
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves learning human intent from
biological signals, extracting higher-level goals using sensors embodied in the
patient, and developing controllers for motor manipulation based on estimated
motor movement intent and higher-level goals. Specific sub-goals proposed to
achieve the overall goal of the project include: a collaborative brain-machine
learning system that trains the human brain to remap limb movement control to
heterologous muscles while simultaneously training the machine to interpret the
movement intent from surface electromyograms of the heterologous muscles;
algorithms to extract higher-level movement goals using biologic and auxiliary
sensor signals; shared brain-machine controllers of robotic hands using the
extracted goal and decoded movement intent; and experimental assessment of the
capabilities of the methods on individuals with paralysis of the upper limbs. In
addition to the innovations in the development of motor prostheses for people
with paralysis of the limbs, the proposed research will provide new insights
into online learning in nonlinear and time-varying environments, collaborative
brain-machine learning, and shared brain-machine control algorithms for motor
prostheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.