* 1901755
* The Association of Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group in Computer Science Education's New Global Computing Education Conference 2019
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Susan Rodger, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 01/31/2024
* USD 59,999.00

This project will support selected U.S. computing science education researchers,
practitioners, and graduate students to attend the Special Interest Group in
Computer Science Education (SIGCSE) first Association of Computing Machinery
(ACM) Global Computing Education Conference (CompEd 2019). CompEd 2019 is to be
held May 17-19, 2019 in Chengdu, China. This support will make participation in
CompEd 2019 more affordable. CompEd conferences will be held in developing
countries in Asia, Africa, South America and other areas of the world in which
few computing science education faculty members currently collaborate.
Involvement in this conference will enable U.S. participants to learn from Asian
colleagues, especially in the areas of cybersecurity education, virtual learning
environments, and algorithm visualization, to share research results, and
collaborate with new research partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CompEd
conference will be approximately 2.5-days long and include 120 ? 240 attendees.
ComEd 2019 will be co-located with the ACM Turing Award Celebration in China
(TURC) conference, a highly selective international forum on computer science
research. The ACM SIGCSE China chapter has traditionally met at TURC but will
instead participate in CompEd; breaks will be scheduled to enable CompEd
conferees to attend the TURC keynote addresses. CompEd 2019 will consist of
paper, panel, working group, poster, and birds of a feather sessions that target
computer science education researchers and practitioners. The ACM Computing
Curriculum 2020 Task Force will be held immediately prior to CompEd in Chengdu.
Fifty US participants will be selected to receive travel support based on
criteria including acceptance of a paper or panel, or leader of a working group,
followed in order of lessening importance, acceptance of a poster, lack of
institutional or grant funds to cover the cost of attendance, absence of other
faculty or graduate students at the applicant's university receiving funds from
this project, and faculty ranking. Assistant professors will have the highest
priority, followed by associate professors, graduate students, lecturers,
adjuncts, and part-time faculty. The aim is to engage participants from a
variety of US colleges and universities. In the case of multiple US-based
authors on a paper, panel, or poster, only one author will receive priority.
SIGCSE's annual Innovation and Technology in Computer Science (ITiCSE)
conference and its working groups have enabled development of strong working
relationships between faculty from US institutions and faculty from European
institutions in the past. Those relationships have led to new and joint
discoveries across several areas of computer science education. The CompEd
project will provide an opportunity for U.S. computing science education
researchers and practitioners to develop partnerships with Chinese and other
academics that they are otherwise unlikely to meet. It will also provide
opportunities to interact with, and develop future partnerships with,
counterparts from institutions in the developing world. US computing education
will potentially benefit from innovations adopted and adapted from these
international exchanges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.