* 1901221
* Research Initiation Award: Identification and Characterization of Cofactor-Linked RNAs in Plants
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Tyrell Carr, Saint Augustine's College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,926.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Saint
Augustine's College intends to identify and characterize plant cofactor capped
RNAs using biochemical, computational and molecular approaches to uncover new
regulatory mechanisms in plants. Undergraduate students will be included in the
project and will gain laboratory training and preparation for STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to dissect and
rewire plant signaling in model organisms to enhance crop resilience to
environmental challenges such climate and weather change. The objectives are to
isolate and identify 5'-NAD+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) capped RNAs and
5'-CoA (coenzyme A) capped RNAs from plants and to examine de-capping mechanisms
of 5'-NAD+ capped RNAs in plants. This study will contribute to the
understanding of plant 5'-NAD+ capped RNAs and 5'-CoA capped RNAs functioning as
cellular metabolic sensors to regulate gene expression and/or regulate metabolic
signaling pathways. This will involve the modification of the terminal
nicotinamide on 5'-NAD+ capped RNAs to an alkyne that is suitable for
biotinylation through chemoenzymatic and click-chemistry processing followed by
cDNA synthesis for high-throughput sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.