* 1901296
* Excellence in Research: An HBCU Partnership to Leverage Resources and Increase Scientific Productivity in Observational Time Domain Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Donald Walter, South Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,119,864.00

South Carolina State University (SCSU) and the University of the University of
the Virgin Islands (UVI) will enhance their research capabilities in
astrophysics by combining their astrophysical resources to form a Time Domain
Astrophysical Collaboration (TDAC) which will significantly increase their
scientific productivity and move them into the growing field of time domain
astrophysics. The TDAC schools manage or partner in the management of two small
aperture telescopes located in the United States Virgin Islands and at Kitt Peak
National Observatory. This project will allow both institutions to build
research capacity through the addition of personnel, faculty and student
support, and improvements to their physical
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will add a Resident Observer to
the UVI facility and SCSU will hire its first ever Postdoctoral Researcher in
astronomy. These enhancements will allow them to participate in coordinated
research with the greater astronomical community in multimessenger observations
of the electromagnetic counterparts of gravitational waves, monitoring Active
Galactic Nuclei and contributing to Living with a Red Dwarf project on K and M
dwarf stars through use their telescope facilities in Arizona (SCSU)and in the
Virgin Islands (UVI). This grant will result in the enhanced research
capabilities of the faculty and recruitment and retention of STEM undergraduate
majors at SCSU and UVI through internships, campus research talks, and the
incorporation of project results into the curriculum of both institutions,
including physics and computer science. It will result in motivating minority
students at both institutions to continue on to graduate school or enter the
workforce in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
HBCU's Excellence in Research (EIR) Program and managed by
MPS/AST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.