* 1901514
* Shape Deviation Generator and Learner - An Engineering-Informed Convolution Modeling and Learning Framework for Additive Manufacturing Accuracy Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Qiang Huang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 366,001.00

Although additive manufacturing (AM), known as 3D Printing, holds great promise
as a direct manufacturing technology, significant deviations from the desired
part shape often occur in the printed parts. As a result,shape distortion
control is a critical issue for AM built products. With advances in computing
and increased accessibility of AM product data, machine learning for AM has
become a viable strategy for enhancing 3D printing performance. However,
meaningful learning of engineering data requires effective integration of domain
knowledge, making general-purpose machine learning methods difficult to apply.
As a result, there is a critical need for an engineering-informed, data-
analytical, machine learning framework for shape distortion control. Such a tool
is essential to improving AM quality and reducing cost and waste.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish an engineering-informed
convolution modeling and learning methodological framework for AM distortion
control. A Shape Deviation Generator and Learner for shape accuracy control will
be researched by: (1) modeling 3D shape deviation generation by establishing a
new convolution formulation for layer-by-layer fabrication processes, (2)
transferring the 3D shape deviation model from a small set of training shapes to
a wider variety of shapes by exploring and learning shape similarity under a
cookie-cutter modeling framework, (3) transferring the shape deviation model
between AM processes by exploring and learning process similarity through an
effect equivalence framework, and (4) validating modeling and transfer learning
methodologies in both polymer and metal AM processes. Methodologies and tools
will be developed to mitigate both shape and process complexities towards the
goal of building AM products with high geometric fidelity: from single shape to
multiple shapes, and from single process to multiple AM
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.