* 1901746
* RAPID: Evaluation of the Resilience of Shoreline Protection Methods to Hurricane Florence
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2020
* Huili Hao, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 10/31/2020
* USD 52,018.00

Hurricane Florence impacted coastal North Carolina resulting in unprecedented
damage and flooding in coastal communities. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID)
project examines the relationship between storm impact and shoreline management
strategies utilized by residents and explores how socio-environmental factors,
such as socioeconomic standing, knowledge of environmental conditions, and
community representation influence the level of impact a storm event may have on
an individual and community at large. More specifically, it seeks to understand
the relationship between past shoreline management decisions and current issues
faced by residents. The project will focus on the experiences of low-income,
communities of color, and other underrepresented coastal communities who are
often disproportionately affected by natural disasters. This research will
provide new quantitative information on spatial changes of shorelines during
storm events and the performance of shoreline protection strategies. This
scientific research contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the
progress of science and to advance our national welfare. In this case, the
benefits will be insights to improve management of coastal communities which can
save lives and reduce economic losses.

Utilizing a multidisciplinary approach, through geographic information systems
(GIS) science, nearshore vegetation assessment, and coastal county resident
surveys, the project goals are to: 1) quantify changes in extent and condition
of estuarine shorelines, particularly restored and stabilized salt marsh
shorelines (also termed living shorelines) as compared to bulkheads and other
shoreline management strategies approaches; and 2) assess the socio-
environmental impacts of Hurricane Florence on North Carolina's estuarine
shorelines and coastal residents via surveys. Changes in shoreline position and
extent of shore zone habitats will be determined using in-situ GIS techniques
using a real-time kinematic (RTK)-GPS unit. Additionally, five sites (two in
Onslow County, two in Carteret County, and one in New Hanover County will be
surveyed for vegetation and changes in dimension of the living shoreline in
comparison to summer 2018 pre-storm data. The findings will be compared to
existing pre-storm data to understand quantitative change in shoreline position,
extent of habitat change, and magnitude of impact the storm had on shoreline
management strategies. Surveys will be used to sample approximately 6,000
coastal county residents to clarify issues faced by North Carolina residents due
to shoreline management decisions that were previously made, the storm, and
associated flooding residents faced. Previous research has not explored socio-
environmental issues associated with shoreline management decisions, natural
disaster decision-making, and location. This underscores the need for effective
melding of geospatial science with coastal residents' perceptions, so that
disconnects between public perceptions and scientific evidence can be identified
and remedied.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.