* 1901128
* Excellence in Research:  Dynamics of Photogenerated Charge Carriers in Mixed Dimensional van der Waals Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Marvin Wu, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 406,366.00

Nontechnical Description: Atomically thin two-dimensional semiconductor
nanostructures are an intriguing alternative to bulk semiconductors that
underpin much of current optical and electronic technology. These
nanostructures, which include graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides,
exhibit weaker bonding in the out-of-plane direction and can thus be integrated
with a broad range of organic and inorganic semiconductors without the materials
compatibility requirements limiting conventional semiconductor devices. Mixed
dimensional systems combining two dimensional nanostructures with zero- and one-
dimensional nanostructures offer new degrees of freedom to engineer devices by
tailoring the properties of each component. Significant questions remain,
however, regarding the movement of charge carriers within and between the
different types of nanostructures. This research is using multiple experimental
tools to elucidate the properties of excited charge carriers in mixed
dimensional systems. This project provides opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate student researchers drawn from the predominantly underrepresented
minority student population of North Carolina Central University and expands
institutional research capabilities. Materials and research methods studied as
part of this project are infused into undergraduate and graduate physics
courses, introducing nanoscience and materials science to a broader group of
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The scientific goal of
this project is to improve the fundamental understanding of carrier dynamics and
charge transport in mixed-dimensional van der Waals heterostructures integrating
two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (MoS2, WS2) with one-
dimensional inorganic metal chalcogenide (CdSxSe1-x) semiconductor nanowires and
zero-dimensional organic semiconductors (pentacene, zinc phthalocyanine). The
local morphologies and band energies of the zero- and one-dimensional components
is expected to significantly impact the dynamics of photogenerated charge
carriers in these heterostructures. The experimental approach of this project
focuses on fabrication of heterostructures with controlled morphologies and band
offsets, and characterization of these heterostructures using correlated
ultrafast optical microscopy, Kelvin probe microscopy, and time resolved
millimeter wave photoconductivity measurements to track the evolution of
photoexcited charge carriers across a wide range of time and length scales.
These measurements address multiple steps that occur during relaxation of charge
carriers, including exciton dissociation, charge transfer across the interface,
lifetimes of charge transfer states and carrier diffusion through comparison of
data from heterostructures and individual components, and shed light on the
influence of nano- or micro-scale morphology through spatially resolved
mapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.