* 1901764
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Capacity Adjustment, Resilience and Information Sharing in a Network for Good (CARING)
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Steven Jiang, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 10/31/2020
* USD 19,980.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will support data collection
efforts to capture the after-effects of Hurricane Florence on the Food Bank of
Central and Eastern North Carolina (FBCENC). Food Banks operate a unique supply
chain network to support people in hunger need in their service region. Natural
disasters like hurricanes disrupt the normal operation of a food bank causing a
sudden increase in demand, damaging sources of local supplies and upsetting the
regular food delivery system. During Hurricane Florence, FBCENC operations were
severely disrupted as more than 50 percent of their service network including
two branch locations were affected by the storm. Immediately after the storm,
FBCENC needed to respond to the disruption caused by Florence while keeping the
regular business of satisfying dynamic hunger need. This RAPID NSF project will
collect data on the challenges encountered by FBCENC after Hurricane Florence to
provide insight for how nonprofit food distribution organizations can prepare,
respond, and recover from disruptions to their network. This scientific research
contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and
to advance our national welfare. In this case, the benefits will be insights to
improve management of humanitarian logistics post disaster which can save lives
and reduce economic losses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will
collect time sensitive operational information and data related to a food bank
network's preparation, incident management and recovery for Hurricane Florence.
The research objectives of the project are to: (i) study the decisions taken by
a food bank having its operational network undergoing a natural disaster; (ii)
scrutinize the responses of the human components (donors, food bank personnel,
agency owners, clients) in the disrupted network; (iii) characterize the impact
on demand and supply before, during and after a disaster; (iv) identify the
optimal trade-offs between equity, efficiency, and effectiveness for disaster
preparation and recovery; and (v) distinguish the disaster-related parameters
impacting food demand. The project will facilitate the study of how the
differences in organizational characteristics and structure affect the ability
of food banks (and agencies) to be resilient to the impact of disasters like
hurricanes. This project will collect the data necessary to develop smart
recommendations for disaster preparedness and response based on field data
collected from a large-scale network disruptive event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.