* 1901479
* Research Initiation Award: Investigating the Structure-Property Relationships of Solid Polymer Electrolytes for Lithium Ion Batteries
* EHR,HRD
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2022
* Asem Abdulahad, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 221,608.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Xavier
University of Louisiana seeks to synthesize and characterize solid polymer
electrolyte (SPE) phosphonium ionene in lithium-ion batteries as an alternative
source of energy. Additionally, the project will provide research training to a
diverse population of undergraduate students in the field of polymer science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) membranes have the
potential to improve the safety of lithium ion batteries by eliminating the
potential for catastrophic battery failure due to lithium dendrite formation in
solvent-based electrolyte formulations. Because they act as both the electrode
separator and the lithium ion transport medium, SPEs have the potential to
enhance lithium ion transport leading to extended lifetimes of lithium ion
electrochemical cells. The overarching goal of this proposed research is to
develop new polyelectrolyte SPEs for lithium ion batteries that are based on
phosphonium ionenes. The PI intends to employ phosphonium ionenes in lithium ion
batteries for the first time and directly study the impact of localized
segmental motion on lithium ion transport through SPEs. This will be achieved by
synthesizing and characterizing a library of phosphonium ionenes and segmented
phosphonium ionenes with variable charge density distribution and chain
flexibility. The outcomes will contribute to the overall state-of-knowledge in
the field by providing essential data towards understanding the role of
polyelectrolyte charge density and polymer chain segmental motion on lithium ion
transport in all-solid-state batteries. Further, an essential educational impact
of this work includes engaging undergraduate students who are historically
underrepresented in the field of polymer chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.