* 1901423
* CHS: Medium: Prediction, Early Detection, and Mitigation of Virtual Reality Simulator Sickness
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Thomas Stoffregen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,116,000.00

With a global installed user base of over 28 million people, virtual reality is
a rapidly advancing field with numerous emerging applications in education,
training, rehabilitation, healthcare, social communications, and entertainment.
However, the effectiveness of virtual reality applications and their rate of
public adoption is currently limited by the fact that many users experience
physical discomfort during or after their use, with symptomatic characteristics
indicative of motion sickness. This problem, known as "simulator sickness" or
"cybersickness", is one of the most significant usability challenges for users,
developers, and stakeholders of immersive technologies. This project offers a
novel and empirically-grounded research methodology to study, predict, detect,
and ultimately mitigate simulator sickness, which can substantially improve both
the subjective user experience and the effectiveness of current and future
virtual reality applications. Furthermore, prior research has shown that motion
sickness disproportionately affects women. This project seeks to advance
understanding of these differences and develop adaptive strategies for
mitigating simulator sickness on an individual level, which can ultimately
increase the overall number of potential users worldwide and erode the
inequitable barriers that currently exist for engaging with immersive
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to address simulator
sickness through a systematic effort that will advance fundamental understanding
of the relationship between motion kinematics and the adverse symptoms commonly
experienced by users of virtual reality systems. Specific activities include the
following: (1) development of models that predict the likelihood of experiencing
simulator sickness based on an individual's motion characteristics; (2)
introduction of real-time methods for early detection of sickness onset before
the user experiences discomfort; (3) identification of specific problematic
virtual reality stimuli that are associated with simulator sickness; (4)
development of adaptive mitigation strategies to reduce the likelihood and
severity of adverse symptoms; and (5) rigorous experimental evaluation of the
effectiveness and tradeoffs of newly developed techniques. The project offers
methodological innovation in several areas related to the fundamental study of
motion sickness phenomena, including the investigation of eye gaze stability for
the prediction or early detection of simulator sickness. Additionally, a key
innovation is that the data collected from empirical studies will be utilized to
develop adaptive techniques that adjust automatically based on the individual's
predicted sickness levels and current real-time state, both measured through
quantitative motion kinematics. The project will also result in the creation of
a large-scale motion kinematics dataset that will be made publicly available for
future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.