* 1901801
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Electrical and Thermal Transport in Iron and Iron Alloys at Core Conditions and its Effects on the Geodynamo and Thermal Earth History
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Jung-Fu Lin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 03/31/2024
* USD 269,841.00

The magnetic field of the Earth and other planetary bodies is generated by the
turbulent flow of conducting fluids in their deep interiors. In the Earth, it is
generated by the outer core, made of liquid iron with some nickel and light
elements. Earth's magnetic field is important, as life may not exist without its
shielding of the solar wind. Moreover, the heat rising from the core fuels
mantle thermal convection, at the origin of plate tectonics and associated
hazards. Understanding Earth's magnetic field and core heat flow requires
detailed knowledge of iron-rich material properties at the extreme pressures and
temperatures of the core. Yet, existing experimental data and theoretical
calculations are inconsistent. Here, the multidisciplinary team investigates the
thermal and electrical conductivities of iron alloys at extreme conditions. They
use a combination of state-of-the-art experiments, theory, and modeling at both
the atomic scale and the scale of the core. Expected results should reconcile
experiments and modeling of the core's heat transport and magnetic field
evolution. This project supports one graduate student and two postdoctoral
associates in the field of Mineral Physics. It has strong implications for
Geomagnetism, Geodynamics and Seismology, and broad impacts in Materials
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-pressure and temperature experiments are
carried out in the laser-heated diamond anvil cell. Extreme pressures and
temperatures are generated at the tips of two opposing diamonds, where the iron
sample is placed. The team will measure and compute electrical and thermal
conductivities at conditions relevant to the core. This allows them to test the
applicability of the Wiedemann-Franz law at these conditions. This empirical law
relates thermal and electrical conductivities in metals. Here, the electrical
conductivity is measured using a four-probe electrical connection brought
outside from the cell. Thermal conductivity is measured by optical
spectroradiometry in conjunction with pulsed-laser heating and modeling. Similar
conditions are simulated using first-principles quantum mechanics to compute the
electrical and thermal conductivity in liquid and solid iron, and compare them
with experimental observations. These calculations are difficult because they
involve the scattering of electrons off each other and off the moving atoms in
the fluid or solid. Experimental and theoretical results are used in geophysical
models of core cooling and magnetic field generation. This will allow to better
constrain the history of Earth's magnetic field and the heat flow at the core-
mantle boundary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.