* 1901936
* 32nd International Vacuum Nanoelectronics and 12th International Vacuum Electron Sources Conferences, To Be Held in Cincinnati, Ohio, July 22-26, 2019
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2019
* Marc Cahay, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

The proposed project seeks financial support for enhancing graduate student
participation, at the first joint meeting of the International Vacuum
Nanoelectronics (IVNC) and International Vacuum Electron Sources (IVESC)
Conferences to be held at the campus of the University of Cincinnati, in
Cincinnati, Ohio, from July 22-26, 2019. The conferences will focus on vacuum
electron sources and applications, from basic principles to the most recent
technological advances and include plenary talks, invited talks, contributed
talks and posters. They will foster advances in the leading research of vacuum
electron sources including theory, materials, structures, devices and their
applications, field, thermal, photo, secondary, photo, and photo-enhanced field
emission. Emission fundamentals and modeling will be addressed together with
consideration of novel materials for electron emission and vacuum tunneling. The
physics and technology of electron sources and their applications will also be
addressed. The meeting will consist of a series of three short courses in some
of the fast-growing areas in the field of vacuum electron sources and
applications, from basic principles to the most recent technological advances.
The short courses are expected to help students and other young scientists to
develop a multidisciplinary understanding of vacuum device research. The
technical program will provide student participants with the opportunity to gain
exposure to new materials and devices for vacuum electronics, their basic
physics, and their engineering applications. Exposing the next generation of
researchers to these important disciplines is critical for learning how the new
science and technology of vacuum nanoelectronics are developing. Students will
gain exposure to the new advances in material growth, fabrication technology and
device physics. The meeting will include three short courses which will be
offered to all attendees as part of their registration. A collection of selected
papers will be published in the Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology B. The
information will be disseminated through the conference proceedings and the
journals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.