* 1901671
* EAGER: Controlling Photochemistry via Spatially Selective Excitation
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Evgueni Nesterov, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 139,878.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B
(CSDM-B) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Evgueni Nesterov of
Northern Illinois University investigates a new general principle to control
photochemical reactions through the use of liquid crystalline media and plane
polarized light. Liquid crystals (LCs) have properties between those of
conventional liquids (in that they can flow) and those of solid crystals (in
that they are oriented in a very specific way). Liquid crystal displays are
widely used - one example is in digital watch faces. This research seeks to use
liquid crystals in capturing light and specifically and uniformly redirecting
the light's energy into specific chemical reactions. The project is high risk as
such a concept has not yet been demonstrated in practice. If successful, this
research may establish a new paradigm for controlling photochemical reactions so
that very specific chemical products are made. This can potentially lead to new
environmentally benign chemical processes which rely on light as a source of
energy for chemical transformations. Students participating in this program
benefit from multidisciplinary and collaborative training, which allows them to
become highly competitive in the technical job market. They also contribute to
society through participation in special hands-on activities targeting local
K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this early-stage
exploratory program is to develop and experimentally confirm a novel paradigm
for controlling the course and selectivity of photochemical reactions through
the uniform molecular alignment of photoreactive compounds in liquid crystalline
(LC) media and spatially selective excitation of specific electronic transitions
with plane-polarized light. In contrast to the conventional ways of controlling
photochemical selectivity by imposing geometrical restrictions on the
photoreactive molecule, this approach relies on selective excitation of the
particular electronic transitions leading to a desired photochemical
transformation. The research seeks to design and synthesize a series of
photochemically reactive compounds with enhanced ability to align in nematic LC
media, which can display excitation-selective photochemical reactivity. The
research group provides detailed experimental analysis and characterization of
their LC-imposed alignment and transition dipole moment orientation using UV/vis
polarization spectroscopy. This research program may establish a new paradigm
for controlling and enhancing selectivity of photochemical reactions. This can
potentially lead to new environmentally benign chemical processes which rely on
light as a source of energy for chemical transformations. In addition to these
practical benefits, the broader impacts of this work include benefits to the
society from multidisciplinary training of students in STEM disciplines, both
through student involvement in advanced research and participation in special
outreach activities developed with the goal of improving public awareness and
appreciation of modern science and technology, particularly among younger
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.