* 1901646
* RAPID: Reconstruction of Hurricane Florence Flood Hydrographs (HF2Hs) for South Carolina's Critical Infrastructures Using Data Analytics Algorithms and In-situ Field Measurements
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Jose Vidal, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 145,999.00

In the wake of Hurricane Florence in South Carolina, this research aims to
collect high water marks (HWMs) data across flooded/damaged critical
infrastructures, and perishable images and video footage from traffic cameras
and social media outlets. The investigators will then reconstruct Hurricane
Florence flood hydrographs (HF2Hs) using data analytics algorithms as well as
HWMs data to estimate flood elevation and inundation extent over overtopped
roads and bridges. Using the eastern portion of South Carolina (SC) as a case
study, this RAPID project will address the following questions: Do reconstructed
flood hydrographs over critical infrastructures provide valuable insight into
flooding thresholds and frequencies? If so, how? To address these questions, the
team consists of members with expertise in engineering hydrology and computer
sciences and engineering who are positioned to deliver the needed collecting,
examining, and archiving of perishable datasets.

The methodology for collecting perishable data merges the broader objectives of
enhancing perishable data collection through the use of traditional (tape
measure, engineer's rule, etc.) and data analytics techniques, both of which
depend on the timely collection of data. The reconstructed flood hydrographs for
overtopped routes/roads and bridges will help understanding of how critical
infrastructures respond to hurricane-induced flooding that presents persistent
widespread challenges in many regions worldwide. The collected data will benefit
the development of new numerical models for flood prediction that will deal with
the unique needs and concepts of the U.S.'s southeast catchments (shallow
aquifer parameterization). The data analytics algorithm is targeted be flexible
and scalable to collect and analyze large sets of data which will be
disseminated through open-source public repositories (e.g., GitHub). The
collection and integration of data is targeted to facilitate communication/
collaboration between decision makers and technically-focused institutions. This
project is intended to have an immediate impact on South Carolina, a state which
is very vulnerable to repeated hurricane events and is under the threat of
increasing floods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.