* 1901515
* DEVELOPING AND INTEGRATING "-OMIC" TOOLS TO ELUCIDATE NANOPARTICLE TRANSPORT MECHANISM AND RESPONSES IN AGRICULTURAL CROPS
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Arturo Keller, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2022
* USD 389,981.00

Nanotechnology has gained considerable attention in agricultural applications,
due to the unique properties of materials at the nanoscale. Nanomaterials also
exhibit an ability to bypass biological barriers. These novel materials may
elicit beneficial as well as undesirable responses depending on their
composition, method of application, dose or the sensitivity of the crop species.
There is limited understanding of how plants respond to these nanomaterials, how
they take them up, and at what point the application results in undesirable
effects. The project utilizes sensitive bio-analytical tools to study the
response of plants to different doses of nanomaterials. The knowledge obtained
from this study should serve to design safer nano-scale agrochemicals, improve
their effectiveness and promote agricultural sustainability by reducing the use
of active ingredients and undesirable accumulation of agrochemicals in soil and
associated water bodies. The overarching goal of this research is to apply
advanced analytical methods to understand potential challenges in agriculture
that can improve crop productivity and health, while minimizing burden on
overall environmental health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
employ sensitive molecular "nomics" approaches to elucidate the mechanisms of
uptake of metal oxide nanoparticles by crop plants and plant response at
different doses. Multi-omic tools considered include high-throughput proteomics
and metabolomics using advanced liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. These
tools will be used to probe the interactions at the protein and metabolite
levels in plants exposed to metal oxide nanoparticles such as copper hydroxide,
molybdenum oxide, manganese oxide and cerium oxide via foliar and soil
application. Plasma-membrane proteins and apoplastic proteins are critical
candidates for this study as they participate in communication between cells and
the extracellular environment, ion transport, protein translocation/integration,
and signal transduction. These protein in roots and leaves may be selectively
enriched in the sample pool, helping to elucidate the main transport pathways.
Analysis of hydrophilic and hydrophobic metabolites will also be fractionated
for untargeted metabolomics. The candidate proteins and metabolites from
untargeted -omic approach will be validated and quantified using targeted
approaches across different exposure periods and concentrations, followed by
meta-data integration to identify universal biomarkers of metal oxide
nanoparticle exposure. The findings will provide a more comprehensive
understanding of the routes of entry and localization of nanoparticles and
simultaneous regulation of essential nutrients and plant metabolites. The
results obtained will provide a benchmark for future research on targeted
delivery of nutrients or other agrochemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.