* 1901906
* High Performance Energy Storage Electrodes through Oxide Electrodeposition in Carbon Nanotube Fabric Scaffolds
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Philip Bradford, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 470,000.00

This grant supports research to investigate the manufacturing of advanced
electrochemical energy storage electrodes, furthering both science and
engineering and thereby enhancing national prosperity and security. There is
increased demand for electrochemical energy storage systems that can provide
both high power and high energy densities for applications ranging from portable
electronics to electric vehicles. This type of performance is difficult to
achieve with electrodes made via slurry-casting, by far the most common
manufacturing process. Nanostructured electrode architectures can achieve high
power and high energy densities, as has been widely discussed in the scientific
literature. However, these nanostructured electrodes usually require many
complex processing steps with unknown reproducibility and scalability. This
research project studies manufacturing design principles for the
electrodeposition of transition metal oxides onto aligned carbon nanotube
fabrics. This new process enables the controllable and scalable fabrication of
high-performance nanostructured energy storage electrodes. The fundamental
understanding developed as part of this research is applicable to a wide range
of oxide-based and electrodeposited energy storage materials, thus benefitting
the U.S. economy and society. In addition to training of graduate students, the
education plan of the project includes the development of a 'Materials
Manufacturing Design Principles' course module, instructions for which will be
shared on publicly-accessible websites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this research is to develop and understand the manufacturing design
principles that yield nanostructured aligned carbon nanotube fabric and
transition metal oxide electrochemical energy storage electrodes with high power
and high energy densities. Achieving this goal overcomes the technical barriers
that are typically faced in the scale-up of nanostructured electrodes and
provides a transformative route for energy storage processing with the potential
for far-reaching industrial impact. Manufacturing design principles are applied
to the nanomaterial synthesis and assembly, specifically, reducing the number of
materials and processing steps for predictable assembly, utilizing surface
functionalization to enable material self-location and self-adhesion, and
enabling modularity. The researchers utilize advanced materials characterization
techniques to determine the relationships between processing and electrode
architecture, composition, and electrochemical performance. Finite-element
modeling is utilized to correlate the electrode microstructure, such as oxide
grain size or thickness, with the extent of electrochemical intercalation. The
fundamental understanding from this research leads to predictive control over
nanostructured energy storage architectures with both high power and high energy
densities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.