* 1901127
* Excellence in Research - Collaborative: Hierarchical multilayered block copolymer dielectrics with z-gradient nanofiller for capacitive energy storage and gate dielectric
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Dharmaraj Raghavan, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 781,495.00

This project is funded by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Undergraduate Program - Excellence in Research program (HBCU-UP EiR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is much interest in use of lightweight
polymer films for potential applications in flexible electronics related to
portable energy storage devices, including batteries, capacitors, integrated
solar cells and soft-actuation. In this regard, new approaches to high-energy
density capacitive energy storage have recently demonstrated notable potential
for high electrical energy storage using multilayered polymer films. Essentially
the multiple interfaces within the multilayer act to sequentially block
electrical breakdown of the dielectric polymer film that determines the upper
limit of energy storage of the flexible capacitor. Recognizing that the
breakdown follows an increasingly branched asymmetric pathway between electrodes
(much like lightning bolts striking the earth), with the highest potential at
the positive electrode, the work will systematically design and explore whether
hybrid polymer multilayers (tetra-layered) can be structurally "reversed-
engineered" with an asymmetry in polymer-layer breakdown properties that
counters the asymmetric breakdown pathway. The approach aims to use self-
assembling block copolymers for multilayer formation and combines it with the
use of dispersed inorganic nanofillers to boost the energy storage capacity.
Successful outcome can have a significant impact on the flexible electronics
industry. This multidisciplinary team effort involves Howard University and
Jackson State University (Historically Black College Universities) and
University of Houston, a Minority Serving Institution, with significant amounts
of intra and inter-institutional educational, training and research activities.
The project will arrange a yearly rotational day-long conference on
nanocomposites at each of the campuses to educate scientists, local teachers and
local college bound students about the vast possibilities of nanotechnology. A
trained cadre of talented nanotechnologists will be trained to address the
challenges of the nation's workforce needs and produce peer reviewed scientific
and technological publications that can be disseminated to the scientific
community and broader society. The program aims to make web-accessible training
protocols to prospective researchers in the field of nanoscience and
nanoengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamentally high energy densities and ultrafast
charge-discharge rates (pulsed power) in solid state-flexible capacitors are of
fundamental importance. The energy storage density is limited by the maximum
electric field that can be applied across the electrodes. Current technologies
for pulsed power applications utilize polymers as the dielectric of choice due
to their high electrical resistance, low dielectric loss, self healing
capability, formability and flexibility. However, these materials do not meet
all of the requirements of the next-generation film dielectrics for high voltage
and high energy density electronic devices. The planned work is based on the
hypothesis that an anti-symmetric z-structured tetra-layered design of
molecularly assembled capacitive elemental layers can precisely counter the
asymmetry of the electrical treeing breakdown cascade from the positive to the
negative electrode. The anti-symmetric film structure considers a tetra-layer
with an extremely high breakdown prevention self-assembling multilayered block
copolymer at the positive electrode where E-field strength is highest as per
electrical treeing breakdown view-point. The subsequent layer is also a block
copolymer structure with in-plane aligned nanosheets to forestall E-field
cascade breakdown. The third layer is designed to contain high dielectric
nanoparticles sequestered within a macroscopically ordered block copolymer
layer, which also provides a strategy of gate dielectric for 2D semiconductor
devices such as field-effect transistors and logic design with enhanced
functionalities compared to the conventional dielectrics. Finally, a defect-free
bottom polymer layer is used, which will prevent trickle-current to the negative
electrode. A multidisciplinary team between Howard University and Jackson State
University (Historically Black College Universities), and University of Houston,
a Minority Serving Institution, will work towards training a cadre of talented
nanotechnologists to face the challenges of the nation's workforce needs. Web
modules on nanoscience and nanoengineering research for young and interested
researchers and the general public will be made
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.