* 1901578
* Acoustic Streaming Flows Induced by Microbubbles in Viscoelastic Fluids: Fundamentals and Applications to Micro-Rheometry
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Joontaek Park, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2022
* USD 323,377.00

Adding minute amounts of polymers into water can turn the solution into a weakly
elastic fluid, which exhibit both viscous, liquid-like, and elastic, solid-like
behaviors. The elastic behavior is due to stretching and coiling of polymers
under flow. Even weak elasticity can have a profound effect on fluid behaviors,
which are essential in many industrial applications, ranging from spraying and
pesticide deposition to drag reduction in piping flows. To achieve the desired
outcomes in those applications, it is critical to accurately measure the fluid
viscosity and elasticity. While viscosity is easy to measure, the elasticity of
weakly elastic fluids has been challenging to measure. One potential method to
measure elasticity is to use steady flows caused by a micro-sized bubble that is
vibrating in an acoustic field. The flow patterns that are induced by the bubble
will change depending on the acoustic frequency and the fluid properties,
allowing inferring of the fluid elasticity. The principal aim of this award is
to provide a deep understanding of the key factors governing the microbubble
induced flows in a viscoelastic fluid. This award will also incorporate
significant educational activities, which disseminate applications of
microfluidics as well as concept of viscoelastic fluids through undergraduate
research projects, engagement of minority and underrepresented students into
research, and outreach modules that are aimed at middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate measurement of relaxation times of low-
viscosity elastic fluids is still a challenging task. This award will tackle
this challenge by using acoustically driven microbubbles. The steady streaming
flows arising from the bubble are shown to depend on the driving acoustics and
fluid elasticity, suggesting feasible microbubble-based rheometry devices for
measuring small relaxation times. In this research, the PIs will combine
experiments, simulations, and theoretical modeling to elucidate the interplay
between elasticity and acoustic streaming flows by: 1) conducting systematic
experiments to characterize the bubble dynamics and streaming flow behavior, 2)
deriving appropriate theory based on the asymptotic method to understand the
interaction of the fluid elasticity and acoustic oscillations, 3) establishing
numerical models to accurately predict the flow patterns, by validating the
simulations with the outcome of Task 1, and 4) engineering novel rheometer-on-a-
chip devices using the developed models in task 3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.