* 1901807
* Chemomechanics in the Solvent-Assisted Recycling of Engineering Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Christopher Yakacki, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2023
* USD 703,082.00

Many engineering composites are troublesome to recycle because the polymers used
in these materials are bonded together permanently. Currently, the disposal of
composite wastes mainly relies on the landfills or incineration, which lead to
significant environmental and health burdens. A new green, sustainable recycling
method was recently developed to address this problem. It uses a bond-exchange
reaction between a solvent and the composite to decompose the polymer material
at a mild temperature and reclaim clean fibers. The decomposed products can be
used to fabricate new composites with near identical material and mechanical
properties for the same applications. However, due to the nascent development of
this recycling technique, existing studies are limited to the proof of concept
demonstrations. This award supports fundamental studies to uncover the
relationships between waste material properties, processing conditions,
recycling speed, and final mechanical properties of recycled thermosets and
composites. The provided scientific knowledge will pave the road for the
immediate applications of this innovative recycling method and significantly
ease the environmental and health concerns associated with the traditional waste
disposal methods. This research will also impact large-scale applications in
other industries involving polymer decomposition and recycling, such as
removable encapsulation of electronics, non-destructive surface coatings,
controlled drug delivery, membrane science, and microlithography. Additionally,
the project will provide opportunities to educate and train graduate and
undergraduate students with a focus on underrepresented students in science,
technology, engineering, and math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives
will be realized using an integrated experimental - theoretical - computational
approach at multiple length scales: In the microscale, constitutive
chemomechanics relations will be defined to link the molecular-level bond-
exchange reactions to the evolution of stress field, network structure, and
mechanical properties of thermosets during the recycling. In the mesoscale, the
constitutive relations will be incorporated into a computational model to study
the influences of the fiber-polymer interface on the recycling performance of a
composite lamina. In the macroscale, an efficient reduced-order computational
model will be developed to guide the selection of solvent and processing
conditions to recycle composite structures with the well-controlled geometry and
mechanical properties. The chemomechanics theory defined in this award will be
used to address three fundamental questions that are mostly concerned in the
composite recycling industry: (i) how fast can the composites be recycled, (ii)
what is the lowest recycling cost, and (iii) how to improve the mechanical
properties of recycled products?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.