* 1901407
* School, Workshop, and Conference on Integrability and Randomness in Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Kenneth T-R McLaughlin, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 01/31/2020
* USD 35,000.00

This award provides funding for US participation for three one-week events
during a semester-long program at the Centre International de Rencontres
Mathematiques (CIRM), in Marseille, France. Specifically, the three events are:
&lt;br/&gt;(i) Research School: Coulomb Gases, Integrability and Painleve
Equations, 11-15 March 2019 &lt;br/&gt;(ii) Large Conference: Integrability and
Randomness in Mathematical Physics, 8-12 April 2019 &lt;br/&gt;(iii) Research
workshop: Integrability and Nonlinear Dispersive Waves, 24-28 June 2019
&lt;br/&gt;The award gives US-based early-career researchers, researchers who
are members of underrepresented groups, and researchers without other sources of
support a chance to attend and participate in this international meeting. The
organizing committee will make major efforts to recruit speakers and attendees
from these groups to promote diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
focuses on recent developments in the field of mathematical analysis, especially
in the subfield of mathematical physics. The main topics will be integrable
systems and random phenomena, and their relations to other fields of
mathematics, including probability theory, operator analysis, representation
theory, combinatorics, partial differential equations, and complex analysis.
More information can be found on the program's web site
https://www.chairejeanmorlet.com/2019-1-grava-
bufetov.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.