* 1901659
* Thematic Month at CIRM in Complex Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Gabor Szekelyhidi, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/29/2020
* USD 17,938.00

The award provides partial support for the participation of U.S.-based
Mathematicians in a conference in Pure Mathematics titled "Thematic Month:
Complex Geometry", to be held at CIRM, Luminy (France) from January 28 to March
01, 2019. The main theme of the conference is Geometry; one of the cornerstones
of modern Mathematics with broad applications, ranging from String Theory to
Cryptography. Through newly discovered, deep connections between various active
areas of research in Geometry, including Arithmetic, Algebraic and Complex
Differential Geometry, each subject has witnessed unexpected and groundbreaking
advances. The conference aims to facilitate interactions among researchers in
these diverse fields to further these developments. Such activities have proved
to be of unparalleled importance for geometers in these interconnected areas,
specially for those in early stages of their careers.

The event supported by this award is composed of a master class (1 week long)
and 4 international conferences, each one week long: Singular Metrics in Kaehler
Geometry (week 2), Birational Geometry and Hodge Theory (week 3), Entire Curves,
Rational Curves and Foliations (week 4), and Ball Quotient Surfaces and Lattices
(week 5). The last couple of years have been witness to important progress in
our understanding of the geometry of complex algebraic varieties, and more
generally Kaehler varieties. The aim of this conference is to facilitate the
gathering of experts of international stature in various active areas of
research. The aim of the Master Class is the introduction of techniques and
theories that will be used throughout the conference. This will mainly consist
of three courses: Hodge theory, K3 surfaces and special metrics on manifolds.
During the second week, the goal is to study various geometric problems where
the theory of singular metrics play an important role. This includes the
following topics: Singular Kaehler-Einstein varieties and their moduli,
Positivity in Complex Geometry and Generalized Yau-Tian-Donaldson Conjecture.
The aim of the third week is to investigate various methods in Algebraic
Geometry with a view towards applications in Birational Geometry and Moduli
spaces. The following topics will be of particular importance: Hodge theory and
Moduli of higher dimensional varieties. The goal of the fourth week is to gather
specialists in different fields working on the geometry of algebraic and
transcendental curves in complex varieties. Topics include: jet spaces and
foliations, Special Varieties and Nevanlinna theory. Despite an intensive search
for finding a geometric construction for ball quotient surfaces, very few
examples have been obtained with explicit equations. Recently Cartwright and
Steger have introduced new algorithms for such constructions, leading to the
completion of the classification of fake projective planes. The focus of the
final week will be a detailed analysis of this fundamental work and its
applications. Webpage for the conference: https://conferences.cirm-
math.fr/2060.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.