* 1901346
* Excellence in Research:  Upstream and Downstream Analysis of Hoxa1 Gene Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Eduardo Martinez-Ceballos, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 607,801.00

Hoxa1 is an important regulator of embryonic development in vertebrates. Studies
have indicated that the lack of Hoxa1 in mouse embryos results in developmental
defects, including hindbrain deficiencies, abnormal bone growth in the skull
and, ultimately, in death. In humans, mutations in this gene result in
neurological disorders and autism susceptibility. Conversely, elevated levels of
Hoxa1 promote cell proliferation and cancer. These observations highlight the
importance of Hoxa1 but little is known about the mechanism by which a precise
control of Hoxa1 gene expression is achieved in cells. To shed light on this
problem, this project will employ mouse Embryonic Stem cells in order to
understand how the levels of Hoxa1 are controlled in cells. The project is an
extension of preliminary findings in the Principal Investigator's laboratory
which indicate that the Hoxa1 protein plays a role in controlling its own gene
expression. Thus, the results from this project will lead to the elucidation of
the specific roles played by Hoxa1 on the differentiation of ES cells, which
will represent a significant contribution to the area of stem cell biology. In
addition, a number of different sectors (research, industry, and education) will
benefit from this study for more effective development of novel stem cell
applications. The work includes a mentoring program for undergraduate students
and therefore, will have broader impacts on the preparation of traditionally
underrepresented students who wish to follow a scientific career in Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Hoxa1 is a transcription factor (TF) that plays
an important role during development of the early brain and neural crest-derived
structures in vertebrates. In humans, mutations in this gene are associated with
various Central Nervous System (CNS) disorders and overexpression has been
associated with cancer development. These observations highlight the importance
of Hoxa1 for correct embryonic development and as a causative factor in human
disorders and cancer. However, in spite of the recognized importance of Hoxa1
during vertebrate development, little is known about its molecular mechanism of
action in cells and tissues. The goal of this work is to shed light on the
molecular mechanisms of Hoxa1 transcriptional gene regulation and function. This
will be accomplished by investigating a novel autoregulatory feedback mechanism
uncovered by our laboratory and by examining the expression of putative Hoxa1
direct target genes during mouse ES cell differentiation both under two-
dimensional (2D) and tri-dimensional (3D) culture conditions. The results from
these studies will improve understanding of basic molecular mechanisms relevant
to Developmental Biology, Organ and Tissue Replacement and Cancer Research,
among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.