* 1901040
* Catalyst Award: Assessing the Role of Natural Compounds on Mechanisms of Apoptosis in RT4-D2P6T cells
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Rosalyn Reid, Johnson C. Smith University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 149,855.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Johnson C. Smith University will explore the ability of natural compounds to
permanently inhibit or prevent the progression of cell death via apoptosis in
neuronal cells. The project will increase the exposure and engagement of
underrepresented students in hands-on, inquiry-based research in the biology of
aging and prepare them for graduate and pre-professional programs in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project forwards the trajectory to find natural
compounds that impact molecular switches that may permanently slow or stop the
progression of apoptosis in neuronal cells. The central hypothesis is that
flavonoids may inhibit, block or prevent the progression of apoptosis in HT22
neuronal cells. Cell death via apoptosis leads to the activation of molecules
such as caspases which have been shown to induce apoptosis. Although studies
show that flavonoids are able to inhibit apoptosis in human normal astrocytes,
few studies have focused on this aspect of flavonoid bioactivity or the
molecular targets impacted in this role. This project is an in-vitro study with
the primary goal of assessing the effects of flavonoids on neuronal cell death
via apoptosis, an issue that is critically associated to the fields of systems
biology, neurobiology, and nutrition science. The neuronal cell line HT22, will
be used in this study for the purpose of assessing the impact of quercetin and
macluraxanthone on gene and protein expression of molecular targets (caspases 3,
8, 9; iROS; iNOS) and to measure the impact of antioxidant compounds on the rate
of cell death via apoptosis in vitro. The findings from this study will increase
knowledge of inhibition of cell death via apoptosis in neuronal
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.