* 1901377
* Excellence in Research: Microbiome of the Eastern Oyster (Crassostrea virginica) and its denitrification potential in benthic systems
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Raphael Isokpehi, Bethune-Cookman University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 420,000.00

Oyster populations have declined worldwide, but reef restoration efforts and
expanding aquaculture operations are helping to meet consumer demands. In
addition to their food value, oysters improve water quality via their filter
feeding mechanism, thus cleaning the surrounding water, removing organic matter
than can cause low-oxygen 'dead zones', and assisting in mitigation of nutrients
like nitrogen and phosphorus from terrestrial runoff. Oysters contain microbial
communities that may include harmful as well as beneficial bacteria, involved in
nutrient cycling and other ecosystem services. The structure and function of
these microbial communities are poorly understood, especially in warm temperate
and tropical water habitats. Therefore, obtaining a better assessment of what
microbes are present, and their environmental functions, in wild and cultured
oysters under a variety of growth conditions are the focus of this work. In
particular, the research team will investigate the microbiomes associated with
the conversion of dissolved nitrogen into nitrogen gas. This process removes
nitrogen that can act as a fertilizer for undesirable algal blooms in coastal
waters. The investigators' hypothesis is that oyster-associated microorganisms
are responsible for significant nitrogen losses within the estuarine waters,
improving water quality and mitigating algal blooms and fish kills. This project
will also enhance research and training activities at two historically black
colleges/universities, and further the education and training of minority
students in STEM disciplines. A comprehensive understanding of the oyster
microbiome will improve understanding of nutrient dynamics in coastal systems
and help improve strategies for managing coastal water quality and reducing
nutrient pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oysters and their associated
microbiomes provide significant environmental benefits, including removal of
nitrogen, a major cause of coastal and estuarine eutrophication. However, the
presence, abundance, metabolic activity and ecological significance of microbial
endosymbionts within oysters, especially in warm temperate and tropical waters,
remain poorly understood. Much of the oyster microbiome consists of
taxonomically unresolved and potentially novel microorganisms. Filling this
knowledge gap is critical because oyster aquaculture and restoration of oyster
reefs is greatly expanding in the Gulf of Mexico and south Atlantic coasts.
Towards this end, the research team will investigate the microbiomes of wild and
cultured oysters grown under different nutrient, temperature and salinity
regimes. In addition to the microbiome community composition and potential
identification of novel microbes, they will focus on microbes associated with
biogeochemical cycling, particularly denitrification. One major hypothesis is
that oyster microbiomes provide a significant ecosystem service of nitrogen
removal in estuarine systems. They will measure dissolved and particulate
nitrogen species, rates of transformations and denitrification gene abundances
(nosZI and nosZII), to better understand the oyster microbiome's role in N
dynamics. Several emergent "omics" techniques will be utilized by a team of
ecologists, microbiologists, bioinformaticians and biogeochemists from two
HBCUs, thus supporting the development and expansion of research capacity at
these institutions. The project also includes a significant education component,
including funding for students and a postdoctoral fellow. Better understanding
of the structure and function of oyster microbiomes will advance knowledge of
estuarine ecology and may provide improved strategies for managing coastal water
quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Integrative
Ecological Physiology Program in the the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems and the Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate
Program in the Division of Human Resource Development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.