* 1901987
* Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center: A Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Joshua Webb, Eastern Iowa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,153,716.00

The U.S. water infrastructure includes more than 151,000 public drinking water
treatment systems and more than 15,000 publicly-owned wastewater treatment
systems. These numbers do not include the industrial water and wastewater
systems. This massive infrastructure is confronting the increased role of water
in national security issues, changes in national and regional regulatory
compliance requirements, a retiring workforce, new technology, and the changing
demands of industry. Thus, there is a need for realignment of academia,
industry, business, and government to ensure the resilience of the U.S. water
infrastructure. An important part of the water infrastructure labor force are
water and wastewater technicians. Technician jobs are growing faster than
average and include water operations technicians, wastewater treatment
technicians, and water and wastewater system technicians and operators. These
occupations have wages above the national median and, because the jobs are
mandated by regulations, they cannot be outsourced. Water technology jobs
survive economic downturn cycles because populations will always need clean
drinking water and wastewater treatment to survive, and business and industry
need clean water to produce goods and services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center (ATEEC) is an Advanced
Technological Education Resource Center that supports and advances high school
and community college environmental technology education through curriculum
development, professional development, and program improvement. ATEEC will
create Professional Learning Community webinars for new water/wastewater
technology programs; conduct a national Defining Forum and occupational analyses
to define current water technician level jobs; update the interactive Defining
Water Management Careers Chart for high school/community college career
counselors and students; revise the Brownfields in a Box with updated technology
to interest new students in water careers; expand the electronic environmental
resource library of juried water technology content; develop augmented/virtual
reality modules in water/wastewater content; and assist college programs in
crosswalks to increase the number of veterans receiving college credit for
military training/experience. Results of ATEEC activities and evaluation will be
broadly disseminated. This project is funded by the NSF Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.