* 1901446
* SHF: Medium: Simulation-Based Analysis of EM Side Channels in Embedded Systems: From Software to Fields
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Michael Orshansky, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Embedded computing systems represent a critical backbone of infrastructure that
society relies on in daily life. They often operate on sensitive data in safety-
critical environments, such as transportation, health care, and industrial
control. An important aspect of securing embedded electronic systems is to
prevent information leakage at the level of system behavior. There exist
multiple venues by which an attacker can get such information even without
having complete access to the internal system components. Specifically,
electromagnetic (EM) fields emanated during software activity in electronic
systems contain important information about the underlying system behavior. This
project will develop tools that system designers can use to ensure resilience
against information being leaked through EM side channels. As part of outreach
and education components, this project will develop a short course on physical
and IoT security that will use interdisciplinary cybersecurity challenges
spanning cryptography, electromagnetics, embedded system, and hardware/software
design topics to generate interest in pursuing careers in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The only existing capability for EM side-
channel analysis is based on cumbersome laboratory measurements. This is a
fundamental problem, as most embedded software developers are not in a position
to carry out lab-based characterization of EM vulnerabilities. Such
characterizations require instrumentation expertise that a typical software
engineer lacks, are expensive, provide limited observability, and are slow
compared to what a computational tool flow enables. This project will develop
novel simulation-based approaches for characterization of EM fields emanated by
software running on complex embedded processors. This will require fast yet
accurate tracking of spatio-temporal EM emanations all the way from circuits to
processor micro-architectures to software running on them. The simulation tool
flow to be developed will permit design of improved system-level defenses
against malware as well as minimization of side-channel leakage through embedded
HW/SW co-design at both compiler and micro-architecture
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.