* 1901316
* Research Initiation Award: Stochastic and Deterministic Solutions to Unsteady Nanofluid Mixed Convection Problems
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Zephyrinus Okonkwo, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Albany State University has potential broader impacts in a number of
areas. The goal of this project is to develop mathematical modeling and analysis
of nanofluid in axisymmetric and three-dimensional flows, and to enhance
teaching and learning at the university by involving undergraduate students in
mathematical modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
mathematical modeling and analysis of nonlinear coupled partial differential
equations in axisymmetric and three-dimensional flows that arise in nanofluid
flow in unsteady mixed convection. The specific goals of this project are to:
(i) obtain deterministic solutions to the unsteady mixed convection nanofluid
flow in axisymmetric bodies; (ii) develop stochastic solutions to unsteady mixed
convection nanofluid flow over axisymmetric and three-dimensional bodies; and
(iii) investigate the stability properties of the mixed convection flow over
moving axisymmetric bodies. The success of this project will provide fundamental
understanding of unsteady convective heat transfer phenomena in complex
nanofluids. The results of such studies could be used to optimize fluid
properties and for existing critical applications such as coolant for
automobiles, air conditioning, and supercomputers, as well as emerging and novel
applications. This project will be conducted in collaboration with the
Mathematical Biosciences Institute at Ohio State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.