* 1901654
* RR Lyrae/Cepheid 2019 Conference
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Karen Kinemuchi, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 12/31/2020
* USD 31,433.00

This conference will bring together researchers and students, observers and
theorists representing a variety of surveys and missions for the presentation
and discussion of the latest discoveries and on-going work with RR Lyrae and
Cepheid type pulsating variable stars. During the meeting, participants will
discuss and share the latest results from a variety of datasets (ground-based
surveys and space-based missions), the latest theoretical models (from
hydrodynamical codes describing stellar interiors, stellar evolution of
pulsating stars, and pulsation theory), and topics on the small (binary systems)
and large (near-field cosmology) scale. The conference is scheduled for October
13-18, 2019 in Cloudcroft, New Mexico.

The conference is well situated to bring astronomy to the local communities in
southeastern New Mexico. One aim to broaden the impact of the meeting is to
engage with the local Native Americans to share their understanding of the night
sky with our group of scientists. This cultural exchange is expected to be
illuminating and inspirational, and educational for everyone. The second aim is
to reach out to the amateur astronomy community to encourage joint research
projects with professional astronomers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.