* 1901033
* SHF: Medium: Gradual Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jonathan Aldrich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,065,511.00

Software is becoming ever more essential to society, yet the apps we use
continue to be plagued by errors (bugs) that range from inconveniences to severe
security threats. Verification is a promising new technology for eliminating
bugs from software. But verification is also very expensive--it may cost 10
times the amount of regular software development, making verification way too
expensive to fully apply to all software. The project's novelties are based on
making verification gradual, so that it can be applied to just part of a
software system, not all of it. The project's impacts are based on allowing
engineers to focus verification efforts on the most important parts of
applications, and on eliminating the bugs that cause the biggest problems. This
could eliminate the most severe bugs from software apps with a relatively small
increase in cost. The project will also enhance the teaching of verification by
providing students with a smoother path to learning the topic, and will take
specific steps towards broadening the participation of underrepresented groups
in computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's technical approach builds on
recent work on abstracting gradual typing: a principled approach that that
applies ideas from abstract interpretation to systematically adapt a static type
system into one that allows static and dynamic types to be mixed. We proposed to
adapt this approach to make verification gradual. In the gradual verification
setting, developers can choose to specify possibly partial pre- and post-
condition specifications for the critical functions in a program, while leaving
other functions and properties unspecified. The gradual verifier will use
abstract interpretation to statically identify inconsistencies between
specifications and code, but without triggering false warnings due to
specifications that are missing or incomplete. It will also insert the minimum
run-time checks that are necessary in order to enforce any properties that the
static verifier cannot assure. The approach is being validated through a
combination of formative qualitative studies, formalization and proof, prototype
implementation and performance evaluation, and summative user studies and case
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.