* 1901510
* CNS Core: Large: Collaborative Research: Network Design Automation
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Yuval Tamir, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,999,404.00

When we use Office365, Amazon, or Facebook, we access a world of rich services
via a network. Network reliability is paramount for business, science, and
government because downtime affects productivity, economic output, and social
communication. However, reliability is difficult to achieve in the face of
component failure, manual configuration, and the stringent economics of the
Information Technology (IT) industry. This project will take first steps towards
creating a new field of inquiry, Network Design Automation (NDA). NDA seeks to
create computer-aided design (CAD) tools that reduce design effort and increase
reliability based on a scientific understanding of network structure. NDA is
inspired by Electronic Design Automation (EDA), a $7 billion industry that
underpins the $100 billion chip industry, and is a vibrant intellectual
discipline in its own right.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NDA will verify networks using
formal methods but also broaden the agenda to debugging networked systems and to
other specialized networks such as rural networks and content distribution
networks. Specific new tasks include tying application performance to network
problems using machine learning, understanding failure logs using Natural
Language Processing, creating more controllable routers inspired by hardware
boundary scan ideas, rural network design using constraint satisfaction, network
scripting to lower the barriers for operators, and data mining to find
configuration bugs without a specification. Networks have unique challenges
including heterogeneity, management complexity, rate of evolution (new data
centers and service rollouts), and high availability needs. Besides a consistent
focus on using algorithm search, we will leverage data mining, machine learning,
Natural Language Processing, and hardware test approaches. NDA will not merely
reuse existing mechanisms, but will exploit domain-specific insights about the
structure of modern networks to invent new and scalable
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.