* 1901718
* Patterned Synthetic Spinal Cords from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jianping Fu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2022
* USD 329,239.00

During development of the nervous system, a vast array of neurons will develop
in discrete positions, acquire varied shapes, and establish connections with
specific populations of target cells. Such spatial organization of neuronal cell
fates and differentiation are generally accepted as being directed by soluble
chemical signals, termed morphogens. However, it remains a significant question
in biology about how embryonic cells transform morphogen information into
spatial patterns of neuronal cell differentiation during the nervous system
development. This goal of this project is to specifically address this
significant knowledge gap by leveraging a stem cell-based development model that
has been established in the investigator's laboratory. This synthetic human
development model will be used as a controllable experimental system to
determine how different morphogen signals control intracellular activities of
key signaling pathways to regulate neuronal cell fates. The project, if
successful, will foster significant progress in advancing fundamental
understanding of the nervous system development, which is important for
diagnosis, prevention and treatment of neurological disorders that are the
result of impaired development and growth of the nervous system. The
technologies developed under this project will be used to enhance K-12 outreach
activities, with priority given to females and minority students, and
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. Outreach
activities planned for students in the Ann Arbor and Ypsilanti school districts
include developing a summer intern program for high school students and
developing educational modules for NanoCamps and TECH DAY events for K-12
students. Established University of Michigan undergraduate research programs
will be leveraged to recruit undergraduate students to participate in the lab's
research and a new course on "Stem Cell Bioengineering and Biotechnology" will
be developed to prepare graduate students for emerging areas such as
regenerative medicine and disease modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It remains
mysterious how embryonic cells transform dynamic changes in developmental
signaling into spatial patterns of gene expression and cellular differentiation
in a reliable and robust fashion. A fundamental goal of this project is thus to
leverage recent progresses in human stem cell-based development models to study
morphogen gradient-mediated embryonic patterning. Specifically, a synthetic
microfluidic patterned human spinal cord model developed from human pluripotent
stem cells will be leveraged as a maneuverable experimental platform for the
proposed quantitative mechanistic investigations. Detailed mechanistic
investigations will be conducted to elucidate how neuroepithelial cells in the
human spinal cord model integrate the duration and level of morphogen signals to
mediate distinct quantities and durations of key transcriptional effector
activities. Furthermore, detailed mechanistic investigations will be conducted
to understand how dynamic intracellular activities of key transcriptional
effectors correlate with progressive emergence and fate specifications of
neuronal subtypes in the human spinal cord model. Owing to its interdisciplinary
nature, the proposed research will seamlessly integrate knowledge from distinct
fields including stem cell biology, developmental biology, signal transduction,
epithelial biology and microfluidics. The mechanistic investigations proposed in
this research will provide new fundamental knowledge and novel discoveries of
emergent self-organizing principles and pattering mechanisms that provide
robustness and reliability to embryonic patterning, a long-standing question in
biology,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.