* 1901420
* Excellence In Research : HBCU Collision Collaboration - J/psi Peripheral Collision Analysis and Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Marcus Alfred, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 581,000.00

The HBCU COLLIDER Collaboration's goal is to provide resources for HBCU nuclear
and particle physics faculty to further the broader goals of their collective
institutional missions through research. The members of the COLLIDER
Collaboration are Florida A&amp;M University (FAMU), Howard University (HU), and
Texas Southern University (TSU). Each institution's mission has a core
commitment to increasing opportunities for underserved populations. Both FAMU
and HU have graduate physics programs and, through this project, will lay a
foundation for broader participation of HBCUs and their underserved communities
in planned major national investments in experimental nuclear physics at the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), Jefferson Lab and the proposed Electron
Ion Collider (EIC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two related objectives for
this project. 1) The proposed research project involves the measurement of
Ultra-peripheral J/Psi cross sections in heavy ion collisions with the PHENIX
detector at RHIC. 2) In addition, the project seeks to build a cosmic ray test
stand to test multi gap Resistive Plate Chambers, a technology that can be used
for 10 picosecond level time of flight measurements in modern nuclear and
particle physics experiments. Such an advance will greatly enhance the particle
identification capabilities of collider detectors, enabling more knowledge about
the fundamental laws of physics to be extracted from these
collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.