* 1901661
* SBE-RCUK Lead Agency: The Cognitive Foundations of Human Reciprocity
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Felix Warneken, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 323,126.00

Reciprocity is one of the major skills that enable humans to cooperate with
others. When individuals take turns cooperating in a reciprocal fashion, they
are better off in the long-term than individuals who care only about their own
immediate benefit. However, little is known about the psychological skills
needed. What features of the human mind enable us to engage in reciprocity? How
can we explain when individuals are more or less cooperative? This project is
focused on three psychological abilities that are hypothesized to be critical
for reciprocity: The ability to plan for the future, to exercise patience, and
to tolerate a level of risk. Measuring these abilities will facilitate
understanding fundamental aspects of human cooperation and developing strategies
needed to foster cooperation in daily social interactions, including the work
environment. This project will examine reciprocity as it first emerges in
development (by studying children), it will also examine reciprocity within the
context of human evolution (by comparing human abilities to those of
chimpanzees). To assess why some individuals are more cooperative than others,
the project tests individual differences in reciprocal behavior across adults.
An important aspect of this research project is to translate the insights about
the basic skills for reciprocity into programs that foster cooperation in
society-at-large. In business, practitioners have come to realize the need for
more cooperative approaches and are in urgent need of guidelines to promote
cooperative work in organizations; therefore, the researchers will partner with
the Institute for Collaborative Working, an organization that develops executive
training for collaborative working in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will use a battery of validated tests to determine the degree to which future
planning, patience, and risk tolerance are the foundational skills required for
reciprocity-based cooperation. The project will integrate three complementary
lines of inquiry. One line will assess the evolutionary basis of the human
capacity for reciprocity by studying chimpanzees as one of humans? closest
primate relatives. This will test the hypothesis that chimpanzees reciprocate in
limited ways because of differences in future planning, patience, and risk
tolerance. A second line of inquiry will trace the emergence of reciprocity in
children between 3 and 6 years of age. This will enable the researchers to test
whether the emergence of reciprocity can be explained by developmental changes
in the three component abilities. A third line involves experiments designed to
examine individual differences among human adults in their tendency to engage in
reciprocal cooperation -- measuring whether variability in reciprocity can be
explained by differences in future planning, patience, and risk tolerance.
Researchers will meet with key members of the Institute for Collaborative
Working and international scholars to discuss the findings and their
implications for fostering cooperative interactions in the work
place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.