* 1901787
* RAPID: Draining the landscape: Will the drop in stream and groundwater levels following dam removal increase the leaching/leakage of nitrogen (N) from riparian zones?
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Shreeram Inamdar, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 10/31/2020
* USD 49,945.00

A large number of dams are currently being removed across the U.S. and at an
accelerating pace. Most of the dam removals are driven by the need to increase
public safety, reduce owner liability, and improve fish/aquatic habitat.
However, little attention is being paid to how dam removals could influence
water quality. Generally, dams slow down the flow of water and simultaneously
raise the level of water in the stream and in the stream-side areas known as
riparian areas. Unintentionally, this provides a valuable benefit: wet soils
rich in carbon act as important filters for nitrogen, a key pollutant in
waterways. This natural filtering service reduces stream water nitrogen
concentrations and improves water quality. Dam removals could undermine this
valuable service and potentially increase nitrogen in streams. This study will
quantify how dam removal alters the capacity of riparian soils in filtering
nitrogen. Results will be conveyed to landowners and natural resource agencies
which will position them to make informed decisions on dam removals and better
manage our watersheds. The study will provide a valuable opportunity for
education and professional development for undergraduate and graduate students.
In addition to presentations at professional conferences and meetings, project
results will be disseminated to broader, non-academic audiences through talks at
community Science Cafes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Near-surface groundwater and wet
soil conditions in riparian zones, particularly upstream of dams, enhance
denitrification in soils - a key mechanism by which riparian zones filter and
remove nitrogen (N) from soils and act as hot spots for nitrogen buffering. Dam
removals can lower groundwater levels, expose and dry riparian soils, and result
in loss of valuable denitrification ecosystem services. Furthermore, drying of
soils could enhance mineralization and nitrification, processes that release
soil N and increase water pollution. This could result in riparian zones
switching from watershed N sinks to sources. This hypothesis (increasing soil N
leakage following dam removal) will be tested at the Chickies Creek site in
Pennsylvania where the Krady Mill dam was recently removed. Stream water and
ground waters at two riparian transects will be monitored and sampled weekly to
study changes in concentration of nitrogen species. Riparian soil samples along
the transects and at various soil depths will be collected to measure changes in
soil N concentrations and the rates of mineralization, nitrification and
denitrification. Measured process rates along with areal extent of the drained
soils will be used to estimate/predict the N leakage (kg per unit stream length)
following dam removal. Considering increasing dam removals across the U.S.,
results from this study will provide novel insights critical for watershed
management and assessing the benefits and drawbacks of dam
removal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.