* 1901928
* Collaborative Research: Digitization TCN: Digitizing collections to trace parasite-host associations and predict the spread of vector-borne disease
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Neal Evenhuis, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 246,267.00

Arthropod parasites (specifically, insects and their relatives) are responsible
for economically critical issues in human health, wildlife conservation, and
livestock productivity. Because natural history collections are permanent
repositories for past and present parasite specimens, these collections and
their data can help address these significant societal challenges in human and
animal health and safety. Natural history collections often contain specimens
and ancillary materials that are completely unknown to the broader community,
yet represent irreplaceable knowledge about organismal habitats, distributions,
and parasite-host associations. Further, these collections yield information
that can be used to model ecological processes and changes in species
distributions, predict the future spread of human and animal disease, update
taxonomy, and help identify under-represented parasite groups in urgent need of
sampling and threatened parasite diversity in need of conservation. This project
will provide digital records (i.e., specimen label data and images) of
invaluable arthropod parasite collections to make research-ready baseline data
accessible online, catalyzing new research and education initiatives. These
newly digitized data will have immediate and long-lasting benefits for our
understanding of organismal associations, biodiversity, and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Terrestrial Parasite Tracker Thematic Collection
Network (TPT-TCN) will digitize over one million arthropod specimens
representing species that are significant parasites and disease vectors of
vertebrates in the United States. This digitization effort will integrate
millions of vertebrate host records with vector and disease monitoring data
shared by state and federal agency collaborators, creating a novel foundation
for integrative, long-term research. This project is a collaboration of
taxonomists and curators from vertebrate and invertebrate collections, as well
as epidemiologists, ecologists, data-scientists, and biodiversity informatics
specialists. This reach is further extended by the 26 collaborating research
collections and other initiatives. This project will empower ongoing citizen
science and public awareness campaigns with the tools to understand distribution
changes of arthropod vectors and associated diseases due to environmental change
and global movement. Public education initiatives include partnering with
natural history museums to educate the public about parasites via science-
focused lectures, exhibits, summer youth programs, informal presentations, and
developing new online educational resources for teachers in underserved
communities. All specimen images generated by this project will be used for the
development of a rapid identification tool for parasites which will be made
accessible through the internet and smartphone apps and shared with iDigBio
(idigbio.org). The TPT-TCN will also develop and implement undergraduate
teaching modules focused on data held in natural history collections. These
modules will be disseminated to academic institutions across the United States
and made available online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.