* 1901579
* Library of protein-nanoparticle interactions: Automated sample handling and low-cost proteomics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Christine Payne, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 06/30/2023
* USD 390,000.00

Exposure to nanoparticles can be beneficial, such as the use of nanomedicines,
or detrimental, such as the inhalation of metal oxide nanoparticles used in
industrial applications. In both cases, there is a pressing need for a
quantitative understanding of how nanoparticles interact with biological
systems. This research will generate a library of protein-nanoparticle
interactions using a carefully controlled set of nanoparticles. Experiments will
focus on the interaction of nanoparticles with the proteins found in the blood
stream. Use of a robot to automate experiments will increase throughput and
reproducibility. The research team will use this library, which will be publicly
available, to determine which proteins adsorb on the surface of nanoparticles as
a function of nanoparticle diameter and surface properties and then use this
library for subsequent cell-nanoparticle experiments. A major limit to
generating a protein-nanoparticle library has been the cost associated with
protein analysis. The research team will benchmark the use of a faster, less
expensive, protein separation method to reduce costs. The use of controlled
nanoparticle parameters, in combination with automated sample preparation and
low-cost protein analysis, will enable the first quantitative understanding of
protein-nanoparticle interactions, important for environmental and industrial
nanoparticle exposure, as well as therapeutic and diagnostic applications. This
research also provides an ideal training platform for students to address
fundamental questions of nanoscience with advances in research automation,
training that will be relevant to future academic or industry
jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles used in any biological system proteins
are exposed to proteins that adsorb on the surface of the nanoparticle forming a
protein corona. Modification with neutral polymers can reduce this protein
corona, but complete inhibition remains a challenge. Currently lacking is an
ability to predict which proteins will adsorb on the surface of a specific
nanoparticle. Previous work in this area has been limited by the cost of
proteomics, only identifying protein-nanoparticles interactions for small sets
of nanoparticles, or have carried out large-scale proteomics on a diverse array
of ligands that preclude the identification of trends. This research will
generate a protein corona library and then use this library to select
nanoparticles for protein- and cellular-level mechanistic studies. To generate
sufficient nanoparticles with controlled variation of surface parameters, the
research team will automate nanoparticle functionalization using a liquid
handling robot. To reduce the costs associated with generating a protein corona
library, the team will reduce the time required for peptide separation using
capillary electrophoresis instead of liquid chromatography. The corona library
will be used to select nanoparticles for mechanistic studies to understand why
complement C3 and serum albumin are enriched and under-represented,
respectively, in protein coronas, and the effect of these proteins on the
subsequent interaction with macrophage cells. The outcomes of this research
include the protein corona library, which will be publicly available, automation
of nanoparticle functionalization and sample preparation, and a detailed
comparison of capillary electrophoresis and liquid chromatography separation for
proteomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.