* 1901704
* A Logic Programming Approach to Integrate Computing with Middle School Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Wanli Xing, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 01/31/2024
* USD 421,755.00

As a result of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, the STEM+C program addresses an urgent need for real-world,
interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of students from the early
grades through high school (preK-12). This exploratory project will assess the
effectiveness of a Logic Programming (LP) approach to integrate computing into
middle school science education. Researching LP as a strategy to integrate
computing into STEM offers an interesting and viable approach for the STEM+C
field. While LP is not a new programming approach, it is under-explored in the
STEM+C field where the focus is more on visually-based programming such as
block-based programming (e.g., Scratch). Through logic programming, students
will learn to represent STEM subject-matter knowledge in an explicit and precise
manner, while practicing critical thinking and logical reasoning, and developing
computer models based on scientific investigation and problem-solving. A key
advantage of LP is in its simplicity and generalizability, and this project will
provide valuable information about its effectiveness for STEM content area
curriculum development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employing a design-based research
methodology, the research team will first develop, test and implement 6-week
modules that integrate computing with chemistry and life science using logic
programming. This curriculum will facilitate students in developing skills
fundamental to computing (e.g., abstraction in knowledge representation) and
STEM, and compliant with standards such as Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
for Science (TEKS) and the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). A mixed-
methods approach will be employed to study the effectiveness of the LP approach
on students' motivation and learning outcomes in both computing and the STEM
content areas. The modules and supporting materials will be made available
online, and promoted at conferences for practitioners and through workshops to
non-participant teachers. Results from this exploratory project will provide
initial evidence on the effectiveness of integrating computing and middle school
STEM science education through the LP approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.