* 1901082
* Applications of Tensor Categories in Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Corey Jones, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 11/30/2020
* USD 113,495.00

Symmetries play a fundamental role across the spectrum of mathematical sciences,
especially as a unifying principle in physics. Classically symmetries of a
physical system are described by algebraic objects known as groups, which act on
the observables of the system. In quantum systems, however, the observables are
described by noncommutative operator algebras (C* and von Neumann algebras). In
this setting a new kind of symmetry emerges. The algebraic objects that
naturally arise are called tensor categories, and have proved to be very
successful at describing symmetries of low dimensional quantum field theories,
topological phases of matter, and quantum statistical mechanics. The goal of
this project is to apply the theory of tensor categories to understand the
relationship between noncommutative operator algebras, as well as exploring the
role of tensor categories in low dimensional quantum
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on three main problems. The
first is to use tensor categories to classify and construct discrete inclusions
of von Neumann algebras building on recent progress in this area, furthering the
work of the PI with David Penneys and with Shamindra K. Ghosh. The second is the
study of Alain Connes' chi invariant for finite von Neumann algebras from the
point of view of braided tensor categories. We propose a generalization of this
invariant using non-invertible bimodules, along with new methods of computation
of this invariant that will allow us to distinguish previously indistinguishable
classes of von Neumann algebras. Finally, we investigate the algebraic process
of gauging braided tensor categories, which described the interaction between
quantum and classical symmetry in topological phases of condensed matter
systems. This is an important construction from the physical point of view, but
mathematically difficult to understand. The primary problem for this project is
to establish the existence of gauged categories in physically relevant
situations such as permutation symmetry, generalizing the results of the PI with
Terry Gannon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.