* 1901614
* Volcanic jet noise: Linking field and laboratory experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,08/31/2024
* David Fee, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 319,629.00

Volcanic eruptions are dynamic and complex, making both monitoring and
understanding their source processes challenging. Infrasound, or low frequency
sound waves, is becoming increasingly used to monitor and study volcanic
eruptions. Volcanic jets are prolific producers of volcanic jet noise, the sound
produced by turbulent flow from a volcanic vent. Volcanic jet noise was heard
extensively during the 2018 Kilauea East Rift Zone eruption. Despite its
increasing use, many questions on volcanic jet noise remain. The investigators
will perform a systematic set of linked field and laboratory experiments to
address fundamental questions on volcanic jet noise and assumptions typically
made when interpreting volcano infrasound data. The lab experiments will be
performed at the unique facility of project collaborator LMU (Munich, Germany)
that can reproduce gas and particle jets under controlled source parameters. At
Stromboli Volcano, Italy, the researchers will examine jetting from eruptions
and determine the jet noise radiation pattern. The observations from the lab and
field will be used to interpret and determine source parameters (e.g. jet
velocity and flux) for eruptions at both Kilauea and Stromboli, as well as
previously collected volcano infrasound data. The project results will have
significant implications for hazard monitoring at volcano observatories in
Alaska and Hawaii, the results will be presented to the general public in those
regions, and broad international collaboration and training will occur.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate unique lab and field
observations of volcanic jet noise to provide new insight into volcanic
eruptions. The lab experiments will, for the first time, simulate the generation
of volcanic jet noise while varying sound-influencing parameters such as
particle concentration, particle shape, vent geometry, temperature, and Mach
number. The field experiment at Stromboli Volcano, Italy will address the
assumed highly directional nature of volcanic jet noise using advantageous
topography and reliable eruptive activity, as well as providing critical
corresponding high-speed visual and infrared imagery. The investigators will
also capitalize on near-source infrasound and visual data collected during the
2018 Kilauea fissure eruption. By combining these three data sets, the
researchers will determine the principal features and complexities of volcanic
jet noise, including the characteristic frequency spectra, highly directional
sound radiation, and unique waveform characteristics. These analyses will help
determine 1) new scaling laws relating jet velocity to acoustic power and 2)
improved eruption source constraints such as particle content and jet diameter,
thus having direct implications for understanding and monitoring of volcanic
eruptions worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the
Prediction of and Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.