* 1901350
* Catalyst Award: Plant and Rhizosphere Processes that Prevent Groundwater Contamination from Metals and Nitrates
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Niroj Aryal, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2023
* USD 149,979.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
North Carolina A&amp;T University will develop sustainable technological
solutions to current and emerging agricultural and urban environmental problems
to protect water resources and increase agricultural productivity. The project
will actively engage underrepresented students in interdisciplinary research,
while building a strong relationship with the local high school
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intermittent application of carbon-rich food
processing wastewater to soil for treatment can create saturated and anaerobic
conditions or aerobic conditions and lead to mobilization of redox-sensitive
soil native metals or nitrate. The goal of the project is to evaluate plant and
rhizobial processes important to reduce mobilization of metal and nitrate to
groundwater during land application of carbon-rich food processing wastewater.
This project will use column studies to evaluate evapotranspiration,
rhizostimulation, plant uptake, oxygenation and phytosequestration. It utilizes
analysis of soil, water and plant samples, and measurement of soil oxidation-
reduction potential, soil moisture and soil microbial communities. The research
identifies the role of individual rhizobial and plant-processes towards nitrate
and metal mobilization in laboratory scales. The research results are important
for development of plant-based engineering solutions to reduce land treatment
system problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.