* 1901133
* CNS Core: Medium: Collaborative: Reality-Aware Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ashwin Ashok, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 199,647.00

This project seeks to improve the robustness of wireless sensing and networking
technologies through a reality-aware wireless architecture that blends
networking and sensing. Robust perception and high-bandwidth networking benefit
innovations across a diverse spectrum of high-impact areas including mixed-
reality, robotics, and automated vehicles. For example, the use of such
techniques to enhance driver assistance systems or automated vehicles has the
potential to save numerous lives. In addition to disseminating results through
scholarly publication, the project will engage the wireless and automotive
industry to facilitate the technology transfer. The project also includes a set
of integrated education and broadening participation activities to engage and
retain students from underrepresented groups through internship programs,
educational and outreach activities at each participating
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As wireless sensing and networking
technologies make significant strides in today's world, applications such as
automated driving or augmented reality are increasingly involving rich sensing
of the environment with unprecedented network requirements. Existing approaches
that strictly separate the network stack and the perception component face
challenges in providing robust perception and high-bandwidth networking. To
address this, this project develops and studies a reality-aware wireless
architecture that blends networking and sensing components, rather than
isolating them. This approach exploits sensor information and scene geometry to
provide improved and more predictable wireless network performance. It also uses
information received over the network to aid perception functions such as object
recognition and point correspondence. The team first explores the design space
of network architectures for blending perception and communications by designing
low-energy tags and visual signaling strategies. The team then develops
simultaneous localization and mapping algorithms that blend conventional
strategies with network information to enhance robustness. It also designs
geometric matching techniques to enhance object association in images with
network information. At the network and link layers, the system will exploit
knowledge about physical obstacles and the surrounding geometry obtained from
camera views and other sensors to provide more predictable and seamless high-
bandwidth coverage. The outcomes from the thrusts are integrated into a reality-
aware network architecture that exploits information about the environment
gathered via sensors. The architecture is implemented and evaluated in indoor
and outdoor experiments, culminating in a validation on the Platform for
Advanced Wireless Research (PAWR) COSMOS testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.