* 1901397
* Excellence in Research: Seeding Stimulated Raman Backscattering with Intense and Ultra-Intense Laser Pulses
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Szymon Suckewer, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,046,055.00

Achieving high peak intensity and extreme power of laser pulses stands on the
leading edge of laser developments. The continued scaling of lasers to increase
power will soon reach the limits dictated by the damage threshold of solid state
materials; plasmas can provide an alternative laser gain medium, potentially
allowing laser power to reach extraordinary levels. This project provides a
simulation-driven discovery and experimental verification platform to achieve
the next level of high laser intensity using plasma as the amplification medium.
This represents a new advance in decade-long research efforts to understand the
rich physics behind laser-plasma processes and the production of high-power,
ultra-short laser pulses. This project will contribute to increasing the
research capacity of Delaware State University (DSU) in STEM and will help to
build the core infrastructure in research at the interface of ultrafast science
and plasma physics at DSU. The multi-disciplinary nature of the project,
involving laser physics and engineering, plasma physics, and computational
physics, will bring unique education and training opportunities to graduate and
undergraduate students from under-served communities. The collaborations within
DSU and other institutions will also offer the students a chance to work with
world-class scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop a solid theoretical understanding and to simulate and test the
robustness of a Stimulated Raman Back Scattering (SRBS) scheme in plasma,
through which a coherent, ultrashort, ultra-intense laser pulse is generated in
a plasma channel. This SRBS scheme aims to overcome the saturation barrier faced
in previous efforts, which limits the conversion efficiency and the maximum
amplified seed energy. Using simulations as the guide, the full capacity of the
scheme and the physical mechanisms in the scheme will be revealed and explored.
Experimentally, the scheme will be investigated in detail using intense and
ultra-intense input seed pulses. The amplification and compression of the ultra-
intense pulse provides exciting and new phenomena in ultrafast and plasma
science research. The generated ultrashort, ultra-intense SRBS pulse will open
up new and unique opportunities for generating atto-second pulses, and water-
window x-ray lasers. The work will be carried out through integrated group
efforts of theory, computation, and experiment relying on joint expertise from
Delaware State University and partners at Princeton University and Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory. This project is managed by the Division of
Physics and jointly funded by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Excellence in Research Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.