* 1901845
* Smart nanocomposite bio-sensing wearable for enhanced out-of-clinic rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* David Fullwood, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2023
* USD 386,961.00

Nearly all Americans participate in physical rehabilitation therapy at some
point in their lifespan. Physical therapy can be highly effective in alleviating
pain and restoring function, however only a third of physical therapy patients
fully adhere to their plans of care. Future gains in improving the effectiveness
of physical therapy will require patient-specific monitoring of the accuracy and
frequency of therapeutic exercises. However, low-cost ways to accurately monitor
therapeutic exercise do not currently exist. The goal of this project is to use
cutting-edge advances in nano-composite sensor, artificial intelligence, and
communication technologies to develop an affordable, wearable, sensing system
for monitoring physical rehabilitative therapy exercises for patients who have
recently had a total knee replacement (TKR). These key characteristics will be
used to provide instant biofeedback to patients and clinicians, inside or
outside of the traditional physical therapy clinic. The new wearable sensing
system will be used to monitor therapeutic exercise on an individual and
population scale, facilitating the creation of a massive and previously
unattainable database of therapeutic exercise characteristics. Further, results
from this project will have application in any context where real-life
characterization of human movement is important, for example, worksite safety or
athletic performance. This project will involve numerous graduate and
undergraduate research assistants pursuing careers in engineering or science, as
well as undergraduate research assistants pursuing careers in medicine or
physical therapy. It is also anticipated that the resulting wearable sensing
system will be used as a teaching tool in physical therapy curricula, an
application that will be evaluated in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to engineer and evaluate a wearable nano-biosensing
system that leverages recent development by the investigators in the area of
skin-like nano-composite sensors, as a new approach to characterize the
biomechanics of physical rehabilitation performed by patients during self-guided
and clinician controlled physical therapy. The guiding hypotheses to be tested
are: 1) Wearable nano-biosensing systems based upon a 3D network of
piezoresponsive sensors can be designed with adequate resolution of kinematics
to identify and characterize physical rehabilitation exercises; 2)The mechanical
characteristics of self-guided physical rehabilitation exercises are
fundamentally different from the mechanical characteristics of physical
rehabilitation exercises performed under the direct supervision of a clinician
and 3) Combining biofeedback with a wearable nano-biosensing system can
quantitatively and qualitatively decrease differences between self-guided and
clinician-supervised physical rehabilitation. The Research Plan is organized
under three objectives related to these hypotheses. The FIRST Objective is to
undertake the materials science and engineering research required to create and
validate a 3D wearable, nanocomposite biosensing system whose hardware and
software components will be encapsulated into a Mobile Environment of
Nanosensors for Tracking Out-of-clinic Rehabilitation (MENTOR). The system will
be designed to fully capture the kinematics and kinetics of rehabilitation
exercises for post total knee replacement (TKR) recovery. High sensitivity,
elastomer-based nanocomposite strain sensors will be positioned in a system of
2D sensing membranes whose response can be accurately interpreted in terms of 3D
joint kinematics. Smart insoles to capture ground reaction forces (GRF)) will be
expanded to include piezoresistive pressure sensing of static forces in order to
detect stance during rehabilitation exercises in addition to GRF while walking
and running. The SECOND Objective is to measure, validate, and compare lower-
extremity biomechanics of clinician-guided outpatient rehabilitation exercises
with that of the same patients performing the same exercises in a self-guided
setting independent of direct clinician supervision. Biomechanics will be
measured using both traditional motion analysis tools and the MENTOR wearable
sensing system. The THIRD Objective is to measure and compare the biomechanics
of clinician-guided outpatient rehabilitation exercises with that of the same
patients performing the same exercises, self-guided, with and without realtime
biofeedback when using the MENTOR wearable sensing system. The wearable MENTOR
system will be combined with a simple, smartphone-based biofeedback system whose
purpose is to assist the patients in correctly performing the rehabilitation
exercises at the desired quality (similar biomechanical characteristics) and
quantity (e.g., desired number of sets and repetitions). A simple Knee Motion
Dashboard will provide the patient and clinician with quantitative sensor
information regarding rehabilitation progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.