* 1901541
* CONFERENCE: 2019 Gordon Research Seminar on RNA Editing to be held March 23-24, 2019 at the Renaissance Tuscany Il Ciocco in Lucca, Italy
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Xin Liu, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 10/31/2019
* USD 7,150.00

This award will support attendance by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers at the 2019 Gordon Research Conference on RNA Editing to be held in
Lucca, Italy on March 23-24, 2019, just prior to the associated Gordon Research
Conference. The meeting is organized and chaired by two postdoctoral scientists.
The format of the meeting is a combination of talks and posters, which will
promote scientific exchange in both formal and informal settings. Participants
will also benefit from dedicated career-specific events, including a keynote
lecture from a leader in the field and a panel discussion on careers in science
by three individuals who have taken different career tracks, e.g., academia,
scientific publishing, and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modification and
editing of nucleic acid molecules play important roles in regulating gene
expression. The scientific focus of this meeting (and the accompanying Gordon
Research Conference) will be on "Next Generation" aspects of research in this
field. This will have dual benefits in terms of emphasizing the cutting-edge
nature of latest findings and promoting the career development of early-career
scientists in the field. The meeting will provide an excellent forum for junior
investigators, including those from underrepresented groups, to learn about new
scientific discoveries and challenges, to meet and talk with leaders in the
field, and to have an opportunity to present and receive feedback on their own
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.