* 1901329
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Charting a Research Agenda in Artificial Intelligence - Mediated Communication
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Hancock, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 394,750.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) algorithms are increasingly augmenting
interpersonal communication. What used to be Computer-Mediated Communication
(CMC) increasingly involves AI-Mediated Communication (AI-MC): interpersonal
communication not simply transmitted by technology but augmented --- or even
generated --- by algorithms to achieve specific outcomes. While some simple
forms of AI-MC are already prevalent, recent advances in Natural Language
Processing provide new directions for augmenting communication online by, for
example, modifying texts to include more formal language or enhancing resumes to
make them more professional. The advances are not limited to text: increasingly,
photos and videos can be automatically manipulated with AI, leading to deep
fakes, in which people are shown to act or behave in ways that they never did.
Indeed, if a communication is mediated, AI can potentially modify, augment, or
even generate the message. AI-MC is therefore likely to have a profound effect
on how we communicate, greatly complicating our understanding of technology-
mediated human interactions. The project will inform the development of systems
that implement AI-mediated communication in a socially desirable and ethically
responsible manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives of this
project are to develop a framework that charts how AI-MC will impact cyber-human
systems research and inform the design of AI-MC technologies. The project will
provide some of the first investigations in key areas of AI-MC: 1) the design
and perception of AI-MC systems; 2) the potential impact of AI-MC on
communication dynamics; 3) the impact of AI-MC on social-psychological dynamics
of online self-presentation, with a focus on impression formation and trust,
including malicious contexts; and 4) understanding ethical concerns and
opportunities around issues like bias, manipulation, and transparency in AI-MC
technologies. These objectives will be accomplished through a series of novel
empirical studies employing approaches including computational, behavioral, and
qualitative methods. These activities will include online and lab experiments
that examine behavioral processes and outcomes associated with various forms of
AI-MC, the design and development of an AI-MC research platform, as well as a
qualitative study of developers, engineers, and designers working with AI-MC
systems. In addition, this project will build on the public attention and
intrigue around AI to offer design and technology workshops to K-12 students in
New York City public schools, using AI-MC to connect the ideas of AI to
technologies students use in their everyday lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.