* 1901403
* RI: Medium: Learning to Search: Provable Guarantees and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Maria-Florina Balcan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,199,995.00

AI and optimization are used in a wide range of scientific and business
applications. Much of AI and optimization in turn are powered by search
techniques such as branch and bound. These search techniques are used to
intelligently explore a large number of possible solutions to a problem in order
to come up with the best solution for the problem at hand. Unfortunately, in the
worst case, their running time can be exponential, and much effort goes into the
design of adjustable search strategies that can have a large effect on runtime,
solution quality, or both. Tuning these strategies is typically done manually by
experts. Recently there has been work on automated tuning of some variations of
search, but these methods have not come with performance guarantees, and in
general there is little theoretical understanding of what kinds of guarantees
one might hope to achieve. The goal of this project is to provide new machine
learning approaches with strong provable guarantees for customizing search
techniques and automatically determining a nearly optimal search strategy for
any given problem domain. This project aims to provide formal guarantees for its
procedures as well as techniques that scale up to larger and more complex
problems than currently possible. The algorithms and models developed in this
research will be driven by, and applied to, optimization problems at the core of
important real-world applications including kidney exchange and combinatorial
auction design. These are domains where improved optimization procedures have
significant impact.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specific goals in this project
include: (1) Developing effective tree search strategies (including branch-and-
bound methods) via machine learning that are widely applicable, scalable, and
have strong provable guarantees. (2) Learning branching and node selection
strategies together, and learning admissible heuristics for informed search
techniques including A* search. (3) Applying algorithms developed to solve key
challenges in two important application domains: Kidney Exchange and Automated
Mechanism Design. (4) Learning how to branch in the context of decision-tree
learning, an important machine learning paradigm, and in particular in the
design of heuristics for top-down decision-tree induction. The project will
impact artificial intelligence, optimization, machine learning, theory of
computing, as well as many areas that require repeatedly solving hard
optimization problems from a given domain. This includes kidney exchange and
mechanism design which can have a broad impact across society and commerce. In
addition to advising both graduate and undergraduate students on topics
connected to this project, research progress will be integrated in the curricula
of several courses at Carnegie-Mellon University and course materials will be
made available on the web worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.