* 1901843
* Frustration and Crystallization of Vortices in Artificial Spins / Superconductor Hybrids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Zhili Xiao, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 410,531.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Artificial spin ices are arrays of lithographically
created nanoscale single domain bar magnets. They are introduced to mimic the
behavior of electron spins naturally occurring in magnetic materials. Instead of
focusing on bar magnets, each of the nanobars can be 'broken up' into a positive
and negative magnetic charges, enabling to design an artificial spin structure
that produces a magnetic charge ice with reconfigurable charge configurations.
When an artificial-spin-ice structure is placed onto a superconducting thin
film, its magnetic charges strongly interact with the flux quanta in the
superconductor, enabling the realization of various disordered and crystallized
flux quanta states. The different states have measurable effects on the
superconducting critical current profile, which can be reconfigured by precise
selection of the spin ice magnetic state through application of an external
magnetic field. This research provides a foundation for understanding and
manipulating the new complex and collective effects that are expected in the
flux quanta system in a controllable way. This project also supports the
training of graduate and undergraduate students, enhancing their academic
knowledge and improving their likelihood to succeed in future careers in
academia, industry, or
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric
frustration emerges when local interaction energies cannot be simultaneously
minimized, resulting in numerous degenerate states. A paradigm system with
geometric frustration is spin ice materials such as pyrochlores with 'two spins
in, two spins out' spin configuration, which are magnetic analogues of the old
problem of how hydrogen atoms order in the water ice lattice. Recently, an
artificial spin structure has been developed to produce magnetic charge ices
with in-situ tunable long-range ordering. This project is to investigate a
hetero-structure consisting of such an artificial-spin structure on top of a
superconducting thin film. Certain magnetic charge configurations of the spin
structure lead to ordered arrangements of vortices in the superconducting film,
whereas others frustrate the vortex ensemble. This research is to establish a
new front in geometric frustration research by pursuing the experimental
realization and novel properties of frustrated vortex matter. This project can
lead to new approaches for in-situ tunable critical currents in a superconductor
and novel superconducting devices such as vortex diodes. The coupling of an
artificial-spin-structure with other functional materials provides a new setting
for designing and controlling geometric frustrations in magnetic 'particle'
systems, such as magnetic skyrmions and magnetic colloids. It also leads to an
effective way to design in-situ reconfigurable functionalities and electronic
devices in a wide range of electronic materials, such as graphene, topological
insulators, and quantum wells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.