* 1901684
* Workshop: Uncertainty Quantification in Computational Solid and Structural Materials Modeling; Baltimore, Maryland; January 17-18, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Michael Shields, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2019
* USD 19,910.00

This grant provides financial support for the workshop entitled "Uncertainty
Quantification in Computational Modeling of Materials", to be held on January
17-18, 2019 at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, MD. It is widely known
that the performance of materials is strongly influenced by uncertainties
associated with composition, constituent properties, and micro- or meso-
structure. This is especially true as materials undergo large irreversible
deformations, approaching failure through fracture or fatigue. Computational
modeling of such behavior is further complicated by uncertainties in material
models (e.g., uncertainty due to incomplete physics), and lack of data to
quantify material micro- or meso-structure and property distributions. The
computational cost of uncertainty analyses is an additional challenge. The aim
of this 2-day thematic workshop is to bring together prominent scholars in solid
and structural mechanics, materials science, and applied mathematics with a
shared interest in uncertainty quantification and computational materials
modeling to showcase the state-of-the-art, collectively identify existing and
future challenges, and promote innovative ideas in the field. Emphasis has been
being placed on bringing together experts in seemingly disparate fields who face
shared challenges related to uncertainty quantification and materials, but who
otherwise have only limited opportunities to interact. Funding from this grant
will support travel costs for 10 students/postdoctoral researchers to attend the
workshop and present their work during a poster session as well as production of
a report and a review journal article on the state of the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this two-day workshop, 29 invited leading experts in
uncertainty quantification and materials modeling from across academia,
government, and industry will present ongoing and future challenges related to
uncertainty quantification facing the computational mechanics, applied
mathematics, and materials science communities. The workshop will be comprised
of 7, 2-hour sessions in a single technical track with each track having four
presentations and a 20-minute discussion period. With each session covering a
different topic, this unique format is intended to foster discussion around the
most important technical challenges in each topic and avenues for their
solution. The workshop will also feature a poster session where
students/postdocs have the opportunity to share their work. The outcome of these
presentations and discussions will be documented in a final report and a full-
length review journal article discussing the themes of the workshop. These two
documents will be widely disseminated to the research community and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.