* 1901010
* Research Initiation Award: Designing Efficient Access Control Schemes for Implantable Medical Devices
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Longfei Wu, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,942.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Fayetteville State University has potential broader impacts in a number
of areas. The goal of this project is to study access control schemes for
implantable medical devices; as well as to enhance teaching and learning at the
university by developing courses and involving undergraduate students in this
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research project designs and implements
novel lightweight and generalized access control schemes that can effectively
secure implantable medical devices (IMDs) from unauthorized access in both
regular and emergency situations. The smartphone is used as a proxy to delegate
the complex cryptographic computations for access control. Additionally, to
prolong the lifetime of the resource-constrained IMDs, a modified compressive
sensing technique will be used to reduce both the communication overheads and
the computational overheads for data encryption between the IMD and the proxy.
The ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption (CP-ABE) will be employed to
provide fine-grained access control over the qualifications of IMD programmer
operator, usually the physician. The proposed access control schemes are fully
automated and no patient participation is required. Currently, there are no
common security standards or specifications available for IMD products to
follow. The results of this project will prompt and guide the IMD industry to
develop standards and specifications on the cybersecurity issues for commercial
IMD products. This project will be conducted in collaboration with Temple
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.