* 1901456
* CHS: Medium: Next Generation Content Production Tools for People with Vision Impairments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Anne Marie Piper, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,215,903.00

Ensuring the accessibility of digital information and computational tools is
crucial to enabling people with vision impairments to participate in all aspects
of society, from education to career prospects to personal growth. This critical
need is underscored by the fact that the millions of Americans with a visual
disability are less likely to be employed or to pursue higher education than
their sighted peers, and often have lower income levels as well. Although there
has been tremendous improvement in information accessibility, the vast majority
of research focuses on making content produced by others accessible. Yet,
producing original content oneself (such as creative writing, podcasts, and
music) provides valuable forms of employment, self-expression, and advocacy for
people with vision impairments. This project will introduce novel accessible
tools for creating text- and audio-based content, which will support the needs
of blind students and professionals whether working independently or on teams
with sighted collaborators. Outreach and dissemination of the work will take
place through partnership with five community organizations for people with
vision impairments, as well as online by means of open-source software and
accompanying instructional materials. A "living laboratory for accessibility"
will be created thal integrates research, education, and outreach through
immersive learning experiences for undergraduate and graduate students, as well
as opportunities for community members with disabilities to learn about and
participate in research. The project has the potential to increase access to
STEM-related educational experiences and career opportunities for people with
vision impairments by bridging computation, engineering, and the arts. The
research will also demonstrate an innovative approach to accessibility and
content production that can be extended to other domains and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing accessible content production tools
requires rethinking the way information is processed, rendered, and interacted
with, which brings critical challenges in human-computer interaction, machine
learning, and collaboration to the forefront of research. This project will
contribute: (1) design guidelines and a taxonomy for accessible content creation
tools; (2) novel algorithms to process text- and audio-based content, which
enable new ways of presenting information while solving challenges relevant to
machine learning, text analytics, and audio processing; (3) accessible
interaction techniques that advance the ability of blind users to understand,
navigate, and edit their work; (4) collaboration support features that will
bridge gaps in collaboration systems and provide empirical and theoretical
evidence of whether and how core collaborative processes operate in the context
of mixed-ability teams; and (5) empirical evidence of how the developed systems
support individual self-efficacy and collaboration during naturalistic use,
thereby advancing inclusive online work and learning more broadly. Project
outcomes will be assessed through a comprehensive evaluation strategy that
captures individual, group, and societal level
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.