* 1901566
* Probing the molecular interactions at the extrahaustorial membrane interface
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Shunyuan Xiao, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 857,754.00

Food security is a grand challenge facing humanity in the face of climate change
and population growth; yet, on a global scale up to 15% of crops are lost to
pathogens each year. Protecting crops from pathogens is a critical, ongoing
global initiative. Many agriculturally important diseases are caused by powdery
mildew and rust fungi, and fungus-like oomycete pathogens. One common feature of
these evolutionarily distinct pathogens is that they develop similar feeding
structures called haustoria to invade plants and extract nutrients from host
cells. Despite tremendous progress towards understanding the molecular
mechanisms of plant resistance against pathogens, how the host defense is
executed in the plant-haustorial interface is still poorly characterized. The
research aims to identify and functionally characterize novel molecular players
at the host-pathogen interface termed the extrahaustorial membrane using a model
pathosystem and state-of-the-art genetics and biochemistry tools. New findings
from this project will not only lead to a better understanding of the molecular
composition of the host-pathogen interface but also help design novel strategies
to fight against haustorium-forming pathogens and reduce crop losses, thereby
contributing to sustainable agriculture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Haustorium-
forming pathogens such as powdery mildew fungi develop a feeding structure
termed the haustorium in host tissues to secrete effector proteins capable of
suppressing the host immune response and extracting nutrients from the host
cell. The haustorium is physically separated from the host cell by a host-
derived interfacial membrane named the extrahaustorial membrane (EHM). The EHM
is believed to be the most critical host-pathogen battleground, where the host
defense is mounted to constrain the haustorium, and the pathogen deploys
effectors to subvert host immunity and extracts nutrients from the host.
However, despite the importance of the EHM, its molecular components and the
mechanisms associated with host defense or pathogenesis are poorly
characterized. The long term goal of this project is to understand the protein
composition of the EHM and the mechanisms of plant-haustorium interactions at
this host-pathogen interface. Using the Arabidopsis-powdery mildew interaction
as a model pathosystem and RPW8.2 (a broad-spectrum resistance protein) as the
first and best EHM-specific resident protein, a collaborative team will (i)
identify and characterize proteins interacting with RPW8.2 at the EHM and
additional EHM-resident proteins via proximity-based labeling coupled with
enrichment/purification of haustorial complexes followed by mass spectrometry;
(ii) resolve the protein structure of RPW8.2 and understand how EHM-oriented
vesicle transport of RPW8.2 is regulated by a candidate SNARE complex at the
Trans-Golgi Network; and (iii) identify host susceptibility factors, such as
sugar transporters, which may be recruited to the EHM by powdery mildew fungi
for nutrient acquisition through both genetic and cell biological
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.