* 1901699
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Defining a Performance Measurement Framework for Spontaneous Volunteer Management Systems in Post-Disaster Relief
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Maria Mayorga, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 10/31/2020
* USD 11,383.00

Disasters such as Hurricane Florence attract lay citizens who quickly mobilize
in search of opportunities to contribute to the relief efforts. Individuals who
are not affiliated with relief agencies prior to the disaster have been label
'spontaneous volunteers'. Spontaneous volunteers represent a tremendous asset
and make valuable contributions towards relief efforts; however, they may also
represent a potential source of substantial risk and uncertainty. These
volunteers interact with beneficiaries, trained and affiliated volunteers,
emergency management officials, and nonprofit organizations. While managing
spontaneous volunteers is challenging, it is worth finding ways to effectively
integrate them into the formal emergency management infrastructure. To do this
we must understand what it means to be successful in the response effort. This
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project develops appropriate performance
indicators that can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of volunteer
management systems currently in practice. The results will improve practical
management principles aimed at successfully incorporating spontaneous volunteers
into organized relief efforts. This project provides an opportunity for
experiential learning for students in emergency management, operations
management, and industrial engineering. This scientific research contribution
thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to advance
our national welfare. In this case, the benefits will be insights to improve
volunteer management post-disasters which can save lives and reduce economic
losses.

This RAPID project collects data from volunteers in two cities in North Carolina
during the response and recovery phases associated with Hurricane Florence. The
collected data will support: (1) the development of key performance indicators
associated with volunteer management systems, (2) insights into how well
organizations perform based on these metrics during the ongoing relief efforts,
and (3) an analysis of the decision making process of volunteer managers and
their impact on performance. The team will collect both primary and secondary
data. Primary data include semi-structured interviews and observations. Semi-
structured interviews will be carried out with spontaneous volunteers, volunteer
managers or coordinators of both local agencies and large relief organizations,
and beneficiaries. Secondary data refers to data collected by relief
organizations in the aftermath of a disaster such as volunteer logs (arrival and
departure times), times between customer arrivals (requests for help); and
geographic, temporal, and modal variation in volunteer arrivals; documents and
newspaper articles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.