* 1901126
* HBCU-Excellence in Research: Long-term Trends in Data from Hampton University (HU)-led Satellite Experiments
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* James Russell, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The two major research objectives of this EIS award are to study through the
application of comprehensive analysis approaches a merged satellite data base of
temperatures within the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT)region extending
over 27 years to detect possible long-term cooling trends and also to assess
possible solar cycle dependence. Two potential processes driving the long-term
variability: (1) dynamical forcing and (2) direct solar forcing, would be
examined by comparisons with results obtained using a state-of-the-art general
global circulation model - the Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model(WACCM.
The satellite data to be used for this study includes MLT temperature
observations from HALOE, SABER, MLS and SOFIE that would be merged to generate
the extended database. The award would also include support of research aimed at
achieving a theoretical understanding of long-term trends and solar cycle
variations in the MLT region by using WACCM to compare with and to help diagnose
the observed trends and solar cycle variations in the satellite data. Because of
the possible anthropogenic and solar origin of the decadal changes in the MLT
temperatures, the funded research would include a comprehensive modeling
analysis of sources from which trends and solar cycle variations might
originate, e.g., ozone chemistry, radiative cooling and lower atmosphere wave
forcing and related MLT dynamics. This research would help enhance the
assessment of changes in the upper atmosphere relative to the WACCM model
predictions. The findings obtained in this research are expected to help inform
policy decisions on orbital lifetimes and potential debris mitigation
strategies. In addition to these benefits to society, this award would also
support the research of a graduate student at a HBCU institution as well as
introducing six undergraduates (over three years) to research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award would support the first comprehensive study of
long-term MLT temperature trends using a 27-year global scale data record
constructed from the combined measurements made by four satellite instruments on
different platforms. This merger would be accompanied with a validation analysis
that would test the success of the merger of these separate databases. The
achievements of the award research objectives would significantly advance
knowledge of mesosphere decadal changes driven by possible anthropogenic
greenhouse gas increases as well as solar irradiance variability and lower
atmosphere dynamical forcing. These results would form a base supporting the
development of a much better understanding of the variability and structure of
the MLT region and a better capability to predict the future mesosphere state.
The outcome of funding this award research would provide clarity as to whether
the increasing concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) within the Earth's
atmosphere would eventually lead to a substantial global cooling of the
ionosphere-thermosphere-mesosphere (ITM) region by 10 to 50 K for doubled CO2
concentrations from pre-industrial times. The implications of this cooling go
far beyond the substantial modification of the Earth's upper atmosphere. A
significant MLT cooling trend is known to indicate corresponding thermosphere
density decrease at orbital altitudes, reducing aerodynamic drag on all orbiting
assets, from the International Space Station to orbital debris, and thus leads
to higher probabilities of collisions over time, given the proliferation of
orbital assets and especially orbital debris.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.