* 1901315
* Geometric and Functional Inequalities in Sub-Riemannian and Non-Smooth Dirichlet Spaces and Analysis of Random Rough Paths
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Fabrice Baudoin, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 270,000.00

The research project lies at the intersection of several areas of mathematics:
analysis, geometry and probability theory. The principal investigator is
particularly interested in the interplay between those fields and bringing tools
from one field to another in order to open new paths of research, push the
boundary of knowledge, and offer new point of views. Many of the investigated
problems are motivated by the need to develop theories in spaces which are not
regular (like fractals or rough metric spaces). Some of those problems are
motivated by physics, engineering and mathematical finance. The principal
investigator will also continue his synergistic activities including blogging,
organizing conferences, giving lectures and mini-courses on recent advances, and
mentoring graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A first and most important
part of the research activity evolves around the understanding of curvature
bounds in spaces for which such notions have so far been elusive. In the class
of sub-Riemannian manifolds, the principal investigator and his collaborators
are interested in developing a comparison geometry with respect to constant
curvature model spaces. This includes the study of sub-Laplacian comparison
theorems, measure contraction properties and diameter estimates. In the class of
Dirichlet spaces, the principal investigator and his collaborators are
interested in isoperimetric inequalities and the related study of sets of finite
perimeter and bounded variation functions. A second part of the research project
deals with problems in the theory of random rough paths. Rough paths theory is a
recent theory that allows to define integrals with respect to any Holder regular
path. The principal investigator and his collaborators are interested in several
properties of the solutions of differential equations driven by general Gaussian
rough paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.