* 1901560
* 2019 Summer Research School on Fluid Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Amir Riaz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 03/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

Computer modeling of multiphase flows and thermal transport is important in a
host of industrial and natural applications. These include blood flow in the
human circulatory system, flow of oil and water in porous media associated with
enhanced oil recovery, and boiling and condensation associated with heat
transfer operations. Despite its importance, advanced graduate instruction in
computational methods in multiphase transport is available at very few
universities. This award, to support the 2019 Summer Research School on Fluid
Dynamics, will address that need. The 2019 summer program will focus on modeling
and simulation of multiphase flow and thermal transport. The program will help
train roughly 50 graduate students from across the country through a series of
lectures and interactive tutorials by invited experts. In addition, students
will have the opportunity to build a network and community of researchers
through informal interactions and poster sessions throughout this week-long
course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2019 Summer Research School will focus on the
physical and mathematical aspects of modeling and simulating the behavior of
multiphase flow and thermal transport directly at the scale of the fluid-fluid
and fluid-solid interfaces. Modeling and simulation of these processes is
critical to a broad range of industrial and natural applications. However,
despite a long history of activity, a number of challenges remain associated
with accuracy, efficiency, capabilities, and robustness of simulation
techniques. Recent progress has led to numerous methods that are now available
to address various aspects of these challenges. The summer school will provide
lectures on multiphase flow theory, numerical methods for multiphase flow, and
multiphase flow applications. Lectures will cover phase change heat transfer,
interface physics, simulation of boiling, immersed boundary methods, interfacial
transport, phase field methods, and particulate flows. Interactive tutorials
will complement the lectures and introduce students to some of the difficulties
related to post-processing data. Professional development of the students will
include opportunities to present their research through a poster session and
extensive opportunities to meet and network with the summer school instructors,
who are a mix of distinguished experts and active, early career faculty
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.