* 1901588
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Assessing chemical and microbiological contamination in environmental waters in Eastern North Carolina after Hurricane Florence
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Ryan Emanuel, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 05/31/2020
* USD 99,694.00

Hurricane Florence passed through southeast North Carolina in 2018 resulting in
widespread flooding. The counties most affected by flooding house thousands of
swine and poultry confined animal feeding operations (CAFOs). These areas are
also home to many low-income, African American, Hispanic, and American Indian
communities. The objective of this research is to study the spread of
contaminants into the environment caused by Hurricane floodwaters. The
pollutants assessed include heavy metals from coal ash, emerging chemical
contaminants related to industrial and municipal wastewater, and pathogens and
nutrients associated with CAFOs. This project will result in improved
understanding of the risks posed by extreme flooding. Local communities affected
by the flooding will be engaged in this research through the identification of
sampling sites and communication of research results. The results will have
broader impact through the identification of waste management operations that
can be modified to prevent such releases in future flooding
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of this work is to assess microbial
and chemical contamination of the environment near livestock and industrial
operations flooding caused by Hurricane Florence floodwaters. A secondary aim is
to understand the relative impacts of different land-usage and livestock waste
management practices on contaminant loading. To achieve these aims, this
research project has the following objectives: (1) Collect samples to quantify
spatiotemporal variability in molecular targets for microbial contamination
(i.e., human-, poultry-, and swine-specific fecal microbial source tracking
targets and antimicrobial resistance genes), nutrients (N and P), heavy metals,
and chemical contaminants of emerging concern; (2) Identify spatial
relationships between contamination, flooding extent, land-use (e.g., CAFO
densities, industrial sites, urban areas) and manure management practices using
satellite imagery and machine learning techniques; (3) Assess persistence of
biological and chemical species in the natural environment post-flooding. To
achieve these objectives, the research team will sample across 50 sites in
multiple coastal plain river basins where intense flooding occurred after
Hurricane Florence to map advanced chemical and biological water quality
indicators in high spatial resolution. The team sampled within a week after the
hurricane, and then will sample after ~1 month, ~2 months, and ~6 months.
Knowledge gained from this study will directly inform improvements to emergency
management protocols post-hurricane in landscapes with many contaminant sources.
The work will have broader impact through the promulgation of waste management
recommendations that account for the increasing likelihood and severity of
extreme flooding events expected in the future as our climate
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.