* 1901488
* CNS Core: Medium: Collaborative Research: Privacy-Preserving Mobile  Crowdsourced Data
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Konstantinos Psounis, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 649,979.00

A large and increasing number of services rely on data and measurements
collected from mobile devices and shared with a centralized entity. Users enjoy
these services (such as location-based services, recommendations, wireless
connectivity and others) at the expense of sharing data from their mobile
devices, which increases their privacy risk. For example, users may want to
receive a location-based service, but they may be concerned about sending their
exact location to a server or third parties. Recently, there has been increased
awareness and concern about preserving user privacy, while still empowering the
services that big data enable. While privacy has become a significant societal
concern, the technical solutions in this domain are still lagging behind, and
there is a gap between the theory of privacy and practices in the mobile
ecosystem. This project will develop principled techniques for controlling the
privacy-utility tradeoff for mobile data. Broader impact activities include
collaborations with major players in the space of wireless networking and mobile
data crowdsourcing, training students and broadening participation in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we focus specifically on data
reported from mobile devices, including information about the wireless network,
as well as personal/user data. Our goal is to develop privacy-preserving
techniques to obfuscate reported data, while still providing guarantees for the
quality of the provided service. We will develop both the theoretical framework
(privacy-utility formulation, optimization of obfuscation techniques, and
heuristic algorithms), as well as its application to wireless spectrum sharing,
cellular signal maps, and personal information tracking. The project will
produce models, algorithms, datasets, mobile system implementations and
programming interfaces, which trade off utility vs. privacy in a principled and
transparent way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.