* 1901697
* How and Why Fish School: An Information-theoretic Analysis of Coordinated Swimming
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Maurizio Porfiri, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 475,760.00

This grant will support research that will contribute new knowledge related to
fluid-structure interactions and collective dynamics, promoting the progress of
science and empowering technological advancements. There is a dire need for
advancements in the analysis of complex fluid-structure interactions and in the
diagnostics of fluid coupling between solids, without having access to reliable
mathematical models. Critical examples across engineering and science include
human phonation, clusters of tall civil structures reacting to wind gusts,
arrays of active materials for underwater sensing, nanomats of carbon nanotubes,
arrays of cilia for fluid mixing and transport, and antennulary setal hairs of
copepods. This award supports fundamental research to fill these gaps in
knowledge, focusing on fish schooling, whose energy efficiency, geometric
complexity, and visual allure have attracted the interest of the scientific
community and general public for centuries. This research involves several
disciplines bridging data-driven dynamical systems, experimental fluid
mechanics, and experimental biology. The multi-disciplinary approach carries
momentum in formal and informal learning, by training University students from
underrepresented groups, exposing high school students from underprivileged
communities to biology, engineering, and mathematics, and outreach to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent experimental results demonstrate
that at sufficiently large swimming speeds, schooling fish may prefer to swim in
a "phalanx" formation, where there is no leader and every fish beats their tail
almost in synchrony. The transition from the classical diamond formation to the
phalanx challenges the present understanding of the role of vortex interactions
in fish schooling, which might be superseded by other hydrodynamic or visual
pathways. Yet, it is currently impossible to rigorously test this possibility,
due to the lack of data-driven techniques to disentangle causes from effects in
coordinated swimming. This project will contribute a mathematically-principled,
experimentally-grounded approach to quantify information flow in ensembles of
dynamical systems, interacting through multiple pathways that involve varying
propagation times and physical variables. Hypothesis-driven, engineering-
principled experiments will be conducted toward the discovery and exploration of
dynamic structure, information pathways, and energetic mechanisms that underpin
coordinated swimming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.