* 1901540
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Authentication Solutions for Individuals with Upper Extremity Impairment
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Krishna Kumar Venkatasubramanian, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 10/31/2019
* USD 499,995.00

Authentication solutions for personal computing devices, such as people use to
login to their laptops and smart phones, are usually designed with able-bodied
individuals in mind. But designs for the able-bodied often make authentication
difficult for people with disabilities, particularly for those with upper
extremity impairment. Such persons often lack the range of motion, strength,
endurance, speed, and/or accuracy associated with normal behavior of the arms,
hands, or fingers. Over 20 million people in the U.S. alone suffer from
conditions that lead to upper extremity impairment. This project aims to develop
a suite of authentication solutions for people with these impairments. The
research will aim for authentication solutions that these individuals can use
effectively to securely access their devices. The outcome of this project will
be innovations in authentication that can be readily adopted by commercial
technology providers to beneficially impact people with upper extremity
impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve the development of a
combined group of several authentication solutions that people with upper
extremity impairment often use. These include involuntary head-motion-based
physiological responses, blinking patterns, and pressure patterns. The research
examines strategies that reduce authentication errors when using these
behaviors, particularly those emanating from the non-permanence of such
behaviors, using a family of authentication models and through periodic model
re-training. A robust test-bed designed for the project will enable rapid plug-
and-play evaluation of authentication solutions. The testing and validation
framework will include red-team challenges to allow for expansive security
evaluation of the authentication solutions developed. New techniques developed
in this project will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate education. A
hackathon will be used to raise public awareness about the importance of
cybersecurity solutions targeted at people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.