* 1901886
* Homological Explorations and Symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Claudiu Raicu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 284,736.00

The research supported under this award is concerned with the study of systems
of polynomial equations. The equations can be thought of as dependence relations
between physical quantities in some model, while the solution set of these
equations describes the geometric shape of the model. Natural phenomena often
come equipped with a rich symmetry, which is important to identify and
incorporate into the modeling process. To imagine how equations, geometry and
symmetry naturally fit together, one should think about lines and planes that
are defined using linear equations and exhibit translational symmetries, or
about circles and spheres that are described by quadratic equations and display
rotational symmetries. For more complex systems, the degrees of the equations
alone are not able to capture the geometry or the symmetries. The goal of this
project is to systematically analyze (higher) relations between the equations
defining elaborate systems, that are robust enough to accurately predict shapes
and portray symmetries. The techniques developed by the PI will be used to study
curves and configurations of linear spaces, polynomials and their factorization
pattern, or spaces of matrices and higher dimensional tensors. Such spaces are
not only important for the fundamental research in mathematics, but they also
play a central role in applications throughout the sciences. The research is
suitable for engaging students in research, as well as for computer
experimentation and software development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
investigate a number of fundamental invariants in homological commutative
algebra and classical algebraic geometry. An important emphasis will be on the
study of problems that are concrete, exhibit a rich symmetry, and that touch
upon a number of related fields within mathematics. The PI will continue to
advance the theory and applications of Koszul modules, exploring their uses to
group theory and to syzygies of curves, to hyperplane arrangements or to the
homological theory of algebraic varieties. The PI will study homological
invariants such as syzygies and Ext modules, regularity and projective
dimension, local cohomology and Lyubeznik numbers, in the context of examining
central objects such as determinantal and monomial ideals, Segre and Veronese
varieties, binary forms, or representations with finitely many orbits. The
methods employed fall mainly in the realm of commutative algebra and algebraic
geometry, but also incorporate tools from combinatorics, D-module, quiver and
representation theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.