* 1901959
* Unraveling the Fundamental Mechanisms of Nanoscale Deformation in Bulk Metallic Glasses
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 05/31/2022
* USD 728,807.00

Although the lack of periodic atomic arrangements in bulk metallic glasses is
responsible for multiple desirable properties such as high strength, superior
elasticity, and an ability to be easily formed into virtually unlimited shapes,
their disordered atomic structure and associated absence of defined shear planes
also give rise to inferior room temperature ductility. As a result, the
practical use of metallic glasses as structural materials is currently limited
to only a few applications such as eyeglass frames, surgical tools, or golf
clubs. In this award, experimental and theoretical approaches are combined to
advance our knowledge of the atomic-scale processes governing the response of
bulk metallic glasses to deformation. An improved understanding of
microstructural damage mechanisms is a necessary pre-requisite to establish
structure-property relationships that will allow custom-designed alloys to be
produced with characteristics tailored to best match their intended
applications. The students working on the project will have the unique
opportunity to be trained in an area that combines interdisciplinary skills in
micro- and nanomechanics, to perform investigations of materials at the scale of
single atoms, to implement new experimental approaches, and to develop novel
atomic scale molecular dynamics simulations. The research team will also engage
with local schools to give lectures and demonstrations designed to encourage
students to pursue careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallic glasses accommodate plastic flow
through the emergence of shear transformation zones, which are the smallest
identifiable units in inhomogeneous plastic flow. If many such zones aggregate,
shear bands can form that localize large shear strain inside a thin region of
material. Such shear bands in metallic glasses are analogous to shear planes in
crystals. Here, joint experimental and computational modeling studies are
employed to investigate the initiation and growth of shear transformation zones,
the shear bands they form, and the mechanical properties they control. Towards
this end, nanoscale mechanical testing such as indentation and compression will
be carried out on samples produced by innovative preparation methods to study
how plastic flow is affected by strain rate, sample size, probing volume, and
the structural properties of the material during deformation, the results of
which will then be compared to computer simulations. This work seeks to develop
an ability to quantitatively predict the initiation and propagation of shear
bands, which is a critical step towards a mechanistic understanding of
deformation and failure properties as well as identifying ductility and
toughness enhancement methods for metallic glasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.