* 1901972
* Collaborative Research: Amplifying the Efficiency of Tungsten Disulfide (WS2) Thermoelectric Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Jonathan Malen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2022
* USD 228,073.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;As much as half of US energy production each year is
lost as waste heat. Converting waste heat into electricity could improve energy
efficiency dramatically and sharply reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Thermoelectric (TE) devices convert temperature differences into electrical
power and have the potential to revolutionize the nation's energy portfolio. An
ideal thermoelectric material conducts electricity, but not heat. Metals conduct
both, whereas insulators conduct neither. This project challenges this dichotomy
by using a novel strategy to dope tungsten disulfide, a two-dimensional (2D)
semiconductor. We will enhance its thermoelectric coefficient to maximize the
output voltage, increase the electrical conductivity to minimize losses, and
lower the thermal conductivity to maintain a large temperature difference. The
proposed research will lead to efficient devices for waste heat recovery. This
work will also enable high-performance 2D transistors, low-power memory devices,
and nanoscale switches for thermal management. The team will work closely with
local communities to encourage participation by students from all backgrounds in
engineering careers and foster interest in nanotechnology. Outreach efforts will
include lab demonstrations, summer internships, and career
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to improve the in-plane thermoelectric efficiency of two-dimensional tungsten
disulfide (WS2) devices through engineering their electrical, thermal, and
thermoelectric properties via electrochemical intercalation. WS2 has recently
emerged as a promising TE candidate due to its large atomic mass (low thermal
conductivity), small bandgap (high electrical conductivity), and high Seebeck
coefficient. However, it remains challenging to optimize all of the material
properties to maximize its TE efficiency and to dope this 2D material to create
the p- and n-type pairs needed for TE devices. In this work, we will: (1)
achieve p- and n-type doping in 2D materials via anion and cation
intercalations; (2) optimize the in-plane power factor of WS2 through doping;
(3) reduce the in-plane thermal conductivity of WS2 via phonon scattering by
intercalants. Fundamentally, this project will study electrical, ionic, and
thermal transport in 2D materials. Practically, this work will pave the way for
the wide use of thermoelectric devices to scavenge heat from sources such as
electronics and the human body. This work will also develop a doping method for
2D materials, addressing critical issues in 2D electronics such as low drive
current and poor contact resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.