* 1901740
* Alleviating Electric Grid Congestion: Understanding Consumer and Utilities Response to Infrastructure Investment in Distributed Solar Generation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Islam El-adaway, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 265,994.00

Distributed solar generation (DSG) offers several potential benefits for
consumers including lower cost of electricity, price protection, reliability and
power quality, and a diversified portfolio of heat and power. In addition, DSG
has the potential to change how utilities provide power for customers and how
customers interact with the power system. To this effect, the goal of this
project is to understand the evolution of an electric grid toward DSG by
understanding how customers and utilities respond to incentives in their
investments in new resources. The associated educational component will: (1)
integrate research findings into courses at Missouri University of Science and
Technology and the University of Tennessee - Knoxville using problem-based-
learning; (2) attract underrepresented students; and (3) enhance public
awareness by carrying out several panel sessions and exercises in national
conferences, regional workshops, and local meetings with stakeholders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will work closely with the southeastern
electric grid of Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and study its market
structure, electricity rates, and per capita electricity usage. More
specifically, the project will: (1) gather information about the physical
components of the TVA electric grid (i.e. transmission lines, AC transmission
grid, and generating units) and the different associated stakeholders (i.e.
utility, residential customers, and commercial/industrial customers); (2) use
surveys directed at residential customers to study the social-psychological and
economic factors affecting solar adoption, intent and motivation to participate
in various demand response programs, and daily energy practices; and (3) conduct
focus groups with commercial/industrial customers in relation to their
experiences with DSG technologies, their motivations and concerns about DSG, and
anticipated breakthroughs in DSG technologies of interest. After the data is
collected, the research team will use structural equation modeling (SEM) to
understand factors that affect the decision making of the different stakeholders
concerning electricity use and DSG adoption. The insights learned through this
project will be important to be integrated in understanding utilities?
investment and operation decisions concerning a grid
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.