* 1901099
* III: Medium: Investigating Spatial-Temporal Informatics for Transportation Science
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Shashi Shekhar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Transportation accounts for over a quarter of U.S. energy use and greenhouse
gases as well as hundreds of thousands of premature deaths annually from toxic
emissions such as Nitrous oxides. Therefore, reducing harmful vehicle emissions
and energy consumption are important goals for our society and transportation
science. A key challenge is the limited understanding of emissions and energy-
consumption during real-world driving. This project investigates the potential
of emerging vehicle big data to further the understanding of emissions and
energy consumption during real-world driving. Currently underutilized by vehicle
manufacturers and regulatory agencies, vehicle big data details emissions and
energy use at high frequency and spatial resolution. It has rich information to
help identify patterns of unacceptably high emissions or energy use as well as
associated vehicle properties or road features. Such patterns will be used to
improve prediction of emissions and energy use during real-world driving. In
doing so, the research will lead to improved vehicle design and operation
practices to reduce future emissions and energy use to save lives by improving
air-quality and dampening climate change. It will also improve education through
a creative eco-driving challenge to maximize distance travelled for a fixed
energy (or emission) budget in a driving simulator
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to build next-
generation spatio-temporal informatics (STI) tools to analyze emerging vehicle
big data such as on-board diagnostics data to further the understanding of real-
world emissions and energy consumption. The specific aims are to explore a set
of concepts and develop a set of spatio-temporal informatics tools to: (a)
provide a mapping between the concepts in transportation science and current
informatics methods, (b) conveniently represent common patterns of interest to
transportation scientists and practitioners, (c) efficiently mine novel, useful
and interesting spatio-temporal patterns from vehicle big data, (d) use mined
patterns to improve the physical science models of real-world vehicle emissions
and energy use, and (e) integrate research results in education via eco-driving
activities. The project will advance STI knowledge and understanding in multiple
ways. For example, it will probe new algorithms to detect statistically-
significant linear hotspots of high emissions or energy inefficiency even if
these are not along shortest paths by considering simple paths in a
transportation network. Furthermore, it will design new strategies to
efficiently mine spatio-temporal co-occurrence patterns even when those are not
prominent globally over the entire road network. The project will broaden STI's
focus from simple GPS-trajectory data to multi-attributed trajectory data such
as vehicle on-board diagnostics data with hundreds of physical variables and
constraints. It will also enrich current laboratory and test-track focused
transportation science by improving understanding of real-world energy-use,
emissions, and physical science models used to predict these
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.