* 1901367
* CHS:MEDIUM: Understanding Public Uses of Data and Dashboards
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Paul Dourish, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2024
* USD 814,328.00

Just as data-intensive technologies have spread in the business sector, so too
have they increasingly been deployed by public institutions, including city,
state, and local governments. Many public-serving institutions are currently
expanding their capacity to create and use data by investing in infrastructure,
hiring qualified experts such as data scientists or data engineers, and
retooling their organizations to incorporate data gathering and data analysis
into key processes. Central to these efforts are the production and circulation
of "data dashboards". Dashboards are dynamic visual composites that summarize
and collate data from multiple sources, and they serve as a primary site of the
communication of data work to stakeholders and the public. Dashboards use
graphical conventions to simplify and present the underlying data they
represent, providing snapshots of civic activity derived from diverse data
streams. By consulting data, publishing dashboards, and promoting this work to
internal and external constituencies, public organizations hope to achieve more
effective decision-making, competitive advantage over other organizations, more
efficient allocation of resources, and greater understanding of the audiences
they wish to reach. But public sector organizations differ from their private
sector analogues in many vital ways and research to date has yet to fully
explore exactly what public institutions mean when they aspire to make
themselves data-driven, and the effects this has on public services and
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project looks at public-serving data work in
general and dashboards in particular as sites of interpretation and
contestation, as artefacts that embody arguments about the public interest. The
project team uses ethnographic approaches to study how people in public
administration put data to work. In particular, the project team examines the
role played by data dashboards, including how they are developed and how they
are used to communicate with the public. This research focuses on four related
questions: 1) How are dashboards and visualizations incorporated into
organizational processes of deliberation, communication, and decision-making? 2)
How do dashboards circulate within and amongst organizations with a public
service mission? 3) How do domain experts interact with dashboards meant to
inform their work? 4) How does the public interact with dashboards meant to
explain organizational activity? This project will give insight into the
construction of dashboards by focusing on the conditions and sites where they
are produced, on the the data professionals and other who design, code, and
implement them, on the platforms that make them possible, and on the audiences
who encounter and interact with finished visualizations. This project uses two
sites of important public work: city government and public
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.