* 1901091
* CHS: Medium: Geometric Deep Learning for Accurate and Efficient Physics Simulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Denis Zorin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,180,756.00

The simulation of deformable objects is a widely used technology at the core of
many disciplines, from automobile and aircraft design to computer graphics and
animation. Simulation methods have been historically split into two broad
categories: either they are designed to be accurate but slow, or they are
designed to operate in real-time at the expense of accuracy. The first category
is usually based on high-resolution and complex models for the materials and the
underlying physics, which are accurately solved using intense computing. Whereas
the second category trades-off such accuracy for speed, so that the systems can
be made interactive. This project will develop novel deep learning techniques
that are able to combine both accuracy and efficiency, by leveraging physical
priors in the design of neural network architectures. Such priors may be
expressed in terms of conservation laws (such as energy or momentum), or with
prespecified symmetries (such as invariance of the system to viewpoint changes).
If successful, project outcomes will bring closer together high-precision
scientific computing, real-time simulation, and machine learning. The
applications of such redefined physical simulation are vast and go far beyond
those covered by the present project, impacting broad areas of mechanical
engineering, material design, and physical sciences. The project will promote
cross-disciplinary collaborations across different areas of engineering, machine
learning and physics, and will support education and diversity by creating novel
courses and outreach activities integrating the above
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a novel
paradigm for physical simulation, based on a tight integration between accurate
mathematical modeling of the underlying physics and a data-driven pipeline that
provides adaptation and efficiency. For this purpose, geometric deep learning
techniques will be enhanced with physics-based priors and with a novel self-
supervised training paradigm, whereby the tradeoff between accuracy and
computational efficiency can be explicitly controlled. Specifically, on the
machine learning side, neural networks that operate on 2D and 3D meshes will be
developed that contain the inductive biases of classical mechanics such as rigid
motion invariance and stability to local deformations, and are able to scale to
the hundreds of thousands of degrees of freedom that are typical in simulation
applications. On the simulation side, the project will determine the components
of the simulation pipeline that can be effectively accelerated by neural
networks while maintaining full control over accuracy. The developed techniques
will be demonstrated on two representative applications: the acceleration of
simulations for metamaterial design and the risk-averse optimization of aircraft
wings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.