* 1901827
* EVALUATING THE ROLE OF MASH PROCESSES AND THE GROWTH OF CONTINENTAL CRUST
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Joshua Schwartz, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2023
* USD 297,489.00

One of the unique features of Earth is that it contains large land masses, or
continents, consisting of continental crust. Continental crust is important to
society because it is enriched in minerals and rocks that are used in
construction, manufacturing, agriculture and energy. Thus, understanding how
continents form is vital to the success of our world economy. Continental crust
is generally thought to form in subduction zones where two tectonic plates
converge, and one plate is underthrusted beneath another. In these settings,
melting of the mantle (the layer below the crust) is thought to result in the
generation of continental crust. One of the major unresolved problems with this
model is that direct melting of the mantle produces melts that are geochemically
distinct relative to estimates for bulk continental crust. This conundrum leads
to the central question of this proposal: what processes in the deepest parts of
the crust lead to the transformation/enrichment of melts derived from the
underlying mantle? This project addresses this problem by examining one of the
few places on Earth where it is possible to directly observe the deep roots of
continental crust in an ancient subduction zone. We focus on rocks exposed in
Fiordland National Park located in the southwestern part of the South Island,
New Zealand, where the deep crust of an ancient subduction zone is exposed to
depths of 40 to 65 km paleodepth. Our group, in collaboration with New Zealand
researchers, will use geochemical and isotopic data together with numerical
modeling to determine the processes responsible for the geochemical evolution of
these melts. The results of our project will provide new insights into the
magmatic processes operating in the deep crust of modern subduction zones, which
are inaccessible to geologists. The project will also advance societal outcomes
through an innovative outreach program that provides mentorship through research
to underrepresented students at California State University Northridge, a
Hispanic Serving and an Asian American Native American-Pacific Islander Serving
Institution in Los Angeles County. This project will also provide graduate and
undergraduate students with international field experiences and exposure to
cutting-edge analytical research facilities that will aid in the development of
a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since first proposed by Hildreth and Moorbath
in 1988, the "MASH" concept has had a profound impact on volcanological,
petrological and tectonic thinking regarding the evolution of continental-arc
systems. MASH zones as originally conceived were defined as "Melting,
Assimilation, Storage and Homogenization" regions located at the crust-mantle
boundary where arc magmas acquired their ?crustal? signature through
intracrustal remelting and scavenging of existing crust. Although MASH zones are
commonly invoked in continental-arc models, there have been few studies that
have directly examined magmatic processes in the deep roots of continental arcs
where MASH zones are located. The overarching goal of this project is to
understand the origin of melts that enter deep-crustal "MASH" zones and the
processes that lead to geochemical diversification of these melts. Our project
involves targeted field mapping and sampling, whole-rock and mineral
geochemistry, and high-precision U-Pb zircon dating of the Malaspina Pluton
(Fiordland, New Zealand), which was emplaced at ~40-50 km paleodepth. We use new
and existing samples to address three key questions specific to the lower crust
of the Median Batholith:1) How and where do arc magmas acquire their
"continental" crustal signature? 2) How efficient are MASH zones in homogenizing
lower-crustal melts? and, 3) How long are melts stored and at what rate do they
differentiate in lower-crustal MASH zones? The answers to these questions will
provide insights into the processes that lead to the growth of continental crust
in convergent margin settings. This project also provides continued support for
the "ROCs" outreach program (Research Opportunities for CSUN students). Goals of
this program are to 1) encourage aspiring CSUN geology undergraduate students,
especially minorities and females, to pursue research projects with faculty
mentors, 2) broaden students? understanding of career and graduate school
opportunities in the geosciences, and 3) create a sense of community with the
goal of increasing retention in geoscience. Phase 2 of the ROCs program will
create a network of geoscience mentors from former ROCs participants who will
return to CSUN to share their experiences in graduate school and industry. This
effort will build ties between current underrepresented CSUN students and recent
graduates in the Los Angeles area and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.