* 1901754
* RAPID: Characterization of Pathogens in Water, Soil and Animal Facilities for Resilience Assessment of Civil Infrastructure After Extreme Weather Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2020
* Antarpreet Jutla, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 10/31/2020
* USD 60,000.00

Hurricane Florence caused extensive flooding in North Carolina. Facilities
housing thousands of pigs and millions of chickens were flooded, causing the
spread of the hog waste, manure, animal residue and potentially releasing
dangerous pathogens into the water. The inundation after hurricanes may lead to
the outbreak of one or more In agricultural-dependent coastal regions and the
joint impact of extreme natural events on human and animal infrastructure has
not been studied. A robust civil infrastructure (animal shelters, water
distribution and treatment systems, transportation, and animal waste lagoons) is
critical to minimize these interactions and to limit the outbreak of diseases
after a natural disaster. Surveillance and detection of a broad range of
pathogens are not usually initiated until a few human cases of infection are
reported. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will collect key data on
the presence and abundance of pathogens, which are often assumed otherwise,
leading to potentially inaccurate reactive resource allocation strategies for
disease outbreak prevention and containment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this RAPID project is to use genomic epidemiology combined with
bioinformatics and computational phylogenetic analyses to track pathogen sources
and dispersal in water bodies to create spatial pathogenic profiles. Water and
soil samples will be systematically collected near flooded farms with upstream
locations serving as controls. Results from field data collection and associated
analysis will provide data on the abundance, presence, and source of pathogens
in water to assess the functionality of water infrastructure in the studied
regions. The pathogen profiles will be combined with the human population,
socio-demographics, infrastructure damage information, and data from a rapid
flood model to develop a preliminary index which will characterize the spatial
risk of disease outbreaks in the affected region. The analysis will help provide
guidance on where to focus countermeasures (infrastructure rehabilitation,
medicines, emergency personal, relief, and clean water supplies) to contain the
risk of infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.