* 1901025
* FET: Medium: Collaborative Research: Engineerable Molecular Computing: Flying like an Airplane, not like a Bird
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* David Soloveichik, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 668,460.00

Computation via chemical reactions is prevalent in biology as every cell
performs sophisticated information processing on internal and external chemical
signals. Engineering synthetic biochemical pathways that are likewise capable of
decision-making will impact a range of applications in manufacturing, chemical
sensing, and medicine. Work funded by this project constructs smart molecular
systems using two novel paradigms that, although inspired by biology, are very
different from evolved biological systems (analogously to how airplanes do not
fly by flapping their wings). The success of this project will lead to a new
understanding of how chemical reactions can perform information processing, and
to a new generation of functional molecular devices. The educational and
outreach activities funded by this project, in collaboration with the
Association for Women in Mathematics, also address the serious problem of the
low percentage of women in computer science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct analysis and manipulation of molecular
information (e.g., the information encoded in the concentrations of various
molecules) is where molecular computing outcompetes its electronic counterparts.
The project advances the computer science theory and experimental capability to
engineer chemical information processing with nucleic acids (DNA) by two new
paradigms: (1) molecular computation programmed by the stoichiometry of
reactions (independent of reaction rates); (2) molecular computation programmed
by a simple combinatorial model of thermodynamics. The new paradigms result in
greater robustness and easier programmability than existing approaches. Also, in
contrast to existing methods, this proposal will yield reusable molecular
computation, whereby switching the input results in dynamically updating
output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.