* 1901709
* IIBR: Development of enhanced computational protein design methods using a metaanalysis of enzyme dynamics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Sefika Ozkan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2023
* USD 797,144.00

Proteins are biomolecules that carry out the cellular processes that are
fundamental to life. It has recently become well-established that concerted
motions (dynamics) within proteins are directly correlated to their function,
but an incomplete understanding of this relationship currently exists. To
further elucidate the link between protein dynamics and function, recently
developed computational methods will be used to first identify and subsequently
classify networks of interactions in proteins that are directly responsible for
defining the motions that underpin their functions. Information regarding these
networks will be organized in a database that will be made freely available to
researchers interested in both studying protein function or rationally
engineering proteins that possess desired functions. The potential utility of
this database will then be directly tested by using the information contained
therein to improve protein engineering efforts. Enhanced proteins generated
using this database will be experimentally characterized in an effort to both
validate and subsequently improve the information contained therein. This will
not only lead to a deeper understanding of the relationship between protein
dynamics and protein function but will also find immediate use in myriad
biotechnological applications including the development of new protein-based
drugs, enhanced agricultural products or the production of new, functional
biomaterials. An enhanced understanding of the relationship between protein
dynamics and function can also readily be incorporated into educational
materials using a popular online protein folding game, FoldIt, which will be
used in outreach activities that seek to inspire interest in STEM fields at the
high school educational level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of the
proposed research are 1) to better elucidate the complex relationship between
protein dynamics and function and 2) to develop new computational protein design
algorithms that enable the rational design of functional proteins from scratch.
Our current understanding of the relationship between protein sequences, their
structures and functions has benefitted substantially from the aggregation and
dissemination of this information in publicly accessible databases. Although a
direct link between correlated motions in proteins and the functions they carry
out is well-established, no database of protein dynamics currently exists, which
we believe severely limits our ability rationally engineer functional proteins.
We will address this challenge by generating the first large-scale database of
the dynamic signatures of proteins of known function and then cluster these data
both within and across enzyme functional classes. Our findings will be
incorporated into the Rosetta protein design software to develop dynamics-based
computational protein design methods that will subsequently be used to engineer
new dynamic networks within proteins. This will serve as a direct test of our
understanding of the relationship between protein structure, dynamics and
function. Experimental characterization of our designed proteins will serve to
improve our computational methods and will further enhance our understanding of
the interplay between dynamics and protein function. The long-term goal of this
study will be to use the lessons learned in this study to generate cutting edge
computational protein design tools that could be used to study enzyme function,
enhance the catalytic efficiencies of existing designed enzymes and enable the
de novo design of artificial enzymes with desired activities.Results of this
project will be reported at &lt;br/&gt;https://sms.asu.edu/jeremy_mills and
http://ozkanlab.physics.asu.edu/research.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.