* 1901757
* Cybersecurity Workforce: Bridging the Gap
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Bernice Brezina, College of Southern Maryland
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 258,912.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches, and the growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge
and skills. The demand for educated and talented cybersecurity personnel exceeds
the supply in Southern Maryland, which is home to multiple naval bases, several
Fortune 500 companies, and a growing list of smaller entrepreneurial
enterprises. This project will contribute to growing the region's cybersecurity
workforce talent pipeline and to increasing its diversity. In particular, it
will develop cybersecurity professionals who are also knowledgeable in business
and management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will implement practices shown
by research to be effective, contributing to the understanding of curricular and
co-curricular activities that affect recruitment, retention, student success,
academic and career pathways, and degree attainment in cybersecurity. The
project will introduce an updated cybersecurity curriculum that is closely
aligned with the unique cybersecurity workforce needs of industry and military
base partners in Southern Maryland. The curricular modifications are also
aligned with continuing the college's designation as a National Center of
Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense - 2-Year Education (CAE-2Y). Activities
will include:&lt;br/&gt;* developing a new business area of concentration in
Cybersecurity Policy, with stackable certificates and the opportunity for
students to earn professional cybersecurity certifications;&lt;br/&gt;* summer
orientation events;&lt;br/&gt;* boot camp workshops to prepare students for
certification exams;&lt;br/&gt;* monthly cohort activities, such as guest
speakers, field trips, hackathons, and career enrichment;&lt;br/&gt;*
cybersecurity career awareness workshops for K-12 teachers, parents, and
students;&lt;br/&gt;* a virtual learning community that will bring together
students attending classes on different campuses;&lt;br/&gt;* engaging industry
partners in the design of courses and curricula;&lt;br/&gt;* integrating real-
life cybersecurity enrichment activities into the cybersecurity program to
increase student satisfaction and improve retention; and&lt;br/&gt;* increasing
the number of women, minorities, and first-generation college students entering
cybersecurity careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program, which focuses on the education
of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.