* 1901852
* Improving the Integration of Supervisory Controls and Data Acquisition Technologies into the Renewable Energy Sector
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Kathleen Alfano, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2022
* USD 588,809.00

There has been a tremendous growth in renewable energy over the past decade,
evidenced by the proliferation of thousands of biofuel, wind turbine, and solar
panel installations across the country. Since each of these devices has its own
individual Supervisory Controls and Data Acquisition (SCADA) communications
output, this has also resulted in an explosion of data for renewable energy
system operators. The data from a SCADA system can have enormous value for
renewable energy system owners, operators, and the greater community. Therefore,
the Center for Renewable Energy Advanced Technological Education (CREATE), in
collaboration with industry and academic partners, aims to advance the use of
SCADA technology for the energy sector. SCADA technology is of crucial
importance to the electric industry to manage the extraordinary growth in
renewable energy installations, while also ensuring the security and resilience
of our nation's electric grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is
to advance renewable energy education by enabling faculty leaders to integrate
SCADA into existing energy technician educational programs. SCADA systems are
core technology for the operation of many key industrial processes, including
oil and gas refining, food and beverage production, water treatment, and
electric power production. SCADA systems allow engineering technicians to
control systems in real time, and log data for monitoring of system performance.
SCADA data analytics allow for system optimization, preventive maintenance
scheduling, and for rapid detection and correction of faults and alarms to
prevent or minimize system downtime. This project will result in the creation of
an educational open source SCADA system that will be deployed and shared among
participating colleges and universities nationwide. Technician education in
SCADA technology will be advanced through a series of professional development
workshops for college and university faculty, and SCADA instructional activities
will be integrated into existing courses and curricula for undergraduate energy
technician education programs. The project will have enormous impact on the
renewable energy sector, ultimately benefitting society by providing more
reliable and lower cost energy to consumers, while creating a more resilient
energy grid and reducing the environmental impact of America's energy sector.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program, which
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.