* 1901069
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Verification of Differential Privacy Mechanisms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Mahesh Viswanathan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2024
* USD 800,000.00

Information extraction from data is integral to decision making in public
policy, science, and business. Responsible information extraction demands
respecting privacy of individual data. Differential privacy is a precise, and
popular notion that ensures data privacy while guaranteeing its usefulness for
analysis. Schemes to preserve data privacy are difficult to design. Even well
intentioned mechanisms may fail to respect privacy, because reasoning about
privacy of an analysis is subtle. This project develops automated methods that
determine if a data analysis method, preserves data privacy with respect to the
notion of differential privacy. These techniques either certify that the given
data analysis method is differentially private, or provide feedback to analyst
when it falls short. The project includes educational activities like
mentoring/training of graduate students, development of curricular materials for
graduate, undergraduate, middle and high school students, and participation in
outreach activities targeting under represented minorities at the undergraduate,
middle and high school levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes a model
checking based approach to verifying differential privacy. Principal research
thrusts include (a) identification of decidable and undecidable cases by
considering programs of varying complexity; (b) development of model checking
techniques, for decidability cases, that combat state space explosion using
abstraction, symmetry reduction, and symbolic approaches; (c) development of
counterexample schemes and methods to generate them; and (d) development of
tools implementing the algorithms and evaluating them experimentally on example
programs. Research successes in the project will advance state of the art in
verification of security and differential privacy. The project develops games
and special off-line coding exercises for middle and high school students to
introduce them to some of the challenges and ideas in security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.