* 1901575
* Supporting Inclusive Participation in the Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Nate Derbinsky, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 12/31/2020
* USD 27,254.00

The integration of artificial intelligence (AI) into everyday life is
increasing. This creates a parallel increase in the difficulty and importance of
related discussions related to AI research, policy, and public debate. Broad and
informed participation in these discussions by a diverse community is critical
to the nation's future. This project supports the engagement of AI educators
from a diverse set of backgrounds to participate in the Symposium on Educational
Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI) in 2019 and 2020. EAAI provides a
venue for AI researchers and educators to discuss pedagogical issues and share
resources related to teaching and using AI in education across a variety of
curricular levels, from K-12 through postgraduate training. Increased diversity
in EAAI participation has the potential to broaden the pipeline of AI
professionals as well as the types of discussions surrounding the development of
AI technologies, including those of ethical implications and unintended
consequences. The symposium is co-located with the Association for the
Advancement of Artificial Intelligence Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
This is one of the premier conferences on AI, drawing wide domestic and
international participation. Co-location allows EAAI participants to engage in
discussions of both cutting-edge disciplinary research and state-of-the-art
methods of educational delivery and assessment.

This project addresses the need to develop a diverse set of faculty to educate
the next generation of AI researchers, practitioners, and policy makers. The
goal of this effort is to increase understanding of how to engage a more
demographically diverse pool of AI educators. Support for participation in EAAI
over two years will be provided to ten students, ten current higher education
faculty and secondary school educators, ten new or future educators, and four
invited speakers. Priority for support will be given to first
authors/presenters, paper co-authors, Birds-of-a-Feather undergraduate
participants, and poster authors. The Selection Committee will be composed of
the EAAI co-chairs and track chairs. Recruitment will target women and other
groups underrepresented in the AI community, as well as late-stage graduate
students or early-stage faculty. This last group, the New or Future Educators,
will be invited to assume future EAAI leadership positions. This project aims to
collect, analyze, and disseminate data on the efficacy of recruitment venues for
achieving a demographically diverse EAAI community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.