* 1901410
* CNS Core:Medium:Collaborative Research:Towards Enabling Optimal Performance-Cost Tradeoffs in Distributed Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Rashmi Vinayak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2023
* USD 421,352.00

Modern Internet services aim to be always available and provide low latency
responses. Typically, this is achieved by storing data on multiple sites close
to the end-users. Such an arrangement imposes a fundamental trade-off between
response times for read and write requests to storage systems and data
storage/transfer costs. Existing distributed storage solutions for addressing
this trade-off may result in sub-optimal outcomes. First, realizing different
performance-vs-cost trade-offs today requires using radically different
solutions with little choice in between. Also, many trade-off points that appear
theoretically feasible are currently unachievable in practice. This research
project aims to design and build a distributed storage solution that offers a
single design to realize a wide range of feasible latency-cost trade-
offs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to design
next-generation distributed storage solutions (1) that can be configured to
achieve all feasible performance-cost trade-offs on mutable data, and (2) that
enables a significant portion of the theoretically feasible trade-off space that
is currently unachievable. Specifically, the project involves overcoming the
following key challenges: (1) Seamless support for low latency and low cost; (2)
Ensuring high performance across widely varying network latency domains and
object sizes; and (3) Efficiently maintaining consistency in erasure-coded data.
This will allow application developers to select from all feasible points in the
trade-off space, using replication or erasure coding, without having to redesign
their services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By making a broader region of the trade-off
space accessible to cloud service providers, this project will help reduce the
price of cloud storage for end users. Additionally, lowering achievable latency
bounds enables new, low-cost, geo-distributed services and applications that are
interactive and collaborative. The researchers will work with industry partners
to apply the outcomes from this project in practice, and leverage the results
from this project in classes they teach. Research exposure for undergraduate
students will be promoted through research internships. The researchers plan to
build upon several already-established outreach activities to help improve
diversity of the student population in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the research project, including
software, will be made available at:
github.com/cns1901410.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.