* 1901715
* NeuroNex Research Program Workshop, San Diego, California, November 7-8, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Terrence Sejnowski, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 03/31/2020
* USD 34,700.00

One of the explicit goals of the NeuroNex Program is to provide added value to
NSF investments in the BRAIN Initiative by building a community of researchers
who are committed to the continued development and dissemination of
neurotechnologies and theoretical approaches to the broad neuroscience
community. Such community building/expansion ensures that the innovative
imaging, recording and genetic manipulation methods that are being developed as
part of the BRAIN Initiative are accessible to the broadest possible spectrum of
neuroscientists. Furthermore, it allows the neurotechnology developers to expand
the repertoire of tools to interrogate brain and behavior in organisms more
diverse than the limited set of model organisms that the tools were developed
originally. The organizers are making a strong effort to invite women and
members of underrepresented groups as participants. Further, the meeting entails
extensive cross-disciplinary interactions, which will be aided greatly by the
face-to-face nature of this meeting. Importantly, this workshop is part of a
concerted effort to coordinate and align interagency priorities to capitalize on
cross-disciplinary technology developments to approach perhaps the greatest
scientific challenge of the time ? understanding the brain.

Understanding how behavior emerges from the dynamic patterns of electrical and
chemical activity of brain circuits is universally recognized as a fundamental
mystery in science. The BRAIN Initiative was created in 2014 to catalyze
national efforts towards the development of neurotechnologies that are aimed at
a fuller understanding of the brain. To support for research activities related
to interagency BRAIN Initiative as directed by the American Innovation and
Competitiveness Act (Public Law 114-329), NSF created the NeuroNex activity to
ensure the continued development and broad dissemination of these innovative
neurotechnologies. As part of this activity, 9 Neurotechnology Hubs, 2
Neurotheory teams and six Innovation awards were funded in FY2017. This workshop
aims to bring together the principal investigators and their trainees for an
inaugural awardees meeting. Funds are requested for a one-and-half day meeting
to coincide with the Annual Society for Neuroscience Meeting with the following
goals: 1) Present updates and highlights of progress into tools, technologies
and theories, 2) Identify key issues and bottlenecks in technology development,
3) Discuss opportunities, barriers and challenges for widespread dissemination
and community engagement 4) Leverage synergies between the different projects to
push forward new and emerging areas and 5) Continue to build a national research
infrastructure that allows teams to quickly re-configure in response to research
challenges/opportunities. The participants will discuss these issues in small
thematic groups, and will use their insights to generate a coherent set of
strategies and obectives towards the goals of the NeuroNex program and the BRAIN
Initiative.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.