* 1901103
* CNS Core: Medium: Collaborative: Exploring and Exploiting Learning for Efficient Network Control: Non-Stationarity,  Inter-Dependence, and Domain-Knowledge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Zhi-Li Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 331,333.00

Traditionally, computer network protocols and control mechanisms are designed
and engineered in accordance with certain theoretical models or design
principles, under (often simplifying) assumptions about the network environment
in which they operate. Network operations are mostly performed by operators
through manual configurations of control parameters and resources, sometimes
guided by measurement analysis and performance optimization. With the
increasingly wide range of applications and complex network scenarios,
traditional methods do not always perform well. To address this challenge,
machine learning (ML) techniques have been applied to a wide range of networking
and distributed systems problems, from reducing data center cooling costs to
traffic optimization and application management. While preliminary results are
promising, applying machine learning techniques to networking pose many
important research questions that must be explored systematically and in depth.
The proposed research constitutes an important first step toward providing a
principled understanding of the fundamental limitations and promising new
opportunities in learning-based network control from both theoretical and
practical perspectives. It will help advance the emerging visions of self-
driving networks and AIOps (Artificial Intelligence for IT Operations), and
bring benefits to network operators, users, and the society at large. This
project also integrates research with education and broadens participation in
computing, especially with recruitment and training of female and under-
represented students and outreach activities to K-12.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networks are a collection of control and (distributed)
data plane elements that operate at different time scales on diverse types of
data, respond and adapt to changes in traffic demands and the network state to
achieve disparate objectives. The networking environments are highly dynamic and
uncertain, with non-stationarity caused by surges and time-of-day changes in
traffic demands, and unpredictable network failures; they are also inherently
correlated, inter-dependent and constrained, in part due to complex interactions
of various network entities. Moreover, networks are engineered systems -- there
are basic principles that govern their designs and operations, with constraints
that cannot be violated and inherent relations that could yield substantial
performance gains. The proposed research focuses on learning-based network
control problems to address these challenges along the following inter-related
research thrusts. In Thrust 1, Network-Centric Learning Techniques, this project
will explore the fundamental limits (from a theoretical perspective) and advance
new network-centric ML techniques for non-stationary, correlated and constrained
environments. In Thrust 2, Network-wide Learning-based Control and
Horizontal/Vertical Interactions, this project will study and develop innovative
learning-based network control algorithms in a network-wide framework by
exploiting the (horizontal and vertical) interactions and leveraging shared
learning. Last but not the least, in the Evaluation Thrust, this project will
evaluate the proposed learning-based network control algorithms and compare them
with conventional optimization and other ML based
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project information such as publications,
algorithms developed, data collected and personnel, will be made publicly
available at https://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~liu/Research/Holistic.htm during the
entire project duration and for five years after the completion of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.