* 1901714
* Advancing Manufacturing through Integration of Information Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Paul Nelson, Gateway Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

According to the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, in 2017 the manufacturing
sector in Wisconsin produced $59.1 billion in economic output. The skilled
technical workforce that supports this sector must understand both information
technology and manufacturing. To this end, this project will develop an
18-credit hour, entry-level Integrated Manufacturing Certification with an
emphasis on both Information Technology and Operational/Production Technology
systems. The courses in the certificate will have defined competencies developed
by faculty at the local and the state level. This certificate program will allow
students to earn an industry-approved certification in less than a year that is
recognized throughout the state. The project will use instructional approaches
rooted in constructivism, inquiry, reflection, collaboration, and integration,
as well as holistic student support, to graduate workforce-ready students.
Professional development for faculty will focus on curriculum development and
train-the-trainer peer instruction. It is expected that this approach will help
students retain more knowledge while enjoying learning in a project-based,
content-based, hands-on environment. In addition, the college will increase the
learning opportunities in advanced manufacturing for secondary education
students through pursuit of dual credits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many businesses
in the field of advanced systems manufacturing struggle to maintain a workforce
that is up-to-date in the skills required to remain competitive. Few post-
secondary institutions provide education in Integrated Manufacturing with focus
both on Information Technology and Operational/Production Technology systems. As
a result, industries with manufacturing operations that use smart technologies
need more workers with these integrated skills. For example, Bird's Eye Food in
Darien, WI, has an annual payroll of $19.4 million, and purchases another $100
million in goods and services from vendors and service groups in the local area.
In 2017, Bird's Eye Food invested 13 million dollars into its Darien facility
for the installation of three new automated robotic packaging production lines.
The increased automation and associated increased speed capabilities have
created a need for maintenance technicians with advanced skills in robotic
technology to service, troubleshoot, and maintain this equipment. To address
this and related needs, the project will develop an Integrated Manufacturing
curriculum that provides students with specialized training and industry
approved certifications. To achieve this goal, the College will work with local
industries, manufacturers, workforce development boards, the Wisconsin Technical
College System, and the National Convergence Technology Center to develop a
curriculum that incorporates the newest industry advancements (e.g., Industry
4.0). The fully-developed curriculum will be open-source and available to
educators across the country and internationally. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.