* 1901720
* DDRIG: Exploring Monumental Mound Construction in the Rat Islands, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Caroline Funk, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2020
* USD 19,067.00

More than 114 earth mounds have been documented across five locations within the
Rat Islands group of the western Aleutian Islands of Alaska. Common
understanding is that these mounds were created by the accumulation of bird
guano, but archaeological research has revealed that prehistoric Aleutians
constructed at least one of these earth mounds, highlighting the need to more
thoroughly research the origins of these mounds. This project investigates these
earth mounds to better understand their construction history, then linking to
established discussions of Aleut monumentality in the eastern Aleutian Islands
and potentially bringing to light a pan-Aleutian tradition of monumental
construction spanning at least three millennia. This research will dovetail with
regional and global data sets to expand the theoretical understanding of the
form and function of monuments and their relationship to human behavior. Better
understanding these earth mounds will also advance socioenvironmental theories
about the impacts of small-scale societies on their landscapes and will
contribute to global anthropological debates regarding group-identity amongst
hunter-fisher-gatherer communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This archaeological
research project investigates how earthen mound constructions can signal and
reinforce expressions of perceived group identity among prehistoric hunter-
fisher-gatherer communities in the Aleutian Islands, Alaska. The project has
four objectives, (1) examine the depositional history of the Rat Islands mound
clusters; (2) examine the role of the mound clusters within Rat Islands Aleut
archaeological settlement patterns; (3) contribute knowledge about the human
occupation of the Rat Islands; (4) contribute to a global discourse about the
archaeological identification of hunter-fisher-gatherer group identity.
Stratigraphic analyses, lithic artifact analyses, spatial analyses, and
radiometric dating will be employed in the examination of the depositional
history of the earth mounds and their role within Aleut prehistoric settlement
patterns. The project will also produce unprecedented high-resolution drone
imagery of the Rat Islands, which will be an invaluable resource for future
researchers, wildlife management, and environmental monitoring. This research is
especially pressing, as these cultural sites are threatened by climate change
because they occur along coastlines that have already begun to face the effects
of erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.