* 1901048
* CNS Core: Medium: Networked Smart Paper: Towards Invisible Wearables for Humans and Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Xinyu Zhang, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to explore fundamental communication and sensing
technologies to transform the ordinary physical world into a connected,
intelligent Internet of Things (IoT) ecosystem. Despite multiple generations of
evolution, digital devices still demand substantial user involvement for battery
charging and network setup, and current technologies are not yet ready to make
everyday things connected and intelligent. To address the networking challenges,
this project will work technology for ultra-thin paper-like communication tags,
composed of a mm-scale radio chip along with power harvesting unit, printable
flexible antennas, and printable energy storage unit. The tag, referred to as
Networked Smart Paper (NSP), can potentially be woven into clothes or attached
on plain objects, thus encompassing humans or things into the IoT. The resulting
hardware and software will be made fully open-source and become a community
resource, to benefit the relevant industries in wireless systems, radio-
frequency integrated circuits (RFIC), and printed electronics. This project will
engage students in experimental IoT research through the summer research
internship program and outreach to under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed NSP project aims to extend the IoT vision
beyond the current-generation mobile devices, by addressing cross-disciplinary
challenges in low-power RFIC, printable electronics, and wireless networking. It
will renovate the IoT radio architecture and network protocol design, under the
constraints of extremely low-power, extremely thin/flexible form-factor, and
compatibility with the legacy network infrastructure. In particular, NSP
explores a novel "slim radio" architecture, which adopts on-off-keying-like
energy-efficient modulation, but remains compatible with the WiFi physical layer
through signal waveform approximation. In addition, NSP will realize a slim
network stack through association-free network management and application-
specific addressing. NSP's ability to reuse the massive legacy WiFi
infrastructure helps eliminate the deployment barrier that has been hindering
IoT deployment. In addition, NSP explores chip-level optimization for the slim
radio architecture, aiming to achieve up to three orders of magnitude lower
power consumption compared with legacy WiFi transceiver chips. Unlike existing
passive radio architectures (e.g., Radio Frequency Identifier tags and
backscatter), NSP supports channelization (thus enabling coexistence and
frequency reuse); it can power both the communication and computation (network
stack) operations, by scavenging and storing the energy from intermittent
ambient radio frequency signals. The miniaturized radio chip, printable antenna
and energy storage units together enable ultra-thin form factor, making NSP a
truly wearable and attachable IoT device for humans and
things.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.