* 1901960
* Integrating Biotechnology and Applied Engineering to Meet Emerging Advanced Technological Workforce Needs
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Brian Worley, Johnston Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2023
* USD 305,980.00

The rapidly expanding biomanufacturing industries in eastern North Carolina have
a growing need for skilled technicians. For example, over the next eight years,
Novo Nordisk plans to invest in a $1.8 billion production facility and to hire
800 employees, approximately 500 of whom will be maintenance and process
technicians. In addition, Grifols plans to invest $375 million in production
facility upgrades and plans to hire approximately 500 technicians. This project
will help meet these workforce needs by blending concepts and skills of applied
engineering and biotechnology into two existing Associate of Applied Science
programs. To this end, four new courses will be developed in close partnership
with two biomanufacturing companies. These courses will integrate applied
engineering topics into the Bioprocess Technology AAS program and biotechnology
topics into the Applied Engineering AAS program. In addition, both AAS programs
will be enhanced by the addition of certification in the industry-standard
DeltaV distributed control system software. At project conclusion, it is
expected that the first cohort of approximately 15 students will have completed
the biotechnology/applied engineering programs, completed internships, and be
ready for work as biomanufacturing technicians. Approximately 75% of all of
North Carolina's biomanufacturing is located with one hour of the central
Johnston Community College campus, making the College an ideal location for this
project. Thus, this project has the potential to directly contribute to the
national need for a highly-trained advanced technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pursue three goals: 1) develop
and implement a new curriculum that integrates biomanufacturing and applied
engineering; 2) develop a multi-skilled talent pipeline from college to
industry; and 3) provide hands-on education in a simulated drug manufacturing
environment at the College's Workforce Development Center. With support from two
local biomanufacturing companies, this facility will be enhanced with additional
automated machinery and an updated design to create learning environment that
simulates drug production using DeltaV industry software to control equipment,
similar to that of a modern biomanufacturing facility. Students on the Applied
Engineering track will learn to troubleshoot and repair production equipment in
these facilities, and students on the Bioprocessing Technology track will learn
to manufacture life science products by monitoring conditions such as pH,
temperature, and drug concentration during production. By practicing in this
environment, students will gain better skills in mechanical and biological
techniques. The project coordinator will provide students with career coaching,
engage in outreach to high school students, and work with industries to develop
internship opportunities that will ensure employment upon program completion. By
blending applied engineering and biomanufacturing, this project could provide a
transferable model to better prepare students for skilled technical positions in
modern biomanufacturing. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.