* 1901776
* Online Competency-Based Education of Technicians in Computer-aided Design and Cyber Security
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Amy Hertel, Texas State Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 228,017.00

Providing high-quality college education and professional opportunities in rural
areas continue to be a national challenge. To help address this challenge, Texas
State Technical College will develop and implement on-line competency-based
programs in Computer Aided Design and in Cyber Security. The project will focus
on serving non-traditional students and individuals living in rural areas,
populations that have less access to technical education programs. Project
activities will include updating and expanding existing curricula to respond to
current industry demands; providing professional development for faculty;
providing on-going mentoring and support services for students; developing
handbooks for faculty who are teaching the courses; developing a model for on-
line competency-based education that can be used in other career and technical
fields and by other institutions; and supporting job placement opportunities for
graduates. This project will also reach high school students through dual
enrollment and, thus, has the potential to increase the number of students
seeking academic and career opportunities in Computer Aided Design and Cyber
Security across Texas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond creating and implementing
the new curricula, the project is designed to increase connections between
students, faculty, the college, and industry. Such connections have the
potential to enhance students' educational experiences, expand the capacity of
faculty to understand industry needs and opportunities, and increase the
placement of highly qualified technicians into high demand fields. Program
evaluation activities will assess the curriculum development processes, the
success of new industry advisory boards, the retention and academic performance
of the students, and rates of graduation and placement into industry jobs.
Project results will be presented at academic and professional conferences and
submitted for publication. This project is funded by the NSF Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.