* 1901360
* RI: Medium:Collaborative Research: Through synapses to spatial learning: a topological approach
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Facundo Memoli, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 435,000.00

There is a tension in neuroscience between the emergent phenomena of interested,
such as learning and memory, and the level at which most data are acquired. For
example, numerous experimental labs study how the strengths of synaptic
connections and their dynamics affect cognition by establishing empirical
correlations between in vitro electrophysiology measurements and data collected
in animal behavioral experiments. However, these correlations fall short of
causal explanations: to date, there exist no mechanisms connecting recordings in
individual neurons and synapses with cognitive learning dynamics. The problem is
not due to a lack of observations at either the neuronal or the systemic level;
rather, it reflects a principal gap in our ability to link these two scales.
Even if a full description of every neuron in the brain could be produced, there
would still be a gap in our ability to transition from local data to making
qualitative conclusions about how it combines to produce systemic cognitive
outcomes. Addressing this problem requires a conceptual framework encompassing a
computational model that would link the experimentally derived characteristics
of individual cells with effects of those characteristics at the ensemble
level.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to provide a way to
establish such a connection: developing a data-driven, systemic model of
hippocampal spatial learning based on the parameters of the hippocampal synaptic
architecture, including the parameters of synaptic plasticity, using novel
topological and geometric techniques. Recent developments in Algebraic Topology
will be used to integrate the parameters of synaptic connectivity and synaptic
plasticity (e.g., long- and short-term potentiation and depression), to study
structure of this map, the mechanisms of its formation and deterioration, and to
evaluate the time required to produce a spatial map of a given environment, etc.
This project is a natural evolution of prior work done by the Dabaghian group on
modeling the mechanisms of spatial learning, based on algebraic topology methods
developed by the M?moli group. The theory-based insight into learning phenomena
will produce a qualitatively better understanding of how to interpret data, how
to design new experiments, what variables should be targeted in measurements, as
well as how to minimize use of animals, and in general how to optimize use
physical and intellectual resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.