* 1901901
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Security of Reconfigurable Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jakub Szefer, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2024
* USD 528,235.00

Large-scale computer systems that can perform challenging computations can now
be leased by the general public for seconds, minutes, or hours at a time.
Although these systems typically use microprocessors for most computation,
recently, special reconfigurable computer chips called field-programmable gate
arrays (FPGAs) have been integrated into these publicly-available systems.
Although these chips are more powerful than microprocessors, they have security
weaknesses that could put users' data at risk and expose their personal
information. This project explores how to secure FPGAs in distributed large-
scale computer servers, also known as cloud computing, to prevent information
theft and incorrect calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As FPGAs grow in size and
complexity, cloud FPGA deployments aim to leverage economies of scale to share
FPGAs among different, untrusting cloud users who wish to accelerate their
machine learning, data search, or other applications with FPGAs. Numerous
independent applications may share the same FPGA over time, reside in FPGAs that
are in close physical proximity to each other, or even simultaneously reside in
a single FPGA. Such uses of multi-tenant FPGAs open the door to numerous
potential attack vectors on unsuspecting circuits implemented in the shared
FPGAs. This project examines the security vulnerabilities that arise from adding
FPGAs into data center environments where such FPGA sharing is possible on a
large scale. The initial part of this project quantifies the risks associated
with malicious FPGA application behavior, including clandestine data snooping,
data leaking, and deliberate attempts by users to degrade or even damage the
FPGA infrastructure. To address these vulnerabilities, an active monitoring
system continuously checks the FPGAs, detects attacks, and aims to limit
malicious behavior at run-time. In parallel, a rules-based resource manager
controls resource usage and FPGA allocation in an effort to mitigate FPGA-based
attacks. Compile-time rule checks are also implemented. The layered approach
enables truly secure multi-tenant FPGAs, allowing sensitive data to be processed
securely and cost efficiently with cloud FPGAs. Two specific programs to broaden
the impact are: 1)new courses on data center and FPGA security, focused on
scalable real-world systems, and 2) a student-run research workshop to allow
students to share research ideas and their work. These activities teach
undergraduate and graduate students how to leverage cloud FPGA resources for a
variety of hardware and software experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.