* 1901453
* Investigations in Combinatorics and Number Theory via Ergodic Theoretic Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Bryna Kra, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 116,675.00

Historically, the theory of dynamical systems was rooted in the study of the
movement of macroscopic objects (such as moons, planets, etc.) and microscopic
particles (such as molecules and atoms). Today, it is a vast area that pursues
the study of orbits and transformations in general systems evolving with time.
It is a rich and active research area that not only plays an important role in
contemporary mathematics, but also greatly contributes to other sciences and
finds many applications. This project seeks to improve upon the analytic tools
and techniques available in dynamical systems, with anticipated impact in a wide
range of fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of this project are
concentrated at the interface of three different areas in pure mathematics: the
theory of dynamical systems, combinatorics, and number theory. The employment of
analytic tools stemming from measurable, topological, and symbolic dynamics
often offers novel ways to analyze number-theoretic and combinatorial
situations. This approach has proven to be powerful in solving seemingly
intractable problems. In the same vein, this project aims to address, and
potentially settle, conjectures and open questions in arithmetic combinatorics
and number theory with the help of dynamical methods. The main challenges of the
project range from recasting problems in discrete mathematics in a dynamical
language to developing the pertinent dynamical tools for solving these
reformulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.