* 1901381
* SHF: Medium: Algorithmic lambda-Calculus for the Design, Analysis, and Implementation of Parallel Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Umut Acar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,399,291.00

The hardware advances of recent years have brought multicore chips and parallel
computing to the mainstream. While there have been many advances in parallel
software for such multicore chips over the past decade, there is still no
satisfactory model for analyzing the performance of parallel algorithms. In
particular, and unlike the case for sequential algorithms, there is a gap
between cost models for estimating performance of algorithms and easy to use
programming models for implementing the algorithms. This project is developing a
practical approach to parallel algorithms by bringing together two fundamental
but distinct theories of computing---one based on machine models and following
the work that dates back to Dr. Alan Turing, and the other based on language
models and following the work that dates back to Dr. Alonzo Church. The novelty
of the project is in combining these two theories, for which there is currently
a large rift. The impact of the project is in making significant steps in
simplifying the design and analysis of parallel algorithms, and better
understanding of the relationship between the two theories of computing. The
educational component of this project involves teaching undergraduates parallel
algorithms and creates ample opportunities to test the practical effectiveness
of the proposed approach, along with concrete efforts to broaden participation
in computing through programs at Carnegie-Mellon
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is following an end-to-end methodology
bridging Church and Turing's theories along with practice. On the theory side,
the project is developing a calculus called the ``algorithmic lambda-calculus,''
that equips Church's lambda-calculus with a cost semantics, making it possible
to reason about the total work and parallel span (time) of programs, which in
turn can be used to understand the performance of algorithms, at least
asymptotically. To show that this calculus is realizable, the project is
theoretically establishing that the calculus is faithful to a transition
semantics, which can then be efficiently realized on an abstract machine such as
the Parallel-RAM. On the practical side, the project is developing a programming
language and a compiler that faithfully implements this theory. The project is
also extending the algorithmic lambda-calculus, the realizability theorems, and
the implementation to support important features such as aggregate parallel data
structures, interaction, and different forms of
parallelism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.