* 1901599
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: DYNAMICS OF DENSITIES: MODELING, CONTROL AND ESTIMATION
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/16/2018,08/31/2022
* Yongxin Chen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Present day advances in guidance and control, from aerospace applications to
modern device technologies, require ever more sophisticated ways to deal with
the deluge of data and to cope with the probabilistic nature of uncertainty. The
proposed research aims at developing novel computational techniques and new
mathematics that address problems in decision and control of uncertain systems
and in regulating collections of dynamical systems in a unified manner. Typical
examples include the steering of collections of dynamical systems such as a
collection of unmanned area vehicles, a particle beam, micro-mechanical systems
subject to thermal fluctuations, laser-driven molecular reactions, or the
scheduling and control of the flow of resources across a network. Multiple
engineering and scientific disciplines stand to gain from successful completion
of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basis of the proposed framework is the
newly discovered Riemannian structure of Optimal Mass Transport (OMT) on
probability densities. The ensuing geometry allows new techniques for the
analysis of stochastic differential equations, a new perspective of collective
dynamics of particles that leads to new modeling principles, and leads to a
unified approach for designing suitable control laws that ensure stability and
performance of collections of dynamical systems. Density functions become the
primary object of study as these represent the state of the collection of
dynamical systems. Data provide empirical snapshots, statistics, and histograms
viewed as points on the Riemannian manifold of density functions. The
description of system-states and uncertainty via density functions is compatible
with novel mathematical concepts and tools in partial differential equations
that can be now used for control purposes. This new viewpoint transcends control
applications and may impact non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, medical
imaging, filtering and signal analysis. The mathematics that we will develop aim
to extend the current framework OMT to address multi-dimensional objects and
tensor fields and, thereby, applications in diffusion tensor imaging,
stochastically driven density flows of interacting dynamical particles, and
network transport applications will be a focus of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.