* 1901482
* SaTC: CORE: Small: New Defenses for Data-Only Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jeff Huang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

It is critical to defend software systems against memory-tampering attacks that
can steal sensitive data, escalate privilege, or even execute arbitrary code on
a remote system. However, most existing defense mechanisms have focused only on
control-data attacks (e.g., control- hijacking), but cannot defend data-only
attacks such as Heartbleed, which only tamper with the program's data flow.
Data-only attacks will become common once control-flow defenses such as control-
flow integrity are widely deployed. This project will investigate new,
principled solutions to data-only attacks with acceptable overhead for
deployment in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project
are divided into two thrusts. The first thrust develops a novel compiler
analysis and a runtime approach for ensuring cross-origin data flow integrity
(X-DFI), which can effectively defend real-world attacks that infect the victim
system through one or more ingress points, e.g., a function that reads external
data or an event handler for events controlled by attackers. By modeling each of
these ingress points as a separate origin, X-DFI can prevent attacks from
malicious origins from accessing data belonging to innocent origins through
exploiting memory vulnerabilities such as buffer overflows or dangling pointers.
The second thrust develops pointer-arithmetic integrity (PAI), which can further
reduce the runtime overhead and to also deal with attacks within the same origin
through ensuring the safety of pointer arithmetics in memory unsafe languages
such as C/C++. Ensuring PAI is lightweight since pointers that involve
arithmetics typically account for only a small fraction of all pointers in the
program. Through automated compiler and lightweight runtime techniques to
enforce X-DFI and PAI together, the project aims to secure large complex
software against data-only attacks without requiring any change to the source
code, with no false positives, and with minimal performance
overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.