* 1901713
* Melt-processing of Enzymes into Bio-catalytic Polymer Membranes for Carbon Dioxide Remediation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jonathan Pokorski, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 369,606.00

This grant supports research that contributes to the development of advanced
manufacturing methods to enable the capture of carbon dioxide from industrial
waste gases. Greenhouse gases are the principal factor driving climate change
and one of the most detrimental human-derived waste products is carbon dioxide.
Current technologies to sequester carbon dioxide are energy intensive and
inefficient. This research develops a process to manufacture carbon-capture
membranes that are inexpensive, energy efficient, and scalable to meet this
growing societal need. The research relies on polymer melt-processing, a plastic
manufacturing technique that enables the large-scale production of most common
plastic goods. The innovation is using melt-processing to integrate biochemical
catalysts or enzymes into plastic membranes to sequester carbon dioxide.
Enzymatic carbon dioxide capture occurs at room temperature to produce solid
carbon salts which can be easily stored, thus greatly reducing the energy
demand. The outcome of this research greatly benefits society, since climate
change is a grand challenge in engineering, and, thus, is instrumental in
securing the prosperity and security of the country. This research is multi-
disciplinary and includes polymer science, chemical engineering, materials
science, and biochemistry. Students conducting this research are trained at the
forefront of science, which has a long-term positive impact on the nation?s
technological output. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of carbonic anhydrase as a
carbon dioxide capture catalyst is promising given the enzymes rapid turnover
number, minimal energy input for sequestration and ability to sequester carbon
into solid salts. The limiting factor for applying carbonic anhydrase broadly is
a manufacturing challenge that requires scalability and reproducibility. Current
enzyme immobilization processes operate in batch mode and rely on adsorption or
non-specific chemical reactions to a solid support, limiting scalability and
reproducibility. This research develops continuous manufacturing methods to
incorporate carbonic anhydrase into permeable polymer membranes that can be
fabricated at large scale. The primary hurdle in accomplishing this goal is to
develop a fundamental understanding of processing conditions under which
carbonic anhydrase maintains stability and activity during melt-extrusion. This
project seeks to understand the main stressors, temperature and shear, during
processing and correlate these to enzyme performance. Once this relationship has
been established, the results are used to scale-up polymer membrane manufacture
to twin-screw extruders, similar to those used in commercial film manufacturing.
These membranes are evaluated for carbon dioxide flux, sequestration, and
durability in environments that mimic complex mixtures of industrial waste
gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.