* 1901635
* NSF Center for Sustainable Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Marc Hillmyer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 16,000,000.00

Plastics derived from petroleum-based polymers offer affordable packaging,
adhesives, building materials, computer components, and sporting and safety
equipment. The durability and stability of these materials, however, has
resulted in an undesirable accumulation of discarded plastics in our
environment. The NSF Center for Sustainable Polymers (CSP) addresses this
challenge by designing functional and environmentally sustainable plastics. Key
aspects of sustainability include making plastics from renewable resources,
using green and sustainable reaction chemistries, and making specialty plastics
that can be composted or recycled after their use. CSP seeks detailed
understanding of the chemical transformations happening in all of these
processes, building a body of knowledge that can be generalized to other
systems. The multi-institutional and collaborative team involves researchers
from the University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Cornell University, Northwestern
University, Washington University in St. Louis, University of California
Berkeley, University of Chicago and University of South Dakota. CSP promotes
innovation through technology transfer and entrepreneurship as demonstrated by
their patent portfolio and spin-off companies. CSP has extensive programs in
education, outreach, and broadening participation of underrepresented groups in
the sciences. Their efforts include developing new college curricula and
laboratory experiments with sustainable polymer examples. CSP-supported graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers access professional development
opportunities in communication skills, creating collaborative and equitable work
environments, project management, and engaging with industry researchers. A
diverse group of undergraduates is supported through summer research
opportunities. A national partnership is bringing science skills and discussions
of sustainable plastics to 4-H groups across the country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Center for Sustainable Polymers (CSP) incorporates
experts in all stages of polymer chemistry that range from developing polymers
from renewable resources, creating new chemistries for synthesis, and improving
the recycling or degradation pathways for plastics after use. CSP's research
efforts are organized into three areas that have substantive scientific overlap:
1) to discover new, efficient, and often catalytic chemical transformations of
biomass and other natural product-based feedstocks into both new and established
polymer ingredients; 2) to discover new sustainable polymers with precisely
controlled molecular structures and establish relationships between structure,
morphology, and performance properties; and 3) to discover sustainable polymers
with triggered degradation, chemical recycling, and compatibilization
capabilities to reduce or eliminate plastic waste. Center members emphasize
research translation and the protection of intellectual property in their
innovation efforts. The center trains and develops a diverse cohort of chemists
that works collaboratively and leverages one another's expertise. CSP partners
with youth development organizations to encourage interest in the physical
sciences and engages the public in the challenges and the opportunities
presented by sustainable polymers. CSP works to advance data sharing and reuse
by making original, primary data files available with all
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.