* 1901976
* Interaction of Algebraic, Algorithmic and Asymptotic Properties in Finitely Generated Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Mark Sapir, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2023
* USD 539,910.00

Modern group theory is a very fast developing area of mathematics that uses
methods from algebra, geometry, combinatorics, topology, probability, logic, and
computer science. Applications of group theory are ubiquitous throughout
science, from physics and chemistry to cyber security. This award supports
research in the area of asymptotic methods in group theory, an area that has
been extremely active since seminal papers by Gromov on hyperbolic groups and
asymptotic invariants of groups. This project will significantly advance
knowledge of the area by solving several open problems. The broader impact of
the project will affect students at all levels, and professional investigators.
The principal investigators will continue running Nashville Math Club for K-12
students, engaging undergraduate students in research projects, and advising
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research the principal
investigators will work on several fundamental problems together with ideas of
their solutions related to Burnside, asymptotic and algorithmic problems of
finitely generated groups. The problems are intrinsically connected by the
proposed methods of solutions and by the tools used in the proposed approaches
in their solutions. The project for a definition of a proper analogue of
asymptotic cones for Golod-Shafarevich groups has a potential impact far beyond
group theory. Other problems concern the existence of an infinite finitely
presented torsion group for which a detailed approach for a positive solution is
provided, the existence of amenable groups with non-trivial Morse boundary, and
the construction of a finitely presented group with maximal possible (continuum)
different asymptotic cones (assuming the Continuum
Hypothesis).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.