* 1901004
* FET: Medium: ROCS: Recurrent Oscillatory Computing Systems for Rapid Solution of NP-Complete and Deep Learning Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Venkatachalam Anantharam, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Hard computational problems abound in today's world, from airline scheduling to
healthcare. Large classes of these hard problems can be reduced to a form known
as the Ising problem, which is closely related to the underlying physics of
ferromagnetic materials. This project is based on a recently devised way to
solve the Ising problem quickly and effectively in electronic hardware using
networks of connected Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS)
oscillators, i.e., electronic equivalents of metronomes and grandfather clocks.
Being able to solve large real-world problems much more quickly using this
approach than what is currently possible will have broad and beneficially
disruptive effects on society. The project's activities include course
development, outreach to high-school students, yearly workshops for
dissemination and interaction, and scientific and design tool infrastructure
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike previous Ising machine approaches,
which are large, expensive and ill-suited to low-cost mass production, the
proposed approach is a purely classical scheme that does not rely on quantum
phenomena or novel nano-devices. It can be implemented using conventional CMOS
electronics, which has many advantages: scalability / miniaturisability (i.e.,
very large numbers of spins in a physically small system), well-established
design processes and tools that essentially guarantee first-time working
hardware, very low power operation, seamless integration with control and I/O
logic, easy programmability via standard interfaces like USB, and low cost mass
production. Another key advantage relates to variability, a significant problem
in nanoscale CMOS. Unlike other schemes, where performance deteriorates due to
variability, this approach can essentially eliminate variability by means of
simple VCO-based calibration to bring all the oscillators to the same frequency.
Yet another key potential advantage stems from the continuous/analog nature of
the proposed scheme (as opposed to purely digital algorithms). Computational
experiments indicate that the time the scheme takes to find good solutions of
the Ising problem grows only very slowly with respect to the number of
spins.This is a significant potential advantage over digital algorithms as
hardware sizes scale up to large numbers of spins. In addition, virtually any
type of nonlinear oscillator (not just CMOS) can be used to implement this
scheme, including optical, micro-electronic mechanical systems, biochemical,
spin torque device based, etc., oscillators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.