* 1901847
* A Community College and Industry Partnership to Produce a Highly Qualified Cybersecurity Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Calhoun Calhoun, Arapahoe Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,933.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches. The growth of cyber-threats has created
a need for many more workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge and
skills. Nationwide, employer surveys indicate that only a small percentage of
universities and colleges fully prepare graduates for cybersecurity jobs.
Colorado is a major hub for cybersecurity jobs, with over 9,000 open
cybersecurity positions in the Denver Metro and Colorado Springs areas, which
are served by the college. Over 1,200 of these jobs can be filled by individuals
who have an Associate of Applied Science (AAS) degree. This project will prepare
well-qualified cybersecurity professionals and information security analysts to
benefit the regional workforce. The project will create and implement a
responsive AAS cybersecurity program aligned with business needs and Federal
standards. The approach will focus on integrating experiential and project-based
learning to provide students with real-world experiences, to create seamless
continuity from classroom to workforce, and to equip students with 21st-century
employability skills. The college intends to achieve a Center of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Defense designation. This designation, along with mapping
the curriculum to the Federal standards, will equip students with the necessary
knowledge, skills, and abilities to protect and defend the nation's
infrastructure. The project will also focus on increasing the participation of
women in cybersecurity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three goals: (1)
to address the unmet demand for cybersecurity technicians in the region served
by the college; (2) to enhance gender diversity in cybersecurity by recruiting
more female students into the program (the aim is for at least 20% of the
students to be women); and (3) to improve retention and persistence in the
attainment of an AAS degree in cybersecurity. The project will adopt, adapt, and
evaluate materials and methods developed through the Colorado Community College
System, the National CyberWatch Center, and other NSF Advanced Technological
Education projects. It will also develop a new course in Security Risk
Management. Collaboration with a regional Business and Industry Leadership Team
will ensure that the project can create a robust curriculum that provides
seamless continuity from the classroom to the workplace and meets industry
standards. In addition, collaboration with a subject matter expert on diversity
and organizational change, along with partnerships with high schools, will
facilitate the recruitment, retention, and completion of women in the college's
cybersecurity program. By using distance education and remote-access labs, the
project will reach beyond Colorado. The new courses that are developed will be
added to the CCCS database and will be available for all 13 colleges in the
system and other colleges across the nation. The best practices that are
discovered will be disseminated nationally through the National CyberWatch
Center, ATE Central, the Community College Cyber Summit, and the National
Convergence Technology Center, as well as through national conferences that
focus on cybersecurity and experiential education. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program, which focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.