* 1901984
* InnovATEBIO National Biotechnology Education Center
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Thomas Tubon, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 7,896,901.00

The InnovATEBIO National Biotechnology Education Center will address the need to
educate highly skilled technicians for the nation's biotechnology workforce.
Toward this goal, InnovATEBIO will provide leadership in biotechnology
technician education, including support for development and sharing of best
practices in biotechnology workforce development. In addition, the Center will
promote local and national economic development of the biotechnology industry
and help accelerate innovation in biotechnology and associated fields. The
Center will focus on biotechnology technician education across the country, with
a specific focus on strengthening the connections between high school and
community college biotechnology programs. It will actively reach out to all
students, including women and students from economically challenged,
underrepresented, first generation college, and/or rural backgrounds. Project
activities will foster collaboration and mentoring to accelerate development of
community college faculty leadership and promote collaboration with industry.
The Center will work with industry to gain recognition for biotechnology
programs and the educational institutions that offer these programs, so that the
entire biotechnology community sees the merits of educational programs and
values them. The evaluation activities of the Center will gather the information
needed to understand the present status of biotechnology education and the
future trends in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To serve the national
biotechnology community, InnovATEBIO will build a diverse network of educators,
students, alumni, and industry partners, including incubators, trade
organizations, and professional societies. These partners will work
synergistically to build or improve technician education programs so that the
programs meet the needs of students, institutions, the biotechnology industry,
and the communities that support them. Through its outreach activities, the
Center will increase knowledge and awareness of the biotechnology field across
all sectors. A major activity of InnovATEBIO will be developing supply chain
hubs that engage high school and community college students to produce and use
the products necessary for an excellent hands-on biotechnology education.
Another activity will develop open educational resources that will be available
at no cost to educators around the country. Training and mentoring of faculty
will ensure these resources are used effectively and broadly. Through these
activities, InnovATEBIO will achieve the following goals: (1) develop a
collaborative infrastructure that supports innovation, and promptly addresses
the changing needs of the biotechnology community; (2) coordinate and leverage
outputs from ATE-funded biotechnology projects; (3) identify opportunities to
generate partnerships and collaborations that accelerate innovation in
biotechnology education; (4) monitor and address emerging biotechnology industry
and technician workforce trends; and (5) develop a regional outreach and
mentoring infrastructure to broadly engage underserved populations in
biotechnology labs and related emerging technologies. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.