* 1901352
* Collaborative Research: Linking sea ice and snow cover changes to Greenland mass balance through stratospheric and tropospheric pathways
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Judah Cohen, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,761.00

Melting of the Greenland ice sheet is already the largest single contributor to
sea level rise, and the rate of melt is accelerating. At the same time, the
Arctic as a whole is experiencing unprecedented changes and setting new records,
including the decline of Arctic sea ice cover, the decline and early snowmelt
onset of Northern Hemisphere snow cover, and an overall warming at a rate more
than double anywhere else on the planet. Studying and understanding the
mechanisms linking the different Arctic components (Greenland, snow cover, and
sea ice in the case of this research) and how, in turn, their changes are
related to and driven by the atmosphere is fundamental to capture the physical
processes driving the changes. This is, indeed, one of the key aspects to
considerably improve our skills in estimating the future evolution of the Arctic
under different warming scenarios and in projecting future sea level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is quantifying the relationships
between sea ice, snow cover, atmospheric circulation changes and mass changes
over the Greenland ice sheet through a combination of observational and modeling
tools. These include in situ observations of sea ice cover and snow extent as
well as remote sensing products and estimates of atmospheric circulation changes
and outputs from climate models. We also use artificial intelligence (e.g.,
neural networks) to examine relationships between climate, atmospheric patterns
and Greenland changes. Ultimately, this research is testing the hypothesis that
atmospheric circulation changes associated with sea ice and snow cover extent
variability control the mass balance of the Greenland ice sheet by modulating
snowfall and surface melting. This research is also providing new insights on
the linkages between the Arctic and mid-latitudes and how sea ice and snow cover
changes might affect weather patterns outside the Arctic, including the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.