* 1901379
* III: Medium: Efficient Collaborative Perception over Controllable Agent Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Amit Roy-Chowdhury, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,232,000.00

Many of today's applications provide data in different formats (e.g., text,
videos) from different kinds of sensors (e.g., tweets, cameras, sensors mounted
on robots). There is work on how to search each source of data separately, but
this misses the hidden connections between the data across the sources. As an
example, in disaster management, collaborative perception would allow searching
for locations where the semantic concepts "fire" or "crowds" may be present, by
jointly analyzing text and image content from social posts, video from
stationary or mobile phone cameras, and the images or videos recorded by UAVs.
This project will study how to jointly search across data sources by mapping the
information coming from all data sources to a common information space. The
project has the potential to increase the utility of social and video
surveillance data for tasks that require situational awareness. In the area of
disaster response, responders will have a more integrated and holistic view of
the situation, so they can better allocate their resources. The project will
capitalize on the student diversity at UC Riverside, which is a Hispanic Serving
Institution, and thus broaden the participation of under-represented groups in
the research process. This project will strengthen and extend the ongoing high
school and college outreach activities of the PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to create the knowledge to facilitate effective and efficient
collaborative perception on top of a set of independent and multi-modal data
generating agents. The project will study how to jointly model social and sensor
data and use this modeling to efficiently support spatio-temporal queries on the
joint embedding space. In addition to mapping information from multi-modal
disparate sources to a common information space, this project will study how to
optimize the attention routing of controllable agents like UAVs to maximize the
reliability and coverage of the collected information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.