* 1901165
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Photonic Neural Network Accelerators for Energy-efficient Heterogeneous Multicore Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ahmed Louri, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Deep learning architectures such as convolutional neural networks and recurrent
neural networks have achieved unprecedented, sometimes super-human accuracy on
many modern applications in artificial intelligence, such as image
classification and speech recognition. Power dissipation is however a major
concern in these energy-hungry machine-learning architectures, and decreasing it
requires designs that provide a more energy-efficient combination of hardware
and machine-learning algorithms. There is an increased emphasis to leverage
parallelism and specialization to improve performance and energy efficiency. To
dramatically reduce power consumption, silicon photonics has been proposed to
improve performance-per-Watt compared to electrical
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages photonic technology
and heterogeneous multicores for the design of deep-neural network accelerators
that improve parallelism, concurrency, energy efficiency and scalability in
various machine-learning applications. The first task of the project is
concerned with the characterization and identification of photonic devices that
can implement accelerator functionalities such as multiply-and-accumulate,
summation, and other arithmetic operations. The characterized devices are then
inserted into single-layer and multi-layer photonic topologies for implementing
accelerator functionality. The second task of the project implements various
types of deep-learning architectures on the proposed photonic neural network
accelerator to maximize the gains offered by the photonic technology. The third
task of the project builds an extensive simulation and modeling infrastructure
that combines the photonic technology, network architectures, accelerator
functionality, and machine-learning algorithms developed in the previous two
steps, in order to validate the significant reduction in energy consumption
enabled by the photonic neural-network accelerator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research bridges a very important gap between photonic technology,
hardware architecture, and machine learning. As such, and due to its cross-
cutting nature, it is expected to have far-reaching impacts on the design of
next-generation multicore architectures. It will foster new research directions
in several areas, spanning computer architecture, optical technology, machine
learning algorithms and applications. The research will also play a major role
in education by integrating discovery with teaching and training. All the
research findings and simulation toolkits will be disseminated to the community
via conference and journal publications, and a dedicated
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.