* 1901517
* CNS Core: Medium: Collaborative Research: Strategies for Large-Scale IPv6
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2022
* USD 837,000.00

The networking research community has invested significant efforts into
measuring adoption, performance, and security aspects of the Internet Protocol
version 6 (IPv6)-addressable Internet, originally designed to replace the
current Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) Internet to meet the relentless
demand for Internet growth and usage. However, IPv6 measurement techniques have
largely mirrored those of the current IPv4 Internet, which can yield
disappointing coverage and efficiency. Many scientific, engineering, and
operational questions require new measurements that explicitly consider unique
properties of the IPv6 protocol, implementations, and operational deployment.
The project goals target comprehensive, pervasive, accurate, and usable
measurement capabilities, focused on IPv6 Internet cartography, and sharing
measurement tools and data with a broad range of scientific
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will rigorously investigate,
develop, and evaluate Strategies for Large-Scale IPv6 Active Mapping (SLAM) that
meet IPv6-specific challenges: measurement strategies that can amplify our
coverage by orders of magnitude; innovations in IPv6-specific algorithms to
infer router-level topologies; and analysis and remediation of resiliency,
security, and privacy risks to critical communications infrastructure.
Operationalizing this capability for use in scientific research will require
refining the technique to support distributed deployment, decouple probing from
response collection, incorporate additional intelligence, and scale efficiency
and performance. Application of the new technique will include an attempt to map
the IPv6 infrastructure of mobile providers, a driver of IPv6 adoption. The
resulting data will help resolve the IPv6 adoption paradox, with a focus on
actual global IPv6 reachability using scientific measurements. This research
will also support persistent operational challenges, including detection of IPv6
route hijacks, and geolocation of IPv6 infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.