* 1901000
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Semantically-Enhanced Dynamic Traceability for Supporting Human-Centric Development Tasks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Davide Falessi, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 67,609.00

Achieving accurate, complete, trustworthy and usable traceability across
software-intensive systems can be extremely beneficial as the underlying network
of traceability links can be used to answer diverse questions about the software
system and its development process. However, in practice, many software projects
suffer from inadequate or inaccurate traceability due to the cost and difficulty
of manually creating and maintaining trace links. This research will develop a
holistic, interactive tracing environment, which incorporates diverse
algorithmic solutions for dynamically generating trace links, visualizing the
results, and guiding the user through the interactive process of using the
results to support diverse Software Engineering tasks. Automating the creation
and maintenance of accurate traceability links offers significant potential for
industrial impact. For example, traceability is required by certifying bodies in
safety-critical domains and can help in the construction and delivery of high
quality, competitive, timely products. The cross-disciplinary nature of the team
will introduce new opportunities for software engineers, data scientists, and
human-computer interaction experts to collaborate in addressing open Software
Engineering challenges and will provide research opportunities for diverse and
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will explore
challenging problems at the intersection of software engineering, semantic text
mining, and visualization. It will directly address one of the prominent causes
of trace-link inaccuracy caused by the inability of current algorithms to reason
over deep semantics of underlying software artifacts such as requirements,
design, and code. First, the researchers will investigate semantically enhanced
traceability algorithms that generate trace links, even in the absence of shared
textual representations. Second, the work will develop a holistic tracing
solution that dynamically configures a trace engine to leverage diverse tracing
techniques such as semantic traceability, trace link evolution, and other
existing techniques. Finally, given a diverse set of trace links with different
degrees of accuracy, the research team will design, develop, and publicly
release a novel, interactive, visual interface that enables users to understand
the provenance and trustworthiness of each link while providing a clear
rationale for trace query results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.