* 1901311
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: SDI-CPR: Sustaining Digital Infrastructure as a Common Pool Resource
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* James Herbsleb, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2024
* USD 847,218.00

This research will provide a strong scientific basis for assessing, monitoring,
and signaling the condition of critical open source software infrastructure with
the aim of enhancing its sustainability. As a society, we rely increasingly on
open source digital infrastructure for Internet connectivity and for products
and services in every sector of the economy. It is crucial that we develop
effective ways of monitoring the state of this infrastructure and find viable
ways to ensure its continued support if we are to avoid disasters caused by
security bugs or data-loss glitches, and to provide a predictable, stable
foundation for the development of software products. It was long thought that
jointly held resources were doomed to serious underinvestment because of the
individually rational yet collectively destructive "tragedy of the commons"
behavior, where resources are overused, under provisioned, and depleted. Running
counter to the many disasters, predicted by theory and played out in the world,
there are also existing communities that successfully sustain jointly held
resources. This research will identify infrastructure and provide signals that
will enable volunteers and companies to take effective action, also showing
potential funders where they are most needed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
conceptual starting point is the framework of common pool resources (CPR) -
economic principles governing how resources that are jointly held can be managed
effectively in order to avoid depletion. This framework will be used as a lens
to understand how open source maintenance effort can be used sustainably. This
integrated program of research will: (1) conduct and use a census of virtually
all open source repositories to identify networks and infrastructure widely
relied upon; (2) develop measures and predictive models indicating when and
where the effort needed to maintain the infrastructure is in short supply; (3)
conduct mixed-method studies of open source ecosystems focused on practices,
norms, rules, and actions influencing infrastructure sustainability; (4) design,
develop, and deploy at limited scale a monitoring capability to signal
infrastructure status to participants; (5) deploy a modeling service that will
allow supporters and users to predict the ripple effects of using or supporting
projects; and (6) assess the impact of the monitoring and signaling deployment
on sustainability practices. The project will make five key research
contributions: (1) extend the CPR framework into the digital realm, where it is
challenged by scale, by the differentiation of the resource (skilled effort),
and by the embedding of the resource in network dependencies; (2) develop
algorithms for identifying infrastructure and its connections to the ecosystem
depending on it; (3) provide a foundation for better decision-making by exposing
fragility and critical lack of resources; and (4) bring to light the variety of
norms, rules, and practices for managing infrastructure effort and how they are
impacted by signals of infrastructure status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.