* 1901258
* Research Initiation Award: Computational Inference of Mechanisms Underlying Double Minute Chromosome Formation
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Matthew Hayes, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2023
* USD 286,925.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Xavier University of Louisiana has potential broader impacts in a
number of areas. The goal of this project is to advance scientific understanding
of double minute chromosomes via the development of novel algorithms. This work
integrates education and research in an exemplary manner and thus promises to
contribute to the newly established Bioinformatics track at the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop,
implement, and evaluate algorithms to 1) accurately discover double minute
chromosomes by integrating standard next-generation sequencing data (sNGS) and
chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C) data, and 2) to predict the most likely
cytogenetic mechanism behind the formation of double minutes. Double minute
chromosomes (DM) are circular acentric fragments of extrachromosomal DNA that
engender the malignancy of cancer by elevating the expression of the oncogenes
and drug resistance genes of tumor cells. The goal will be achieved by
developing a graph-based algorithm to integrate sNGS and Hi-C data to
unambiguously determine the structure of DMs and algorithmically determining the
mechanism that underlies the formation of each double minute. While previous
studies to infer DM mechanisms have largely been performed at the bench, this
project proposes the development of software that will infer these mechanisms
automatically. This will provide essential information for aiding the
development of effective cancer therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.