* 1901797
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Liquid Crystals as a Paradigm for Chirality and Topological Defects
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Charles Rosenblatt, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 502,004.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Chirality is the inability of an object to
coincide with its mirror image, where the left and right hands are perhaps the
best-known example. A topological defect occurs when the system's inherent
"character", scientifically called its "order parameter", cannot be described
uniquely at a point, line, or surface. Both phenomena are pervasive throughout
nature, often are coupled, and are fundamental to central questions in science
and technology. A few examples include chirality in quantum optics,
semiconductor diodes, and biomaterials - DNA is the best known; chirality
transfer, i.e., how chirality can be induced in an otherwise non-chiral
materials; and interactions of multiple topological defects. This project
focuses on chirality and topological defects using liquid crystals as a
paradigm. Because of the long length scales and novel optical properties of
liquid crystals, many of the associated phenomena can be visualized and measured
quantitatively. This permits a general understanding of chirality and
topological defects that would not be possible by studying other
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Owing to their
large optical, electrical, and magnetic anisotropies, liquid crystals are an
ideal test bed for a multitude of phenomena in condensed matter and beyond. The
central theme of this work is to exploit liquid crystals to explore seminal
issues of chirality and topological defects that can impact the broader
scientific enterprise. The PI utilizes his nanoscale techniques to create and
image controlled chirality and defects at surfaces - sometimes in combination.
Projects include: chirality transfer in biologically-relevant chiral
nanocapsules to achieve the Holy Grail, viz., a measure of the chiral induction
length; the creation of chiral multipoles; chiral topological defects, induced
biaxiality, and skyrmions; multistable "rewiring" of line defects; chiral self-
assembled monolayers for nanophotonics and semiconductors; and highly complex
oily and soapy streak liquid crystalline defects. The PI's team employs a
battery of experimental tools, including optical microscopy, confocal
fluorescence microscopy, optical nanotomography, atomic force microscopy, AFM
nanolithography, and ellipsometry. Much of the work is performed in
collaboration with chemist Prof. David Avnir and his colleagues at the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem. By exploiting the PI's ability to create exquisitely
tailored nano-scale chiral and topological defect easy axis patterns, and to
image liquid crystal orientation down to x,y,z dimensions of 50 x 50 x 2 nm,
this work is transforming our conceptions about - and methodology toward -
chirality, defects, how the two can be coupled in anisotropic fluids, and
broader issues in condensed matter. In particular, the PI's work is leading to
the understanding, quantification, and exploitation of induced chirality in
otherwise achiral materials, as well as a deeper knowledge of chiral and achiral
topological defects, their manipulation, and potential applications in optics
and electronics. The issues studied cut across multiple disciplines, as
consequences of chirality and defects appear throughout biology, chemistry,
physics, medicine, pharmacology, and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.