* 1901818
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Sediment and Contaminant Mobilization by Extreme Flooding Associated with Hurricane Florence
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Zhixiong Shen, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 11/30/2020
* USD 12,000.00

High magnitude riverine floods are an increasingly recognized process shaping
landscapes, mobilizing sediment and contaminants and building stratigraphic
records. Tropical cyclones are the dominant mechanism that delivers extreme
precipitation and produces high magnitude riverine flooding. Hurricane Florence
made landfall in North Carolina on Sep 14, 2018 where it stalled and generated
heavy precipitation and historic flooding on rivers across the lower Atlantic
coastal plain. These floods reshaped floodplains and mobilized a range of
contaminants from industries in the region, providing a unique opportunity to
study the geomorphic and environmental effects of an extreme flood. The PIs will
systematically collect sediment deposited by the flood in the lower reaches of
the Pee Dee River system, one of the largest watersheds in the southeastern US,
to investigate the lateral and longitudinal patterns of sediment and associated
contaminant deposition immediately following flooding caused by a landfalling
hurricane. This research will clarify how extreme flood events carry sediments
and contaminants from land to sea, a process affecting the health of people and
ecosystems along the way. Identifying and quantifying contaminant inputs to
Winyah Bay has critical implications for coastal ecosystem management and public
health. Findings will be communicated to local stakeholders and decision makers.
The project will fund a multidisciplinary team that encompasses geoscientists,
environmental scientists, and environmental engineers across a range of career
stages. A diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students from Coastal
Carolina University and Northeastern University will participate in the proposed
activities to gain research experience and develop research activities that can
be built into their academic programs.

Landfalling hurricanes generating riverine flooding hazards on the Atlantic
Coastal Plain affect millions of area residents. This project takes advantage of
a rare extreme flood to observe how this type of event shapes the floodplain of
an alluvial river system and transports sediment and contaminants from land and
point sources to the coastal ocean. The PIs will collect floodwater sediment
samples before other processes remove or erode the flood-born deposits. They
will analyze sediment characteristics, conduct 7Be dating of sediment to confirm
timing of deposition, and measure concentrations of organic (Polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons; PAHs) and trace metal (V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, As, Se, Ag,
Cd, Sn, Hg, Pb, and Bi) contaminants in the floodwater sediments. Like flood and
contaminant research resulting from Hurricane Harvey (2017), the work is highly
relevant and illustrative of the need to track contaminant dispersal as a public
health issue. Using both PAHs and the selected trace metals will provide
stronger source identification for PAH compounds, e.g., run-off from roads,
parking lot sealcoat, or associated with coal combustion. The proposed
activities build on an active NSF project (EAR-1804799) supporting PIs Munoz and
Shen that develops sedimentary records of flooding on alluvial rivers
(paleofloods) by providing a modern analogue of sediment deposition by an
extreme flood. Data will aid in understanding landscape and ecosystem responses
to extreme flooding and improve paleoflood and paleo-tempestological
reconstructions of past storm activity and periodicity in heavily populated
coastal regions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.