* 1901628
* CAREER: RUI: NetDA -- Protein Network-Based Software for Disease Analysis Using Cliques, Bipartite Graphs, and Diffusion Kernels
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Ananda Mondal, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 505,491.00

This project will investigate and analyze the complex phenomena of disease
progression at the protein network level. A software tool, NetDA (Network-based
Disease Analysis) to understand the essential mechanisms of disease progression
as transitions between disease stages will be developed. The outcome of this
study will help not only in early diagnosis of a disease but also in drug design
specific for a disease stage. Undergraduate students will be involved in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process of disease progression will be
analyzed as an event-schedule-like structure, where a) each event representing a
disease stage completed by a group of proteins will be analyzed in terms of
clique and clique-like graphs, b) transfer of signals from one stage to the next
will be analyzed using bipartite and bipartite-like graphs, and c) the strength
of signals will be analyzed using diffusion kernels. The outcome of this study
will help not only in early diagnosis of a disease but also in drug design
specific for a disease stage. The project will integrate research into the
undergraduate curriculum by assigning projects, in courses already developed by
the PI, to solve problems in the proposed work. The project will provide
research experience for undergraduate students using focused short projects
during both academic year and summer. There is also a plan for the project to
provide research experience for middle and high school students. The project
will also develop approaches to introduce K-12 students to programming concepts
as well as bioinformatics with the help of graphics. A summer institute is also
planned to enhance student participation.