* 1901613
* Single Crystal Metal Nanorods by Thermomechanical Nanomolding
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Jan Schroers, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 06/30/2022
* USD 488,308.00

Making very small things is very hard to do. Think of nanoscale devices ??these
are devices that are smaller in size than the width of a human hair (a human
hair is about 80,000 nanometers wide) ? that need to be manufactured in large
numbers, how can it be done?. This project supports research in the mass
manufacture of nanostructures for nanoscale devices and systems though a
manufacturing process known as nanomolding. Molding, at any scale, places a
soft, liquid-like state of a material into a mold to solidify. Crystalline
metals, despite their wide range of potential applications in nano and quantum
devices, are currently unsuited for nanomolding. However, technologies such as
energy, environment, and information hinge on the effective, precise, and
versatile nanofabrication of metals. A recent, potential solution to the limited
nanomoldability of metals is thermomechanical nanomolding and it has been used
to fabricate gold and copper nanorods that are up to a thousand times longer
than their diameter. The process, based on atomic diffusion, enables nanomolding
with essentially all metals and alloys. This project explores the nanomolding
process and its scalability and determines nanomoldability of different classes
of metals and alloys. Technologically, the ability to fabricate very large
surface area nanostructures, such as, high aspect ratio single crystal nanorods,
of a broad range of metals and alloys impacts several technologies, for example,
catalysis, photovoltaics, plasmonics, and tunable material cell interaction for
implants and sensors. Therefore, results from this research benefits national
health, prosperity, and defense, and hence, have a broad impact on U.S. economy
and society. This project exposes students to state-of-the-art nanofabrication
techniques, thus contributing to the training of the next generation of
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
thermomechanical nanomolding process to form an array of high aspect ratio
metallic nanorods over a large area. It studies deformation based on atomic
diffusion as the underlying mechanism. The research involves determining
processing parameters, such as time, temperature and pressure, on the nano-scale
moldability of various metals and alloys, such as FCC and BCC metals and solid-
solution and intermetallic alloys. Metal nanorod arrays are characterized in
terms of their length and length uniformity over macroscopic dimensions.
Furthermore, crystallographic orientation and potential grain boundaries are
identified as a function of processing conditions and mold diameter to explore
possibilities of the formation of single crystal nanorods with preferred
orientation. A theoretical understanding of thermomechanical nanomolding is used
to explore novel nanofabrication methods. These include the potential to add an
additional dimension to nanomolding by using a multi-layered feedstock with
combinations of miscible and immiscible metals. This allows for the possibility
of varying, controlling, and manipulating the crystal structure and composition
within one nanorod over the smallest dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.