* 1901182
* CNS Core: Medium: RF-Based Analytics with Intelligent Backscattering in Passive Tag-to-Tag Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Petar Djuric, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 949,727.00

Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tags have been used to identify tagged
objects when they are interrogated by expensive devices known as RFID readers.
An RFID reader sends an RF signal toward a tag, and by reflecting that signal
the tag transmits information. In this project, the starting assumption is that
RFID tags are enhanced and read the reflected RF signal from another
transmitting tag. The signal reflected by the transmitting tag is either an
ambient RF signal or signal generated by a dedicated inexpensive RF source. This
eliminates the expensive RFID readers from the networks. Intelligence and
collaboration are added to a network of such tags based on a novel method for
estimation of tag-to-tag communication channels. This enables the network to
localize and recognize dynamic events that take place in the proximity of the
tags. The new capabilities of the tags to gather unique environmental data will
unlock a large number of applications in the Internet-of-Things domain which in
turn will bring benefits to society in various forms including improved safety,
comfort, efficiency and better decision making. The team of researchers will
contribute to enhancing the offerings of after-school activities for female high
school students via Stony Brook's Women in Engineering and Science Honors
Program. Further, the team will be engaged with the daily activities of high-
school students through the engineering teaching laboratories in the Electrical
and Computer Engineering department. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal and scope
of the proposed work include the development of autonomous networks of battery-
less, RF-powered tags, which besides performing basic operations such as
localization and tracking, carry out RF sensing and fingerprinting. This is
accomplished by novel techniques for channel measurement based only on passive
backscattering and by processing these measurements to recognize surrounding
activities. The research on this project brings the following contributions: 1)
novel battery-less RF tag architectures that operate with a few microwatts of
available power and that are capable of passive channel estimation and necessary
communication and processing abilities; 2) effective distributed algorithms for
tag selection for channel measurements, information fusion and learning
techniques to obtain the best possible estimates given various constraints; 3)
novel collaborative backscattering techniques that exploit channel estimation;
4) building discrete and integrated circuit versions of the RF tags which will
be used for creating a tag network in the lab and in more realistic smart home
environments for evaluating the proposed techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.