* 1901645
* Processing, interpretation and analysis of the NZ3D seismic data to investigate fault property controls on slow-slip along the Hikurangi megathrust
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Nathan Bangs, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,384,899.00

Interactions between tectonic plates at subduction zones are responsible for
generating the world's largest known earthquakes (magnitudes 8+) as well as
slow-slip events (SSEs). SSEs may take place over days to years, and are not
felt by people. What controls the occurrence of SSEs and how they are related to
large subduction zone earthquakes is not known. At the subduction zone along the
east coast of New Zealand SSEs occur every 1-2 years and many studies have
focused on this region to get a better understanding of SSEs. A 3-dimensional
seismic data set has been collected in a region of SSEs along the New Zealand
margin and this project will process these data to understand the fault systems
and fluid flow systems in the region and the impact of these systems on SSEs.
The results will aid in the assessment of earthquake and tsunami hazards at
subduction zones. The project supports the training of two early career
scientists and a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slow-slip events (SSEs)
involve transient aseismic slips on a fault that last days to years. SSEs have
been observed in a number of subduction zones worldwide, yet the physical
mechanisms that control this type of slip remain poorly understood. At the
Hikurangi margin offshore the east coast of New Zealand, well documented SSEs
recur every 1-2 years at the shallow portion (~2-15 km depth) of the subduction
megathrust. This provides an ideal opportunity to examine the structural and
hydrogeological conditions that contribute to the generation of SSEs through
detailed seismic imaging and seismic attribute measurements. A team of
scientists acquired a 3-D seismic volume within a 14.7 x 60 km survey area on
the northern Hikurangi margin. This 3-D dataset, with complete coverage and
excellent quality, shows great potential to reveal the conditions along the
plate interface and the development of these conditions. The 3-D volume will be
processed with state-of-the-art 3-D pre-stack time and depth migration to image
the highest possible level of structural detail while preserving reflection
characteristics. The data will be analyzed and interpreted to investigate fluid
flow and tectonic development of the margin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.