* 1901028
* Research Initiation Award: Toward understanding the mechanisms for brain activity patterns by modeling networks of multi time- and amplitude-scale dynamical systems.
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Hui Wu, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 04/30/2024
* USD 284,322.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Clark Atlanta University (CAU) has potential broader impacts in a
number of areas. The goal of this project is to advance understanding of the
mechanisms for collective dynamical behaviors in networks of coupled oscillator
systems with multi-time and multi-amplitude scales, and to enhance teaching and
learning at the university by involving African American undergraduate students
in multidisciplinary research activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding
of the dynamical mechanisms is crucial to make sense of experimentally observed
network oscillations, for example, the neural oscillations in the brain. The
proposed research will use theoretical analysis and computational modeling of
networks of time-delay coupled oscillators. It aims to uncover the effects of
time-delayed positive and negative couplings in synchronization; formulate a
generalized theory for the origin of mixed-mode amplitude patterns; and develop
a general network topology for coupled oscillators to mimic brain activity
propagation and stable patterns. The project will integrate research and student
training in applied mathematics by embedding research projects in courses and
training students in advanced analytical and computational skills. This project
will be conducted in collaboration with Georgia State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.