* 1901247
* Shapes of Julia sets, Thurston Sets, and Neural Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Kathryn Lindsey, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 149,820.00

Complex phenomena in a wide range of disciplines ranging from epidemiology to
finance to climatology are modeled by dynamical systems. A dynamical system is a
function from a space to itself. Points in the space represent possible states
of the phenomenon and the function describes how the states evolve over time.
Even relatively simple dynamical systems can exhibit very complicated long-term
behaviors. Properties of the dynamical systems are often reflected in the shapes
of associated mathematical sets. The principal investigator will investigate the
shapes of dynamically defined sets that arise in three different contexts: (1)
self-maps of intervals; (2) holomorphic dynamics, and (3) neural networks. In
addition to advances in the theory of dynamical systems and geometry, results
could lead to new techniques in computer graphics or machine learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three main goals of this project are to: (1) establish
topological and geometrical properties of Thurston sets for various families of
dynamical systems; (2) characterize the shapes of Julia sets of polynomials in
one and several complex variables; (3) describe how network architecture
constrains the decision regions of neural networks. The Thurston set for the
family of superattracting unimodular self-maps of an interval is the closure of
the set of all Galois conjugates of the exponentials of the topological
entropies of all such maps. Plots of this set reveal that it has a rich and
mysterious geometric structure. In previous work, the principal investigator
characterized which subsets of the complex plane are approximable (in a strong
sense) by Julia sets of polynomials. No analogous characterization of the
possible global shapes of basins of attraction of infinity for polynomials in
several complex variables is known, and the principal investigator will work to
extend her techniques to this setting. Similarly, the principal investigator
will investigate topological and geometrical obstructions to approximability by
decision regions of neural networks of fixed network
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.