* 1901026
* CHS: Medium: Improving Information Accessibility with Sign Language First Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jeanne Reis, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,016,590.00

In the United States, American Sign Language (ASL) is the primary language of
many deaf adults, and many deaf students receive classroom instruction in ASL
while learning English as a second language. However, most interactive computing
tools are presented and navigated exclusively in English, even those designed
for deaf audiences. Making access to technology contingent upon a sufficient
command of a second language creates significant barriers and access delays for
deaf individuals. This project takes a human-centered computing approach to
build a foundation that advances understanding of how deaf individuals could
work and learn in environments that are designed with their needs and
preferences at the forefront. It investigates the feasibility and effectiveness
of new SL1 technology, which will provide delivery of signed language (SL)
content by allowing deaf signers to navigate, search, and interact with
technology completely in their first language (L1). The optimization of
SL1-based user interfaces has never before been attempted and could lead to a
breakthrough in historic communication and learning barriers; determining
preferences, needs and optimized presentation of information for Deaf users will
benefit this population and future populations of ASL signers. Technology that
is truly accessible to deaf SL-signers has the power to facilitate lifelong
learning, enhance access to educational content such as STEM topics, improve
career opportunities, and allow SL-based organization of SL corpora,
assessments, dictionaries, learning and employment resources. This work will
directly impact deaf individuals, parents, interpreters, teachers, and students
studying SL. Direct collaboration with deaf graduate and undergraduate students,
deaf faculty, and deaf researchers, along with several partner schools for the
deaf will ensure that the Deaf community has an instrumental leadership role in
the design of future tools that meet their needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because
there are no character-based written forms for signed languages, SL1 technology
requires the development of SL-based user interface components, including menus,
navigation, and search functions. Building on the team's prior work on the ASL
STEM Concept Learning Resource (ASL Clear), and the ASL Assessment Instrument
(ASLAI), this project will explore the viability, benefits, and impacts of sign
language user interfaces, identify design considerations and best practices for
this technology, and identify challenges for the integration of sign language
into interactive systems. A formative study with deaf adults will explore
challenges encountered with existing technology resources, and user needs and
preferences for SL-based tools. Through an iterative and participatory design
process, the team will study and refine appropriate layout, search and
navigation designs in interactive computing contexts, then develop design
guidelines that optimize the experiences of deaf users. The results will
contribute new human-computer interaction techniques, design guidelines for
optimizing technology for deaf users, exposure of barriers and features needing
technical improvement, and empirical evidence and subjective feedback on the
benefits of such interfaces on user task performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.