* 1901426
* HBCU-Excellence in Research: Improved Understanding of the Changing Seasonality and Magnitude of Precipitation Extremes in the Eastern United States
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Bhikhari Tharu, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2024
* USD 598,951.00

Extreme precipitation events pose numerous threats to life and property, thus
characterization of their frequency and magnitude is of both scientific and
societal interest. But such characterization is not easy given that extreme
events are, by definition, rare. For example a "100 year flood" is a flood so
large that it is unlikely to occur more than once a century (formally, it has
less than a one percent chance of happening in any given year). A further
consideration is that extreme precipitation likelihood is affected by the season
and by climate variations such as El Nino events, and also changes over time as
a consequence of global warming. In regions affected by landfalling hurricanes
it is also important to separately assess their contribution to extreme
precipitation, given the many ways in which hurricanes differ from other rain-
bearing storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work performed here uses a variety of
statistical techniques to estimate the frequency and magnitude of extreme
precipitation events over the eastern US. One set of tasks seeks to characterize
the seasonality of extreme precipitation, with the understanding that extreme
event timing is often multimodal and may not align well with pre-defined
seasons. The seasonality of extremes is assessed using a circular density
approach in which the annual cycle is mapped to the unit circle and the timing
of extreme events over the course of the year is represented by an angle-
dependent probability density. A second set of tasks evaluates secular changes
in probability distributions using quantile regression models, and further
investigates the effects of large-scale climate patterns on precipitation
probabilities. Additional work evaluates the impact of hurricanes on statistics
of extreme precipitation in the study domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
broader impacts due to the value of extreme event statistics for anticipating
and mitigating precipitation-related hazards. The PIs have a specific focus on
stormwater management as a transportation issue, and the project includes a
review of standards for stormwater infrastructure design issued by state
departments of transportation. In addition, the project provides paid summer
research training to two undergraduate students who are also funded to attend
the national meeting of the Council on Undergraduate Research. Student mentoring
is also conducted through group meetings, presentations, written feedback, and a
journal club. The project also provides support and training to a postdoctoral
research associate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.