* 1901844
* Quantum Communication Circuits on a CMOS Chip (QC4)
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Yeshaiahu Fainman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2022
* USD 360,000.00

The emergence of Internet of Things increasingly involves transmission of
confidential and secret data such as financial transactions, medical files, and
data related to national security. These applications have increased the need
for privacy and authentication in future data networks. Traditional encryption
tools rely for their security on computational intractability of mathematical
procedures such as factoring large numbers, and are therefore, in principle
vulnerable. This vulnerability is absent in quantum optics technologies that
have been explored during the past few decades. However, in current approaches,
quantum networks exploit the most obvious independent quantum point-to-point
transmission links between different nodes, making scaling up quantum networks
increasingly complicated. Moreover, the technology for quantum networks uses
realizations based on free space optics and/or hybrid systems combining free
space with fiber optics. These approaches, however, do not scale; they are
bulky, and cannot handle the high level of complexity in a network with a large
number of nodes. The vision of this project is to develop quantum communication
circuits on a silicon photonic chip to meet the societal needs of future quantum
networks, exploiting multiple entangled and single-photons carrying qubits.
Specifically, this proposal is focused on the experimental realization and
theoretical analysis of quantum material sources, devices and circuits
manufactured with CMOS technology for scalable quantum secret sharing network.
The proposed research on exploiting multiple energy-entangled and single qubit
carrying photons will enable the construction of next generation quantum
networks with unprecedented impact on cybersecurity. The project will provide
scientific training in quantum optics for students at graduate and undergraduate
levels as well as serve as a platform for outreach, education and collaborative
efforts with middle and high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Technical
description &lt;br/&gt;To meet the needs of next generation quantum networks for
cybersecurity, this project is focused on experimental realization and analysis
of a quantum secret sharing network utilizing nodes capable of generating time-
bin entangled triplets via a down-conversion nonlinear process in the silicon
nitride material platform. The generated multiple photons are used to prepare
high-fidelity heralded single photons, Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger (GHZ) time-
bin entangled states and remote entanglement states in support of a true network
topology in contrast to commonly used two-photon entanglement supporting point-
to-point links. To construct such a network we will develop novel quantum
optical devices and components on a chip exploiting CMOS processes with use of
fabrication foundries. Therefore, the goal of this proposal is to carry out a
comprehensive approach in construction and experimental validation of quantum
communication devices, components and circuits on a CMOS compatible chip for
quantum secret sharing network. The specific objectives include analysis,
design, fabrication, testing and demonstration of (i) generation of triplet
time-bin entangled photons to create high fidelity heralded single photons, (ii)
preparation of GHZ states, (iii) preparation of remote entanglement states on a
chip, (iii) demonstration of quantum detection circuit on a chip, and (iv)
demonstration of quantum relay circuit on a chip. The proposed research is
transformative in nature as it will not only mark the first step toward
integration of inexpensive and compact quantum communication circuits on a chip,
but also offer a route to practical realization of quantum communication network
systems in support of future societal need in cybersecurity. The project will
provide scientific training in quantum optics and quantum communications for
students at graduate and undergraduate levels as well as serve as a basis for
outreach, education and collaborative efforts with middle and high schools.
Engagement of students of diverse ethnicity, gender and economic backgrounds in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) will be continued via
the ongoing RET, REU, and COSMOS activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.