* 1901109
* Excellence in Research: Reconfigurable Supply Chain Network Design and Assembly Planning for Factory-in-a-Box Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Hui Wang, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 348,000.00

This Excellence in Research (EiR) award will contribute to the advancement of
national prosperity and economic welfare by studying efficient operations of
mobile manufacturing facilities. Mobile manufacturing is an emerging paradigm
that allows for production modules to be transported by vehicles to demand
locations, thus reducing both the cost and time of delivery. This paradigm has
been suggested for diverse, specialized applications, including vaccine
manufacturing to respond to spatial disease outbreaks and battlefield or ship-
board spare parts manufacturing to repair damaged equipment. This project
addresses a critical enabling aspect of mobile manufacturing, namely how to
effectively configure the supporting supply chain and assembly process. In this
new paradigm, suppliers will need to deliver to different manufacturing
locations at different times, which may necessitate engaging different suppliers
depending on the mobile manufacturing transport sequence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will build a decision-making framework for
supply chain network design and assembly planning explicitly incorporating the
logistics of materials delivery. The PI will employ optimization methods to
study two subproblems. The first will consider a Machine Scheduling Problem to
schedule raw material delivery to subassemblies at different suppliers. The
second will consider a Vehicle Routing Problem for the assignment of trucks for
transport of the subassemblies from suppliers to the mobile manufacturer. The
PIs will investigate new computational approaches to these difficult
optimization problems. A test platform for production of biological therapeutics
using microfluidic devices will allow undergraduate and graduate students the
opportunity to develop a working hardware and software mobile "factory-in-a-
box". The project will involve development of educational programs in advanced
analytics for engineering systems at the local institution and will provide
advanced education and training for minority graduate students as well as summer
research for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.