* 1901738
* Finding Your Inner Modeler-year 3
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Elizabeth Sztul, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2019
* USD 52,272.00

One of the major problems in Cell Biology is that detailed knowledge of specific
molecular or cellular events is not integrated across time and space, and
investigators lack the understanding of how one event relates to or influences
another to result in the totality of cellular responses. Understanding how a
specific atomic or molecular reaction results in the overall cellular behavior
is extremely difficult by experimentation alone, and computational modeling is
required to significantly advance our understanding. The main goals of the
workshop funded by this award are to promote the discovery of biophysical laws
that govern cellular differentiation and homeostasis by promoting the
interdisciplinary collaborations between experimental cell biologists and
computational modelers. The workshop aims to provide unique opportunities for
cell biologists and computational modelers to work together to develop
predictive understanding of the cell. The workshop also provides a unique
educational experience for researchers who participate. Organizers will work
with professional societies to ensure the recruitment of faculty from
underrepresented groups as well as graduate students and postdocs and other
early career professionals.

This award will provide funding for a 3rd year extension of the extremely
successful "Finding your Inner Modeler (FYIM)" workshops supported by the NSF
MCB Award 1649160 during 2017 and 2018. The vision for the 3rd year workshop is
to use the 2-day format to continue the goals articulated in the original
proposal to: 1) stimulate interest in computational modeling among scientists
currently not using this approach; 2) promote the formation of interdisciplinary
collaborations between cell biologists and computational modelers; and 3)
develop an information and guidance network to provide advice to cell biologists
and computational scientists on how to start a collaboration, who to contact,
and what resources are available to support collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.