* 1901168
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Counterfactual Learning and Evaluation for Interactive Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Thorsten Joachims, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 980,000.00

Many information systems engage with their users through the following loop of
interactions: the system receives a context as input (e.g. query, user profile),
responds with a context-dependent action (e.g. ranking, recommendation, ad), and
then receives some explicit or implicit feedback on the quality of the action
(e.g. star rating, following a search result, clicking on an ad). While
ubiquitous and plentiful, log data from this interaction loop does not fit the
standard mold of supervised learning, since the feedback is both biased and
partial -- the system determines through its actions where it gets feedback, and
even for the chosen actions it typically doesn't observe all feedback (e.g.
missing clicks on relevant results in ranking). This project will address the
question of how this logged data can nevertheless be used for evaluating and
learning new systems. The potential upsides of reusing the existing log data are
evident. For evaluation, the use of historic log data enables engineers to
rapidly evaluate many new systems offline (e.g. new ranking functions,
recommendation policies), without the weeks of delay and the potential negative
impact on user experience implied by online A/B testing. For learning, it
similarly enables offline reuse of existing data instead of slowly collecting
new data through an online learning algorithm. This can greatly speed up the
machine-learning development cycle, since model selection, feature selection,
and eventual quality control can happen offline before any learned policy gets
deployed to the users. Reusing existing log data is particularly important for
small-scale information systems (e.g. scholarly search), where it is often the
only type of potential training data that is readily available in sufficient
quantity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project will lie in
the development of principled machine learning methods that enable information
systems to reliably learn from logs of the partial and biased feedback they
produce. The theoretical basis for the research lies in deep connections to
counterfactual and causal inference, exploiting the analogy between logs and
controlled experiments with actions as treatments and the current system as the
assignment mechanism. The research builds upon recent advances in counterfactual
estimators, answering the question of how a new system would have performed, if
it had been used instead of the system that logged the data. The project will
develop new counterfactual estimators specifically designed for the action
spaces typically encountered in information systems (e.g. rankings), new
propensity models, and new counterfactual policy learning algorithms that
incorporate both. Finally, to validate the real-world effectiveness of the
research, the project will build the Localify system, which provides local
music-event recommendations and personalized
playlists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.