* 1901570
* Support for Workshop and Mentoring of Junior Researchers at the US National Combustion Meeting
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Nicole Labbe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2019
* USD 27,838.00

This award is to support three outreach activities held during the US National
Combustion Meeting, March 24-27, 2019. These activities include an Early Career
Workshop for Combustion Researchers, a Mentoring Mixer, and a Women in
Combustion Luncheon. The goal of these activities is to bring together a
community of early-career combustion researchers and form action committees to
encourage early-career participation in the combustion research community. In
the U.S. nearly 70% of energy conversion is accomplished by combustion. Hence
the advancement in combustion science is crucial to the society. The
participants will further develop four high-priority items, including education
and communities of practice, development of mentorship programs, cross-
disciplinary collaboration and open-source sharing, and public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion is a key technology for power
generation, and this will remain the same for decades to come. However, the
combustion research community is facing various technical and non-technical
challenges. The participants will identify challenges, educate the early-career
researchers about these challenges, and discuss possible solutions. Discussion
around technical issues will include brainstorming of novel, possibly cross-
disciplinary research areas for future work. On the other hand, various non-
technical issues will also be discussed, including mentoring of early-career
faculty members and retention of talented researchers of diverse backgrounds.
Results of the proposed outreach activities are expected to help build a more
productive combustion research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.