* 1901673
* Expanding the Bio-Bench - Targeted Genome Editing
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Richard Norris, St Louis Community College Administrative Center
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 373,371.00

The St. Louis region is home to many agricultural technology industries based on
plant science research. These include both large companies such as Bayer Crop
Sciences (formerly Monsanto) and the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, and
small start-up companies. As basic research in genetics leads to the development
of new technologies across these companies, current and future employees must
learn new skills. Through this project, to address growing industry education
and training needs, St. Louis Community College (STLCC) will develop new courses
in targeted genome editing to enhance its Biotechnology AAS and Certificate
programs. The project will combine academic and industry interests to develop a
set of courses that will meet the high standards needed in a demanding but
fulfilling field. STLCC will collaborate with industry partners in the
development, testing, and refinement of curriculum pertaining to targeted genome
editing. As a result STLCC's 2-year biotechnician graduates will be able to gain
cutting edge training and education, internship, and employment opportunities.
These programmatic improvements will support the region's need for qualified
technicians and extend graduates' employment opportunities to national and
international enterprises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the success of a
previous ATE award, this project will develop a highly technical curriculum,
driven by industry needs, to address the demand for mid-level technicians with
genome editing bench skills, including critical downstream assessment
capabilities to evaluate the success or failure of the intended genomic change.
The development of these courses will benefit new students entering the
Biotechnology program at STLCC and will also be available to incumbent workers
in need of these additional skills to advance in their current positions.
Students and incumbent workers will also gain valuable specialized training on
the equipment obtained through this award. With the support of leaders at all
levels of the region's bioscience industry this academic-business partnership
will ensure the project's skills curriculum, and its implementation, will meet
the needs of researchers and provide highly skilled, technically proficient
graduates. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.