* 1901546
* Excellence in Research: Influence of Neuropeptide Regulation and the Gut Microbiota on Foraging and Food Choice
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Courtney Robinson, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 912,506.00

Microorganisms located in the gut interact and may influence the function of
neurochemical systems that alter behavior in their hosts. The gut microbiota may
communicate with the brain to ensure that food intake and energy expenditure are
adequately maintained by influencing foraging activity/behavior and food
choices. It is possible that the relationship between the gut, its microbial
community and the brain is bidirectional, and one possible neuropeptide system
in the brain that may contribute to this communication is the orexin system. The
orexin system has been associated with many processes, such as activity and
feeding. The goal of this project is to investigate how gut microbiota influence
host fitness after foraging and food choice, orexin system antagonism, and
disturbances of the gut microbiota (via long-term exposure to probiotics or
antibiotics). This project will use a rodent behavioral model to identify males
and females with high or low-preference for a particular diet and then use
pharmacological manipulations of the orexin system to analyze shifts in
structure and diversity of microbial communities as analyzed from fecal and
colon samples. In addition, probiotic and antibiotic administrations will be
employed to examine how these regimens control feeding behavior, affect orexin
neuronal activity, and microbial structure and diversity. These data will
enhance society's understanding of how the brain communicates with microbial
communities and how this interaction can impact fundamental food seeking
behaviors that are required for survival and maintain fundamental homeostatic
processes involved in maintenance of energy balance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delineating the relationship between the
gastrointestinal system, its microbial community, and the brain is critical to
our understanding of the bidirectional communication of the microbiota-gut-brain
axis and signaling pathways that drive foraging behavior and food choice. The
goal of this project is to investigate the ability of gut microbiota to
influence foraging and food choice and determine whether neuropeptide regulation
(via orexins) plays a role in microbial fitness. Orexins are neuropeptides that
regulate energy balance, by increasing food intake and contribute to increased
energy expenditure. Food choice testing and competitive foraging tests will be
used to assess the impact of varying energy-dense diets and sex on feeding
behavior, host fitness, orexin neuronal activity, and microbiome dynamics. It
will also be determined whether microbiome alterations via a panel of probiotics
and antibiotics impacts behavioral, physiological, and/or neurochemical
activity. It is hypothesized that gut microbiota participate in gut-brain
signaling by influencing foraging and food choice and that the orexin system
contributes to the mechanisms that drive these behaviors. In addition to
providing valuable data for the general populace about dietary choices and their
impacts across multiple scales this work will provide research and educational
opportunities for students at an HBCU and help in developing stronger
educational programs at the investigator's home
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.