* 1901096
* Research Initiative Award: Deciphering the Molecular Mechanisms Preceding the Aging Skeletal Muscle Phenotype
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Tyesha Burks, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Bowie
State University seeks to investigate the adult time-point in efforts of
deciphering the biological mechanisms of the aging process. This project will
increase the research capacity of the institution and provide research
experiences for underrepresented minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is centered around the hypothesis that alterations in molecular
mechanisms governing the homeostasis of skeletal muscle occur during the aging
process and contribute to the aging phenotype that develops decades later. It is
hypothesized that adult skeletal muscle will display a unique signaling profile
and phenotype when unchallenged and when challenged with immobilization and
injury, as compared to young and aged counterparts. To decipher the profile upon
challenge, the adult skeletal muscle will be subjected to an injury or
immobilization; microscopy will be utilized to assess the histological phenotype
and Western blots will be employed to determine the signaling mechanisms. To
decipher the profile when unchallenged, mice of various ages ranging from 2- to
12- months will be characterized using in vivo strength tests, microscopy,
Western blots and RNAseq. This study will provide a characterization of
molecular, histological and functional changes that occur during the aging
process. Additionally, it seeks to support the notion that aging is an ongoing
developmental process as opposed to an endpoint phenotype and therefore,
intermediate timepoints are very informative and should be included in age-
related studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.