* 1901894
* RAPID: The response and recovery of adjacent natural and built coastlines impacted by Hurricane Florence
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2020
* Devon Eulie, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 10/31/2020
* USD 48,543.00

The recent passage of the 2018 Hurricane Florence, despite its category 2 status
at landfall, altered the North Carolina coastline by eroding sand resources from
beaches, eroding and over washing protective sand dunes, and inundating both
built and natural back-barrier environments. Unfortunately, this type of impact
from hurricanes is not unique. The same stretch of coastline was affected by
Hurricane Matthew in 2016. The coastlines of Texas, Florida, Georgia, and Puerto
Rico have also recently experienced similar impacts in 2017 due to hurricanes
Harvey, Irma, and Maria, respectively. While still not perfect, over the last
decade, the accuracy of meteorological and oceanographic models has improved.
They can now generally predict the location, strength of maximum winds, and
storm surge elevations associated with such events. The ability to predict
coastal impacts, however, has not improved at the same rate, and operational
models to predict how coastlines change during storms are in their nascent
stages. This is due, in part, to a lack of data documenting the pre- and post-
coastal changes associated with major storm events. For example, beaches and
dunes are constantly changing features, even when there are no storms. Thus,
pre-storm elevation data is often out-of-date and post-storm data may not
reflect the storm-related conditions because it was collected after the start of
restoration activities (e.g., bulldozing sand to clear areas and re-establishing
dune barriers). Pre- and post-storm data of the natural system, therefore, are
vital to increasing our fundamental understanding of the impacts these storms
have on the nation's coastlines. This research program conducts post-Florence
drone aerial mapping on Masonboro Island and Wrightsville Beach, both just south
and/or east of Wilmington, North Carolina where Hurricane Florence made landfall
in September 2018. These surveys will be used to create post-Florence surface
models. These models can be compared with those from identical surveys taken at
the same locations just days prior to the hurricane (Masonboro Island) and from
those taken in the past (Wrightsville Beach). In addition, over wash deposits
will be cored and samples will be taken and examined with respect to grain size
and shelly sub-bottom dwelling organisms to identify indicators of storm wave
strength and off shore seabed erosion. Broader implications of the work are
significant for coastal communities and coastal land/resource managers in terms
of providing input for coastal erosion, overtopping, flooding, and sediment
transport models that are used to determine risk. There will also be
interactions and discussion of results with the US Geological Survey and
managers of the Masonboro Island National Estuarine Research Reserve. There are
plans to incorporate this work and discuss its results with local North Carolina
high school classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will collect post-
Hurricane Florence drone-based imagery surveys and sediment samples of the beach
, dune, and over wash areas of Masonboro Island, a part of the National
Estuarine Research Reserve, in addition to surveying and sampling Wrightsville
Beach, which is a built environment serving the Wilmington NC area. Both
locations have good pre-storm data to which post-storm measurements can be
compared, some of it collected just days prior to Hurricane Florence landfall
(Masonboro Island). Aerial images collected at both location as a result of this
project will be converted to 3D elevation models that reflect the coastal
geomorphology immediately before and after the storm. On Masonboro Island, prior
to the storm, land-based GPS profiles along different regions of the island and
sediment samples were collected. These samples and the sets of pre- and post-
elevation models will be used to quantify changes in the coast in the target
areas resulting from Hurricane Florence. These surveys will be used to document
the magnitude of beach and dune erosion, dune over wash, and back-barrier
sediment deposition. The land surveys will be used to validate the aerial drone-
based digital surface models to better identify elevation change in vegetated or
low-lying areas including thin and diffuse over wash deposits that may not be
captured with required accuracy to detect change. Surface sediment samples and
cores of over wash deposits will be collected in the course of this work along
shore-perpendicular and shore-parallel transects. Grain size and foraminiferal
analysis of surface sediment samples and cores will be used to potentially
determine minimum surge velocities, the depth of wave excavation of the seabed,
over wash sediment volume, and possible sediment sources. The analysis of these
data will link the hydrodynamic processes of the storm with the coastal response
in areas of diverse barrier island landforms and provide baseline data for
future evaluation of post-storm recovery in both built and natural
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.