* 1901680
* Origin and diversification of evolutionary novelties:  insights through the study of beetle horns, insect wings, and bilaterian heads
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Armin Moczek, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 861,412.00

Understanding how novel complex traits such as eyes, feathers, or light-
producing organs originate is a fundamental goal of the biological sciences.
This work will investigate how nature innovates, by using insects as model
organisms, and by assessing the significance of two proposed, alternative routes
to novelty. The first route posits that much innovation is made possible through
the re-use- and re-combination of already existing biological features, from
genes to tissue types to organs, not unlike how the pre-existing building blocks
of Lego creations can be reassembled and recombined to generate novel
structures. The second route in turn emphasizes how novel traits may originate
from scratch, piece by piece over time. Ultimately, the work will contrast the
mechanisms, efficiency, and consequences of innovation via these two routes, and
how they may help us understand why and how life on earth has innovated and
diversified the way it has. This work will also be leveraged to further expand
an existing, highly successful collaboration with a children's museum to train
science teachers in support of Indiana Science Teaching Standards, and to
develop teaching resources for special education and ESL students. Similarly,
this work will be used to enhance the participation of underrepresented
minorities in science through the research team's participation in three award
winning summer programs and the recruitment of minority High School students
into the group for individualized summer research immersion. Lastly, this work
will train at least six scientists in interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How novel, complex traits originate, how they
integrate into preexisting contexts without disruption, and the developmental
properties that facilitate their subsequent diversification, all remain overall
poorly understood. This work utilizes horned beetles, and the disparate routes
of innovation exemplified by different types of horns, to address these
challenges. The first major objective focuses on prothoracic horns, which
preliminary evidence strongly suggests have evolved through the repurposing of
wing serial homologs, and explores how innovation may be facilitated and biased
if it relies on the re-use of preassembled morphological structures, their
developmental underpinnings and gene networks. The outcomes of this effort will
be contrasted to those of the second major objective, which explores how
innovation is enabled and directed in circumstances when large scale exaptation
of pre-existing modules is not an option. This second objective will utilize the
head horns of horned beetles as a focal trait, which lack even remote homology
to other insect structures, and which preliminary data show evolved in the
absence of large scale repurposing. Contrasting the outcomes of both objectives
will afford assessment of the distinctness and commonalities of both routes of
innovation with respect to biases, constraints, and resulting developmental
architectures. This work will be executed using comparative RNAsequencing and
surveys of gene function across multiple species selected based on their
phylogenetic positions and the degree of innovation embodied by their focal
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.