* 1901957
* NextGen Technicians: Addressing Industry Demand for Robotics
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Brian Mason, North Iowa Area Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 299,962.00

This project at North Iowa Area Community College is designed to increase the
number of industrial technicians in the workforce who are skilled in robotics.
Manufacturing is the largest workforce sector in North Iowa. A spring 2018
survey of 30 regional manufacturers confirmed the general need for more
industrial technicians. In addition, respondents indicated a strong need for
technicians with robotics education. Because of the combined issues of too few
workers and the need for technicians with robotics education, employers are
struggling to meet production demands. This project will use strategies to
broaden the pipeline into the courses that will best support the burgeoning need
for robotics-savvy technicians. The region and the college have a high
proportion of first-generation low-income students. Thus, this project's focus
on robotics may help many individuals with financial need move more quickly into
high paying jobs. The project aims to develop educational pathways to broaden
access to robotics education for populations including veterans, high school
dual enrollment students, students on the college campus, and incumbent workers.
This project may provide a model for other community colleges and their industry
partners about how to incorporate advanced robots into manufacturing technician
preparation. As a result, the project has the potential to contribute to
improving the national STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inclusion of
robotics will allow the college to offer instruction in more advanced levels of
industrial technology. An introductory robotics class for Industrial Mechanics
and Maintenance and Industrial Systems Technology students will address industry
need and also support college recruiting, which is key to providing more
industrial technician graduates to regional employers. The course will embed a
newly-developed stackable credential from the National Coalition of
Certification Centers (NC3) and the college will uniquely enhance the credential
by adding lab courses that feature state-of-the-art robots. This project will
enable the college to recruit and educate more industrial technicians, with a
plan to double the number of graduates in the Industrial Mechanics and
Maintenance and Industrial Systems Technology programs and introduce new
robotics training to these students. To these ends, the project focuses on: 1)
adding state-of-the-art robotics equipment and training faculty in the new
robotics technology; 2) training and credentialing all Mechanics and Maintenance
and Industrial Systems Technology students using a new Introduction to Robotics
course that will include hands-on robotics labs and NC3 Level 1: Fundamentals
Robotics coursework and robotics credentialing; 3) creating and implementing
demonstration projects for both educational and recruiting purposes to expand
the pathway into the college Mechanics and Maintenance and Industrial Systems
Technology programs; and 4) training and credentialing incumbent workers using
the Introduction to Robotics course with the NC3 robotics credential. The use of
this curricular model is based on results of previous research and draws on the
experience of closely-related NSF-funded projects. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.