* 1901551
* Conference: Biological Normalcy: A Workshop Investigating Relationships Between Statistical Norms and the Normative: Santa Fe, NM, October 2019
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Andrea Wiley, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 7,400.00

This award provides support for a multi-day workshop to be hosted by the School
for Advanced Research in Santa, FE New Mexico in October 2019. Participants in
the workshop will develop the concept of "biological normalcy" by using a series
of case studies to understand the relationships between statistical norms for,
and normative social views of, biological variation within human populations,
and the broader implications of these relationships. By bringing to light the
normative (and often ethno-biocentric) language used to describe human
biological variation, the goal of the workshop is to expose and reduce bias in
discourse about biological variation and develop new ways of describing it. The
language used to describe human variation has direct relevance to clinical and
public health, where treatments and policies may be aimed at "normalizing"
biological measures that are viewed as "non-normal," deviant, or pathological.
To maximize the impact of this workshop, time during the final phase will be
dedicated to developing dissemination plans for each participant and the group,
with an emphasis on academic, applied, and public outreach that will emphasize
communication and education as well as public engagement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological normalcy serves as a conceptual framework to
better understand and describe human biological variation from a biocultural
perspective. The outcomes of this workshop will advance biocultural research in
anthropology by elaborating this framework, which emphasizes the bidirectional
relationships between biology and culture. Over the past twenty-five years
biocultural anthropologists have learned much about how social or cultural
factors influence biology, but relatively little about how the distribution of
biological traits in a population influence social norms. Using the biological
normalcy framework, the two meanings of normal are untangled, revealing the
relationships between the two, and the ways that ethno-biocentric views may
exist in discourse about human biological variation are exposed. The workshop is
structured as a three day intensive session, with each day having a mix of
individual presentations, group discussion, and small group research.
Participants will focus on the causes and consequences of relationships between
statistical norms and normative views, with each providing material on specific
biological or biobehavioral traits (such as growth, body proportions, sleep,
diet, among others), and investigate the ways that ethno-biocentric views may
exist in discourse about these traits and their variability within and across
populations. Funds support travel costs for a diverse group of participants in
various career stages to and from the School for Advanced Research in Santa Fe,
NM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.