* 1901808
* Building Capacity for Safer Post-disaster Shelter: Leveraging Local Understanding and Advanced Engineering Assessments
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Matthew Koschmann, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 556,442.00

There is an urgent need to improve community capacity to recover more
effectively after disasters through safer design and construction practices. To
foster this community capacity, post-disaster reconstruction programs must both
assist with the construction of safer shelters and enhance local understanding
of safe shelter. Little research currently exists, however, on whether this
assistance actually results in safer shelter and improved community capacity to
build safer shelter. To foster community capacity for safe shelter design and
construction, this project: (1) examines how households perceive the safety of
their shelter, recognizing that these perceptions influence local design and
construction practices; (2) assesses the engineering performance of the post-
disaster shelters in future hazard events; (3) compares perceptions and
engineering assessments to determine what and why discrepancies exist; and (4)
creates a communication design for nongovernmental and governmental
organizations assisting with disaster response that incorporates socio-cultural
understanding to enhance local capacity for safe shelter. By addressing the
complex interactions between humans, disasters, and the built environment in a
multi-hazard approach, this project will reduce vulnerability to future disaster
events, contributing to increased community resilience and improved quality of
life. It also addresses both the humanitarian imperative to build safer shelters
in vulnerable communities, and provide critical information for organizations
and governments, including the U.S. government, in supporting local capacity for
safe shelter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze 15 communities and
reconstruction programs in Puerto Rico (responding to 2017's Hurricane Maria)
and the Philippines (responding to 2013's Typhoon Haiyan and 2017's Ormoc
earthquake) to: (1) assess local understanding of shelter safety in multiple
hazards, including causal factors influencing this understanding, through a
household survey; (2) assess the expected performance of various post-disaster
shelter typologies to quantify safety during future earthquake and wind events
using performance-based engineering methods, developing a rapid screening tool
that can be used in design or evaluation; (3) identify conflicts between
perceived and assessed safety of shelter, and why these conflicts exist, by
comparing engineering assessments with local perceptions; and (4) create a
communication design for organizations assisting with disaster response that
incorporates socio-cultural understanding to address conflicts and create safer
shelter. The work will address both community programs, wherein an organization
designs and builds a common shelter design for all households, and self-
recovery, wherein organizations provide financial and other assistance, but
shelter designs vary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.