* 1901595
* Cohomology and Representations of Finite and Algebraic Groups with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Robert Guralnick, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2024
* USD 314,997.00

This project will involve the study of finite and algebraic groups and in
particular their actions on linear spaces and varieties. Groups are one of the
fundamental tools in mathematics and arise in many areas including analysis,
geometry and number theory as well as in the study of symmetries in chemistry
and physics. The classification of finite simple groups was completed in 2006
and has led to a revolution in using group theory to study other fields. The
classification basically says that the finite simple groups are analogs of the
simple Lie groups and so to understand them, one must study simple Lie and
algebraic groups. The best way to understand and use group theory is to study
the action of groups on different objects. One aspect of this project is to
understand groups acting on Riemann surfaces (and their analog over finite
fields). This will lead to a new fundamental understanding of basic objects
including rational functions and should lead to advances in cryptography and
fundamental problems in number theory. The utility of group theory has also been
greatly expanded due to advances in computation. Another aspect of this project
is to find useful presentations of the finite simple groups which will lead to
more computational efficiency. A third important problem addressed in this
project is to greatly generalize what is called the Tits alternative. This will
lead to results showing the existence (and construction) of expander graphs.
These are graphs that are highly connected relative to the number of edges in
them. This has been of great importance in computer science. Graduate students
will be trained through research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In particular, we plan
to study the problem of producing strongly dense subgroups of semisimple
algebraic groups and proving a generalization of the Tits alternative. This will
give some new results about superstrong approximation in number theory and
results on expander graphs. Earlier results of the PI, with Breuillard, Green,
and Tao, will be generalized using new stronger methods. We also want to prove
the conjecture that every finite simple group has a presentation with two
generators and at most four relations. This should lead to advances in
computational number theory. Deep results in group theory have led to major
advances in basic problems about bijective polynomials over finite fields
(viewed as mappings on a smooth projective curve) and has had applications to
cryptography and solved problems over a century old. Another goal of the project
is to completely classify monodromy groups of coverings of low genus Riemann
surfaces leading to fundamental breakthroughs in number theory and also to
classify monodromy groups of mappings from generic Riemann surfaces (first
studied in Zariski's thesis). Finally, we want to classify generic stabilizers
for simple algebraic groups in irreducible linear representations. This has been
done in characteristic zero but new ideas are required in positive
characteristic. This will have consequences for essential dimension and some
special cases will fit into the program of Bhargava to solve interesting
classification problems of algebraic families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.