* 1901324
* CNS Core: Medium: Thermodynamically-driven design of high capacity, practical DNA-based data storage systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* James Tuck, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,216,000.00

The idea of storing information in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) first arose a few
decades ago. DNA is intriguing as a storage medium due to its high density, long
half-life of over 100 years, and low maintenance costs. There is renewed
interest in DNA as a storage medium due to society's growing demand for large
volumes of permanent data storage. However, it also poses many new challenges.
Unlike electronic media that physically orders its data, DNA strands are stored
in a very small space without any order. This project seeks to understand how
DNA strands can be designed using a thermodynamically-driven
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a set of computational
and physical tools that enable truly extreme-scale DNA storage systems. A key
goal is a set of generalizable design principles for DNA-based storage systems
garnered through a deep fundamental understanding of how DNA sequences translate
into physical interactions derived from a statistical thermodynamic framework.
From this thermodynamic framework, the project will engineer specific data
manipulations to make random access and searching for data more efficient and
create overall effective architectures for DNA storage systems. The tasks of the
project involve exploring, developing models, and testing key thermodynamic
knobs for tuning strand interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If the project is
successful, it may help lay the foundation to make DNA-based storage practical
and affordable. With that, long-term, reliable storage of information may become
more abundant. The project will also train multiple Ph.D. students and
undergraduate students in related areas of synthetic biology and computer
systems engineering. Their training will include interacting with the project
leaders, taking coursework relevant to the project, carrying out research tasks,
writing and critiquing articles for publication, and presenting their work. The
project will also broaden participation in computing through outreach to
underserved communities in the areas around North Carolina State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will be made
available through a public website at http://go.ncsu.edu/dna-storage. The
website and data collected in the project will be available for at least five
years after the end of the project and will remain available until such
provision is no longer practical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.