* 1901618
* The Development Of Agriculture In Mesoamerica
* SBE,BCS
* 07/08/2018,09/30/2020
* Andrew Somerville, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2020
* USD 29,028.00

Corn (Zea mays) is the largest commercial crop in the United States and one of
the most important nutritional resources across the globe. Archaeology is well
positioned to increase our understanding of the factors that led to its
privileged place in the modern global economy and, more generally, to improve
our ability to model the long-term dynamic relationships between maize
agriculture, climate, and socio-economic change. The domestication of corn (or
maize) occurred approximately 9,000 years ago in Mexico, but over 5,000 years
passed from domestication to the development of the first fully-sedentary
agricultural societies. The factors that motivated early Mexican populations to
switch from nomadic lifestyles that incorporated maize seasonally to fully-
sedentary agricultural economies focusing heavily on the grain staple remain
highly contested. Dr. Andrew Somerville and his research teams in Mexico and the
United States will explore the factors that led to the development of incipient
agricultural societies in Mexico and interrogate the role that climatic changes
may have played in this process. Through close collaborations with Mexican
scholars and institutions, the project will strengthen the social infrastructure
for international and interdisciplinary research between the United States and
Mexico, and the results will have broad significance to those interested in the
relationship between agriculture and climatic change, a pressing issue of our
time.

Dr. Somerville and his research teams will analyze the biological collections
excavated from a series of dry cave and floodplain sites in the Tehuacan Valley
of Puebla, Mexico, one of the first centers of the world to adopt maize farming.
The research will use accelerated mass spectrometry dating and stable isotope
analysis of human bones to firmly date the timing of when maize became a
dominant dietary input in the Tehuacan Valley. In addition, a large sample of
ancient and modern faunal bones and plant samples will be analyzed for stable
isotope ratios to contextualize the human paleodiet signal, and to make
inferences regarding changes in the local environment from the Terminal
Pleistocene (~10,000 BC) to the Postclassic Period (~AD 1500). By establishing
the timing and context in which economies of food production emerged in highland
Mexico, this study tests the notion that maize was a fallback food, initially
less desirable than other resources but capable of being intensified during
times of scarcity, and that environmental changes encouraged populations to
exploit this resource with increasing frequency. In this sense, the research
tests the idea that the development of agriculture was an adaptive social
response to environmental change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.