* 1901563
* Hydrogen in the Ultrawide Bandgap Semiconductor beta-Ga203
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Michael Stavola, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 336,700.00

Nontechnical description: Semiconductors with bandgaps larger than those of
gallium nitride and silicon carbide are emerging as a new class of ultra-wide-
bandgap electronic materials for high-power, deep-ultraviolet, and extreme-
environment applications. Despite the tremendous potential of the ultra-wide-
bandgap semiconductors for device applications, with orders of magnitude
improvement over devices made from more conventional semiconductors, the
fundamental underlying mechanisms of their electrical properties are poorly
understood. This project is focused particularly on gallium oxide, a
semiconducting oxide with a bandgap of 4.9 eV, that is an attractive candidate
for high-power devices. In spite of its promising applications, gallium oxide
remains underexplored, and the defects and impurities that affect its electrical
properties remain controversial, opening exciting opportunities for fundamental
research that impacts technology. Hydrogen impurities and their chemical
reactions strongly affect the electronic properties of gallium oxide and are of
particular interest in this project. Experimental studies of defects and
impurities in gallium oxide provide an excellent opportunity for students to
solve important problems in materials physics, igniting excitement that leads to
a successful career in science and engineering. The recruiting of students from
groups that are under-represented in physics is expanded in the present
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This project is focused on
experimental investigation of the hydrogen impurity in gallium oxide, a
semiconducting oxide with an ultra-wide bandgap of 4.9 eV. Hydrogen is an
important impurity in oxide semiconductors where it can give rise to n-type
conductivity and can also compensate deep acceptors. While there are a few
theoretical predictions for the properties of hydrogen in gallium oxide, the
research in this area is in its infancy. Gallium oxide promises to show new
behaviors and to reveal new defect physics. The research involves a
complementary set of experimental methods, aiming to determine how hydrogen
impurities affect the electronic properties of gallium oxide and to test the
theoretical predictions. For example, the combination of vibrational
spectroscopy with free-carrier absorption provides a powerful strategy for
studying hydrogen centers that relates specific defects with the conductivity
they cause. Furthermore, the interactions of hydrogen with other defects such as
gallium vacancy are investigated to probe the passivation of these deep
acceptors by hydrogen. The addition of Raman scattering and photo-thermal
ionization spectroscopies provide access to additional types of hydrogen species
that do not have infrared absorption lines (such as molecular hydrogen) but
that, nonetheless, play an important role in defect reactions that affect the
conductivity of gallium oxide and its thermal stability. The expected outcome of
this research is fundamental understanding of which hydrogen centers are n-type
dopants in gallium oxide and investigates how hydrogen interacts with other
defects that also affect electronic properties. The fundamental science of these
defects and their reactions needs to be understood so that the conductivity of
gallium oxide can be reliably controlled and
engineered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.