* 1901031
* CHS: Large: Collaborative Research: Gender-Inclusive Open Source through Gender-Inclusive Tools
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Anita Sarma, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2024
* USD 966,773.00

This research will investigate whether and how open source software (OSS) tools
and technologies have gender biases tied with diverse problem-solving styles,
and how to remove any such biases that are found. OSS is having a significant
impact on society, in the products it produces and the career paths that it
facilitates. However, women are vastly underrepresented among OSS developers.
This is a significant concern to OSS communities because it prevents them from
receiving the benefits of a larger talent pool and the benefits that ensue from
team diversity. Further, the problem feeds upon itself: women developers then
miss out on the learning and professional growth opportunities that OSS projects
provide, and professional opportunities evade women developers when open source
contributions are used to make hiring decisions, both of which hold them back
from OSS engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will harness foundational
gender research to provide theory-based yet practical solutions, towards
addressing the underrepresentation of women in OSS communities. In Phase 1, the
research will experimentally identify gender biases through the GenderMag
research technique, and cross-validate results empirically. This is an
inspection method for software professionals to use to find gender-bias "bugs"
in their own software, by assessing to what extent their software supports
diverse cognitive styles in terms of five facets: (1) motivations, (2) computer
self-efficacy, (3) risk aversion with technology, (4) information processing
styles, and (5) styles of learning new technology. Starting with each facet
implicated in the bugs identified in Phase 1, the Phase 2 research will derive
redesigns for each facet identified by working closely with the teams. The
redesigns and the process of creating inclusive tools will be empirically
evaluated to create a compendium of "best practices" for fixing gender-bias
bugs, in both products (what suitable fixes are to such bugs) and processes (how
OSS teams can work together to fix gender-bias bugs). Continuous evaluation will
be a critical component throughout, to determine which practices and processes
work and which do not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.