* 1901966
* TRAVEL: Travel to Workshop on Behavioral Risk Modeling for Pandemic Prevention and Response
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2018,03/31/2019
* James Jones, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 2,782.00

This is a Travel Award to enable anthropologist Dr. James Holland Jones
(Stanford University) and a post-doctoral scholar working with Dr. Jones to
participate in a workshop on behavioral risk modeling for pandemic prevention
and response. The workshop is hosted by the National Science and Technology
Council and the Pandemic Prediction and Forecasting Science and Technology
(PPFST) Working Group, at the National Museum of Natural History. The workshop
will address the role of human behavior in pandemic prevention and response.
Understanding human behavior and its consequences for disease transmission
dynamics is essential for effectively developing a national pandemic
preparedness plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human behavior is central to many
aspects of the ecology and evolution of emerging infectious disease (EEID).
Consequently, the contributions of social scientists to work on EEID are
essential. This workshop will provide an opportunity to better integrate
behavioral and social sciences with EEID and pandemic preparedness. Dr. Jones
brings to the workshop a unique constellation of expertise in the behavioral
sciences, social structure, and the ecology and evolutionary biology of
infectious disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.