* 1901466
* CNS Core:Medium:Systems Challenges in Scaling Distributed Intelligent Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Andrew Chien, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,190,975.00

The rapid proliferation of smart edge devices and breakthroughs in machine
learning are poised to change how applications extract insights from sensor
data, creating a new class of Distributed Intelligent Applications (DIAs) that
include video monitoring, autonomous device control, and response for network
cybersecurity. The project explores new analysis, distribution, and resource
management approaches that enable DIAs to employ geographically distributed
architectures, spreading analytics across sensors, edge clusters, and cloud
datacenters. This approach is a major shift from today's approach that
collocates data and analytics in the cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed
Intelligent Applications (DIAs) present fundamental challenges arising from
distribution, bursts and high computational demands, as well as complex
analytics. First, the project will explore systematic approaches that distribute
DIA analysis across sensor, edge, and cloud resources to reduce cost and
increase application quality. Second, the project blends analytics and
communication, enabling new options to optimize capability and cost. Third, to
meet realtime and bursty resource requirements, the project will explore new
resource management approaches for shared, open resource environments that
provide essential application guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will create capabilities that will increase the number and the
capability of DIAs, allowing such applications greater accuracy, timeliness, and
efficiency at lower cost. The project will involve a number of undergraduate and
graduate students, exposing them to real edge computing testbeds, experimental
studies, and exciting applications. These opportunities and impacts will include
course enrichment and undergraduate research opportunities. The project team
will bring novel insights and energy to several large outreach programs to
broaden participation in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
release data and source code generated by the project. Such software artifacts
will be open sourced via github (https://github.com/) or departmental storage
service, for the project period. After the project's end, the team will provide
best-effort support, helping others to use the project results as expertise and
team effort is available. As opportunity arises, we will work with industry
partners to make results and insights even more broadly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.