* 1901877
* Arkansas Delta Information Systems and Cyber Technician Education Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Cindy Grove, Phillips Community College of the University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2023
* USD 268,117.00

There is a growing demand for qualified technicians in information systems
technology and cyber security. In rural areas such as the Arkansas Delta region,
this demand is even stronger because of a severe talent shortage in the
information security workforce. Unfortunately, students pursuing education in
these fields may be underprepared for even introductory courses. As a result,
they need additional tutoring and other academic supports to be successful.
Financial constraints also make it difficult for students to obtain the
necessary resources to complete their degree or other training programs. This
project aims to increase the capacity to prepare information systems and cyber
technicians to enter the workforce. Specifically, Phillips Community College of
the University of Arkansas will implement strategies to increase the quality and
capacity of skilled technicians completing degrees or certificates in the
College's Information Systems program. The project also aims to increase the
quality and capacity of faculty who have the required credentials to teach in
the program. Graduates of the program are expected to help meet the demand in
the job market across the tristate area of Arkansas, Mississippi, and Tennessee.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement activities designed to support
students and faculty. Student recruitment activities include summer workshops,
high school outreach, and lunchtime career information sessions. Student
retention and support activities include tutoring and study groups. Experiential
education, including the use of hands-on experiences and high-tech
virtualization products, will expand and enhance the curriculum by giving
students the opportunity to connect classroom knowledge with real world
experiences. Additional hybrid and online courses will serve students who are
unable to participate in traditional face-to-face classes. Partnerships with
industry will be expanded and an industrial advisory board will help guide the
program and connect students with internship and job opportunities. Finally,
faculty training and certification support will ensure that faculty use the most
effective pedagogy and students acquire the most current content. This project
will strengthen the connections between the college and the community by
providing the opportunity for graduates to secure technician jobs in the area,
fill the employment gap, and become vital members of the community. This project
is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.