* 1901772
* Travel Support of Infrared Terahertz Quantum Workshop 2019, To Be Held in Ojai California, September 15-20 2019
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2019
* Benjamin Williams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

The proposed project seeks financial support for enhancing graduate student and
postdoc participation, at a Workshop to be held from September 15 to 20, 2019 at
Ojai California. The "Infrared Terahertz Quantum Workshop 2019" will focus on a
variety of novel physical phenomena in quantum- and electromagnetically-
engineered photonic materials in the infrared and terahertz frequency range and
the exploitation of these phenomena to create novel optoelectronic devices and
applications. The Workshop will host world-renowned experts from leading
institutions around the world. It will bring together academic, government, and
industry scientists in an intimate venue to encourage close interaction and
collaboration. The workshop will foster advances in the leading research of
physics of inter-subband related low-dimensional systems, Mid-infrared and THz
sources and detectors, collective effects in 2D systems (strong and ultra-strong
coupling), Mid-infrared and THz materials and metamaterials and Mid-infrared and
THz applications. In addition to about sixty technical talks, the organizers
have also planned three plenary talks, ten invited talks. There will also be a
poster session with thirty to fifty posters. A "Focused session" will also take
place during the workshop. The focused session will be on Polaritonics and
Strong Coupling Phenomena. The technical program will provide student
participants with the opportunity to gain exposure to physics of inter-subband
transitions and related devices and their engineering applications. There will
be a vigorous exchange of new ideas on device technology that will benefit to
students and young scholars in their pursuit of high-quality research. The
meeting will promote scientific exchanges and discussions. The "Infrared
Terahertz Quantum Workshop 2019" is expected to play a key role in identifying
new directions for research. Exposing the next generation of researchers to
these important disciplines is critical for learning how the new Infrared
Terahertz Quantum science and technology progresses. Students will gain exposure
to the new advances in this field. will allow international interactions and
collaboration opportunities among the participants. In addition to the
dissemination of scientific information associated with the workshop, the
Workshop website will archive the talks, which will be generally available to a
wide public.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.