* 1901848
* Free Resolutions, K-Theory and dg-Categories
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Mark Walker, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 257,571.00

This research project concerns topics related to commutative and homological
algebra and looks at formal systems of equations. While the rules for
manipulating such equations are the same as the ones learned in high-school
algebra, the general setting in which they are studied yields powerful tools
that put commutative algebra at the heart of much of pure mathematics with
applications to many other areas of study, such as number theory (the study of
properties of the integers) and algebraic geometry (the study of geometric
properties of solutions to systems of polynomial equations). Homological algebra
is the branch of algebra related to the field of algebraic topology (the study
of topological spaces, i.e."shapes"). A central object of study in homological
algebra is that of a complex of modules, which can be thought of an abstraction
of the notion of a topological space ("shape"). One specific goal of this
project is to settle some long-standing conjectures concerning such complexes
and the analogous topological spaces. The award will also support graduate
students working on affiliated topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail,
this research project aims to settle various conjectures concerning bounded
complexes of finite rank free modules over commutative rings, in particular
concerning the possible ranks of the modules appearing in such complexes that
have finite length homology. These topics relate to conjectures of Halperin and
Carlsson concerning free actions of tori and elementary abelian p-groups on
topological spaces. The success of the proposed research on these topics will
thus advance our understanding of homological algebra over commutative rings, of
algebraic topology, and of the interaction of the two. This research also will
pursue several conjectures about smooth and proper dg-categories, focusing on
the example of the dg-category of matrix factorizations associated to a hyper-
surface with an isolated singularity. Smooth and property dg-categories can be
thought of as non-commutative analogues of smooth and proper algebraic
varieties. The success of the goals in this area will advance our understanding
of the non-commutative analogues of well-known conjectures in classical
algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.