* 1901186
* RAPID - Impacts of Hurricane Florence on Coastal and Inner Shelf Environments: Onslow Bay, North Carolina
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2018,09/30/2020
* David Mallinson, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 09/30/2020
* USD 69,466.00

Hurricane Florence was an immense 2018 September storm that caused significant
coastal erosion in North Carolina on the Outer Banks. Rainfall events associated
with the storm caused unprecendented flooding in coastal and inland locations
that impacted sediment delivery to the coastal ocean. In addition, the hurricane
generated a storm surge of 2 to 3 meters. Elevated water levels combined with
the tremendous and sustained wave energy caused substantial erosion to coastal
islands and inlets and likely impacted sediments and the morphology of the
seafloor across the continental shelf. This research project collects time-
critical, ephemeral data consisting of geophysical surveys and sediment coring
in the offshore and back island lagoonal parts of the Bear Island, Onslow Bay,
and Bogue Banks areas. These surveys will be taken in the same location of
surveys and coring done for studies in the same areas prior to the storm to
understand the impacts of Florence on these environments. Goals of the
collection and analysis of the new data are to assess the impact of the storm
on: (1) erosion and sedimentation throughout the region; (2) changes to the sand
resources (location, volume, etc.); (3) changes to the types of microfossils and
sediments in the various environments and; (4) the potential for retaining and
identifying this storm signal in the stratigraphic record. Understanding inner
shelf and coastal processes and their response to high energy storm events like
Hurricane Florence is important for accurately calculating sand volumes for
beach nourishment, understanding where sand goes following such an event, and
forecasting coastal erosion rates in response to sea-level rise and storm
impacts. This will aid in our understanding of the resiliency of sand resources
which are vital for beach nourishment in this region and all along the Outer
Banks of the United States. Broader impacts of the work include graduate and
undergraduate student training and the sharing of data and information with
Hammocks Beach State Park personnel in North Carolina which may aid in
management of the park, as well as other coastal resource managers.

Hurricane Florence severely impacted the coastal region of North Carolina
between Cape Fear and Cape Hatteras in September of 2018 with sustained winds of
50 to 90 mph with gusts exceeding 100 mph. It also generated significant wave
heights of 8 meters with peak periods of 15 to 17 seconds in a generally
microtidal area. The hurricane also caused a storm surge of 2 to 3 meters in
central Onslow Bay, North Carolina that was sustained over several tidal cycles.
With an average inner continental shelf depth of about 15 m in Onslow Bay, these
shallow water waves possessed tremendous energy that greatly influenced erosion,
sediment transport, and deposition on the inner continental shelf, the
shoreface, and barrier island and inlet environments. These impacts were
manifest in a location where substantial geological and geophysical pre-storm
data were recently acquired. These pre-storm data will serve as a baseline for
measurements collected post-Florence in the same areas. Both geophysical
(multibeam bathymetric surveys and CHIRP subbottom data) and sediment
coring/sampling on the inner shelf and shoreface will be collected. Comparison
of the pre- and post-storm results allow assessment of (1) erosion and
sedimentation in the area; (2) changes in the distribution of beach nourishment
sand resources on the inner continental shelf; (3) changes to foraminiferal
assemblages which are important for paleoenvironmental and paleo storm studies;
(4) assessment of the potential for survival and identification of storm signals
in the stratigraphic record.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.