* 1901145
* RCN Build-a-Cell:  An Open Community Considering &amp; Advancing the Construction of Synthetic Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Kate Adamala, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,243,115.00

Cells are the fundamental "building blocks" that make up living organisms.
However, we don't know exactly how cells were formed in the first place. We also
don't know what all the molecules that make up any natural cell do. Finally, we
still can't put molecules together ourselves to make a new, synthetic, cell.
Addressing the questions and challenges posed above requires significant
collaboration and cooperation. The Build-a-Cell Research Collaboration Network
will facilitate studies on understanding and engineering a diverse range of
synthetic cells. The future of biotechnology is in realizing fully-understood,
lineage-agnostic organisms, beginning with a single cell. The Build-a-Cell
network will integrate existing knowledge about engineering various aspects of
biological systems, with the ultimate goal of facilitating construction of
living cell from non-living components. Learning how to engineer a living cell
from a set of well-understood parts will provide a leap in our understanding of
life, and it will result in novel technologies beneficial for the scientific
community and society. The skills and tools necessary to build a living cell
from scratch will be useful in studying existing biology, while our
understanding of life will be significantly improved by the ability to engineer
living systems from known, defined parts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Engineering a
live cell will require close collaboration between teams with a wide array of
different skill sets and capabilities. This network provides a formalized
structure for collaboration between individual labs, bridging geographical and
disciplinary divides. The network will host two workshops a year, to allow for
intensive interactions between members, creation of new research collaborations,
and exchange of ideas and unpublished results. We will facilitate meetings with
researchers from other fields, who could either use technologies developed by
the synthetic cell community, or provide us with tools from their own fields.
This will be done by organizing tutorials and workshops during biology,
biochemistry and bioengineering meetings. Other activities of the network will
include outreach to the general public via popular science articles, social
media presence, and outreach to meetings organized for and attended by minority
students. Working groups of network members will create open access tutorials,
including crowd-tested protocols for use of various synthetic cell-related
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.