* 1901721
* Protecting Soft Targets against Lone Actor Attacks using Game Theory and Immersive Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Melike Baykal-Gursoy, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 325,000.00

This project examines terrorist attacks by individuals who are outside of an
organized terrorist group (lone actor attackers) that target public spaces like
train stations (soft targets). Such attacks have increased 134 percent in the
last 20 years, yet lone actor attack-defend models have not kept up with the
trend. The project will develop new models based on game-theory to understand
attack and defense strategies combined with immersive simulations that can
validate the theoretical models. The project team has expertise in the fields of
operations research, industrial and systems engineering, psychology, and
electrical and computer engineering. Implementation of this work will contribute
to the national priority to reduce risk to critical infrastructures and their
users. Furthermore, it will provide advanced training in game-theoretic models
for undergraduate and graduate students. This scientific research contribution
thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to advance
our national welfare. In this case, the benefits will be insights to improve
man-made emergency management, which can save lives in future
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the gaps in current
understanding of lone actor attacks to guide the development of new innovative
defense strategies. Specific research objectives are: 1) to develop and analyze
game-theoretic models of attack and defense strategies, and protection
algorithms, to be used by the defenders against lone actor attackers; 2) to
design immersive simulations to provide descriptive agents' behavior and to
validate the game-theoretic models using risk metrics such as expected damage,
and the fraction of unsuccessful attacks. The intellectual merit of this
research is the broadening of the knowledge base of game theory with incomplete
information, multi-agent (attacker and defender) learning, and stochastic games
of partially observable systems. This is transformational research since it
brings a fresh vision into the risk management, immersive simulations,
statistical learning and normative behavior studies for infrastructure security.
The anticipated results of this research are both analytical and practical for
emergency management agencies, transportation safety officers, and the
police.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.