* 1901120
* International Conference on Equivariant Topology and Derived Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Paul Goerss, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 03/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports the travel and local expenses of early-career US-based
mathematicians attending the international conference "Equivariant Topology and
Derived Algebra (ETDA)" to be held from July 29 to August 2, 2019 at the
Norwegian University of Science and Technology in Trondheim. These mathematical
research areas have seen a dramatic expansion in recent years and have attracted
increased interest at an international level, especially amongst young
researchers, who are taking these fields in new directions. The direct impact of
this funding will be to augment the training and career development of
approximately twenty junior US researchers, who will gain the opportunity to
participate in a major conference in Europe. A secondary impact is to further
develop collaboration between emerging research groups in algebraic topology,
derived algebra, and derived algebraic geometry in the US and Europe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference topics are centered on the areas of
equivariant stable homotopy theory, derived commutative algebra, and derived
algebraic geometry. The conference program features invited talks on all three
areas by leading researchers and time for contributed talks, with a focus on
young researchers. The conference will be an ideal venue for results and new
questions arising from recent research progress to be announced and discussed.
It will also provide a place to reinforce the networks of connections between
mathematicians and add junior researchers as new nodes. Moreover, the particular
topic of equivariant symmetric monoidal structures, together with the derived
algebra that realizes those structures, is experiencing rapid development and
will be a focal point of the conference talks. The conference website is:
https://sites.google.com/view/etda2019/home&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.