* 1901098
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: HUGS: Human-Guided Software Testing and Analysis for Scalable Bug Detection and Repair
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Tevfik Bultan, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 415,987.00

As all aspects of human society increasingly rely on software systems, there is
an urgent need for scalable techniques and tools that can detect and eliminate
software bugs effectively. In the last decade, hybrid approaches that combine
software analysis techniques of different strengths have resulted in powerful
tools for automated software testing and repair. However, despite the
significant progress that has been made so far, fully automated techniques often
fail to scale in practice. The key strength of automated techniques is their
ability to quickly analyze many program behaviors by performing repetitive,
computational tasks at a rate far beyond the human attention span and
computation speed. However, they do not know how to intelligently navigate
complex state spaces, which often requires contextual and common-sense reasoning
that humans excel at. The goal of this project is to combine the strengths of
human ingenuity and automated tools in order to achieve bug and vulnerability
detection and repair at scale, while keeping the human intervention at a
minimum. All the techniques developed within the context of this project will be
transitionable to scalable software testing products by industry and government,
leading to better software dependability in all application domains, including
critical national infrastructures. The project will also seek to broaden
participation in computing by training students from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop human-guided hybrid
techniques that combine fuzz testing, symbolic execution, and search strategies
that will aim to optimize the search towards efficient and scalable bug
detection; annotations for controlling the search and for pruning the search
space; input generation techniques and human-guided value generation; and
automated and semi-automated synthesis of repairs. All these techniques will be
integrated into open-source tools targeting multiple programming languages. To
minimize the human effort, the framework will incorporate self-monitoring
mechanisms to detect when the automatic analysis fails, which will provide
detailed feedback to the developers to remedy the problem. This will result in
an interactive testing and analysis process that leverages human input in a
principled way to best guide the automated techniques, resulting in scalable bug
detection and software repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.