* 1902352
* CDS&amp;E: Simulation- and Data-driven Search for Cross-dimensional Materials Interfaces to Enhance Heat Transfer
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Eric Polizzi, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems Division
jointly fund this award, which supports theoretical and computational research
and education on the properties of thin two-dimensional (2D) materials. With the
rise of nanotechnology, reliable quantum simulations to supplement experimental
investigations of emerging materials are becoming increasingly important: they
accelerate the development of quantum technologies and their impacts to the
global economy. The project addresses critical issues surrounding heat
dissipation from hot spots in next-generation electronics based on 2D materials.
Thermal management is important for cooling dense nanoelectronic circuits built
from 2D materials in order to maintain optimal performance. With further
reduction in device size and dimensionality, a crucial bottleneck for heat
removal in 2D-based devices is the thermal pathway from the 2D layer into the 3D
substrate supporting it. In order to achieve reliable device performance, it is
imperative that the thermal resistance between 2D materials and various
substrates be well characterized and that new solutions for boosting heat
transfer are discovered. Since heat is transmitted via vibrations of the atomic
lattice, understanding the unique vibrational properties of 2D materials will
complement existing electronics applications and enable better performance
through efficient thermal management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will develop, validate, and openly share a platform of computational simulation
tools as well as materials-property data sets for the thermal boundary
conductance between many 2D materials and 3D substrates combinations. In
addition, the PIs will train and mentor students through a multidisciplinary
program covering materials science, computing, and engineering, and will present
summer outreach activities on thermoelectric energy conversion to high-school
students through the Summer Engineering Institute at the University of
Massachusetts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems Division jointly
fund this award, which supports theoretical and computational research and
education on the properties of thin two-dimensional (2D) materials.
Comprehensive and predictive first-principles modeling is required to gain a
more complete understanding of the transfer of energy across interfaces between
materials of dissimilar dimensionality, in order to guide the design of a broad
range of next-generation thermal-management materials. The proposed work will
develop simulation tools and data sets for the transfer of thermal energy at
nanostructured cross-dimensional interfaces between atomic mono- and few-layer
two-dimensional materials and three-dimensional substrates. The research team
will develop and validate a suite of predictive numerical simulation tools for
capturing the vibrational degrees of freedom, grounded in the fundamental theory
behind the transfer of thermal energy at nanostructured interfaces. The PIs will
perform state-of-the-art density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent DFT
calculations of electronic and vibrational structure of 2D-3D interfaces,
coupled with Monte Carlo simulation of phonon transport across the
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will deepen our understanding of the
role of interface structure, composition, and dimensionality on the vibrational
properties and phonon transport, and identify ways to improve it. These
contributions will enable wider adoption of 2D materials in nanoelectronic
devices and sensing applications, which are currently hampered by our limited
understanding of how to systematically improve the heat management at interfaces
between 2D materials and their 3D substrates/environment. The results will
enable better thermal interface pairing, utilizing combinations of atomic
monolayers with selected vibrational properties and composition tuned to match
the surface vibrational modes of the substrate and to maximize thermal boundary
conductance for thermal management applications. The PIs will propose ways to
further improve the thermal boundary conductance by patterning of coating the
surface of the substrate with thin films or low-dimensional nanostructures in
order to better match the vibrational modes of the 2D layer and thus improve
heat transfer. Publicly shared datasets will enable device designers to select
2D-3D materials combinations with specific interfacial properties needed for
their applications, such as for heat removal from nanoelectronic devices and
sensors built out of 2D materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
develop, validate, and openly share a platform of computational simulation tools
as well as materials-property data sets for the thermal boundary conductance
between many 2D materials and 3D substrates combinations. In addition, the PIs
will train and mentor students through a multidisciplinary program covering
materials science, computing, and engineering, and will present summer outreach
activities on thermoelectric energy conversion to high-school students through
the Summer Engineering Institute at the University of
Massachusetts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.