* 1902466
* Developing Certificates in Technical Art &amp; Photogrammetry and Technical Animation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Cynthia Foster, Wake Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 03/31/2023
* USD 505,103.00

This award will support development of certificate programs in Technical Art
&amp; Photogrammetry and in Technical Animation. The project goal is to train
technicians who have the critical knowledge and skills in art and programming
that are needed for the design and development of realistic simulations for
virtual and augmented reality. The project has significant industry involvement
to ensure that both faculty and students gain industry-relevant experience, and
to ensure that students who earn the certificates are fully prepared to enter
the workforce. The project addresses the need to develop technicians with the
ability to produce the sophisticated user interfaces, simulations, and training
systems demanded by the future of work in a broad array of fields, including
education, medicine, law enforcement, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has six objectives. First, it will use a "developing a curriculum"
(DACUM)-based process to create rigorous, project-based courses in operation,
utilization, and programming using highly-technical hardware and software.
Second, it will place faculty in industry externships to improve and update
their skills and abilities, allowing them to share real-world experience with
students. Third, four new courses will be created as part of two new certificate
programs. The certificates will incorporate components such as work-based
learning/job shadowing, industry tours, and employability-skills practice
throughout the program. Fourth, the project will create a training studio for
motion capture and photogrammetry. The studio will incorporate multiple
stationary cameras around a moving object covered in data-capturing "dots" to
convert data into 3D animations. It will also use data from multiple 2-D
photographs of a stationary object at different angles to create three-
dimensional output. This studio will provide students with hands-on, industry-
valued skills and experience. Fifth, the project will increase diversity across
the entire program through targeted, evidence-based practices aimed at
recruiting and retaining higher percentages of students from populations, such
as women and veterans, that are under-represented in STEM technical fields.
Sixth, the project will utilize external formative and summative evaluation to
monitor project success and make iterative programmatic improvements.
Descriptive statistics and inferential statistics will be utilized as a part of
the evaluation. Data will be collected and analyzed to determine annually
whether the stated outcomes have been met. In addition, the evaluation and
project teams will provide annual reports on relevant quantitative measures of
project success based upon enrollment, certificate completion, industry
placement, degrees earned, and pass rates for the four new courses. The project
estimates that more than 200 students will enroll in the four new courses over
the course of the project. Additional students will benefit from the increased
industry involvement in technician education programs, including studio tours,
mock interviews, and portfolio presentations. This project is funded by NSF's
Advanced Technological Education program, which focuses on the education of
technicians for the high-technology fields that drive our nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.