* 1902274
* Level Structures on K3 Surfaces, and Constrained Rational Points on Log Fano Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Anthony Varilly-Alvarado, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 360,000.00

At heart, arithmetic geometry is a subject that aims to understand systems of
polynomial equations in many variables, with the constraint that the coordinates
of the solutions be rational numbers or integers. A system of polynomial
equations has a geometric avatar, called an algebraic variety. The mantra of
arithmetic geometry is that geometric properties of an algebraic variety, like
curvature, bear strongly on the types and the structure of solutions to the
underlying system of polynomial equations. The PI studies systems of polynomial
equations whose algebraic varieties are surfaces, i.e., they are two-
dimensional. Algebraic surfaces are classified into four rough phyla. Within
this classification, the PI studies the class of K3 surfaces, within a phylum of
"intermediate complexity." Our knowledge of the geometry of K3 surfaces is ripe
enough now for a meaningful study of the rational points they harbor. The
projects supported by this award aim to answer questions like: given a set of
polynomial equation that define a K3 surface, is there an algorithm that will
determine whether the system of equations has solutions? If so, can this
algorithm be implemented?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;K3 surfaces have a rich and
structured geometry; their arithmetic is subtle, yet conceivably tractable. A
host of conjectures in the last 10 years point to a surprising expectation:
given equations for a K3 surface over a number field, there should be an
algorithm that detects whether the surface caries rational points. Many of the
projects are designed to either provide evidence towards this expectation, or to
give practical methods for detecting the existence of rational points on K3
surfaces. Proposed projects include a detailed study of moduli spaces of K3
surfaces with Brauer group level structures, as well as a type of inverse Galois
problem to study the possible algebraic Brauer groups of K3 surfaces. The PI
also proposes to study a class of orbifold points on algebraic varieties that
interpolate between rational points and integral points, and to do so in a
uniform way, so as to develop a better understanding of when treatments of these
two types of points must be separated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.