* 1902551
* Integrating Software and Machine-Lab Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* BRIAN MAITLAND, Pittsburgh Technical Institute
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 297,712.00

The Integrating Software and Machine-Lab Instruction project will address the
increasing local, regional, and national demand for workers in the manufacturing
sector, specifically the need for manufacturing and civil engineering
technicians and CNC machine tool programmers. Many of the efforts in higher
education that contribute to the skilled manufacturing workforce focus on
preparing engineers, with less attention paid to educating the technicians who
facilitate the work of engineers. This project will fill that gap by
establishing a pathway for high school students to continue a technical
education after graduation. The project will address the curricular disconnect
between high school and college manufacturing classes, the need for software-
based training for high school students, and the need for manufacturing workers
to be trained in software-based skills relevant to manufacturing environments.
The project will also establish a model for collaboration between high schools
and community colleges, whereby faculty at the latter offer college courses on-
site at the former. The project management team will promote that collaboration
so that other institutions might consider similar partnerships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to increase the number of
students who matriculate from high school into the computer-aided drafting
program, prepare students for the evolving technical workforce, and model how
industrial partners contribute to the learning process. Toward these ends,
Pittsburgh Technical College (PTC) will partner with Montour High School in the
Pittsburgh area. The project will enhance the ability of Montour to deliver
technical education to students by providing trained PTC instructors who will
mentor Montour students toward completion of extracurricular, manufacturing-
based projects as part of an after-school program and extend the existing
partnership between PTC and Montour to allow PTC faculty to offer software
design courses for concurrent credit to both Montour and PTC students in the
state-of-the-art manufacturing laboratories on-site at Montour High School. PTC
faculty will also organize and offer workshops for high school teachers in the
Pittsburgh area to develop skills working with manufacturing software (such as
Inventor and SolidWorks). Additionally, this project will provide professional
development training to enable PTC faculty to integrate additional lab-based
instruction into PTC courses, support the revision of existing curricula to
incorporate the use of new machinery, strengthen partnerships with industry by
enhancing the existing CAD Advisory Board and increasing internship
opportunities for PTC students, and support the implementation of an annual
workforce needs assessment for the Pittsburgh area. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.