* 1902644
* Collaborative Research: ECCS-EPSRC: Development of uniform, low power, high density resistive memory by vertical interface and defect design
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Haiyan Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Non-volatile memory is critical for all aspects of modern computing, as well as
for next generation of digital technologies like the Internet of Things and
neuromorphic computing. Among non-volatile memory technologies, resistive random
access memory based on metal oxide films as resistive switching layers has the
potential for high-speed, low operation voltage, low power consumption, and good
endurance properties that enable the highest performance at the lowest cost.
However, metal oxide resistive random access memory also faces some critical
challenges such as the unpredictable forming process. Another challenge is the
variable resistive states from one film to another and from one point to another
across each film. The collaborative project between the US team (Univ. at
Buffalo and Purdue) and the UK team (Univ. of Cambridge) will develop a highly
innovative, scalable, and advanced materials technology to overcome the current
technical limitations of emerging resistive memory. The materials platform is
HfO2, a widely used material in the semiconductor industry. Unlike previous work
on this material, the current project will precisely engineer HfO2
microstructures in new ways to create highly controlled switching properties.
The broader technological impacts are built on established industry
collaborations. The research program is well integrated with education and
outreach programs at all three campuses, including: 1) training young
researchers with multidisciplinary research skills in an international research
environment; 2) implementing resistive memory concepts in materials science and
engineering curricula through teaching; 3) disseminating research findings to
broader audiences through outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
commonly-used metal/metal oxide/metal structures for resistive random access
memory have conduction filaments that are nucleated randomly, the design in this
project incorporates engineered vertical interfaces in either vertically aligned
nanocomposite or fine-grained columnar structures to guide the conduction
channels. These pre-defined interfaces enable the formation of precise and non-
random vertical conducting paths with high densities for high performance
resistive random access memory, without the need for a high voltage forming
process. This project advances knowledge by combining well-integrated
capabilities to synthesize, characterize, design, and fabricate resistive random
access memory devices with targeted properties and performance. Specifically, it
will translate the ideal engineered materials systems which has been already
demonstrated by this team in epitaxial nanocomposites to simple binary oxides
such as HfO2 on Si. These films will be initially grown by pulsed laser
deposition. The knowledge learned from the films grown by pulsed laser
deposition will be then implemented to industrial tools of sputtering and atomic
layer deposition to achieve nanoengineered HfO2-based films with ~few nm sized
columnar-grains. Finally, individual memristors and crossbar array structures
will be fabricated, and the key parameters of the devices characterized.
Furthermore, a set of unique characterization tools will be used to reveal the
interplay between the device performance and the materials properties. The
ultimate goal of the project is to develop a forming-free, highly uniform, high
density, low power, high on/off ratio, superior endurance resistive memory
through the formation of controlled oxygen vacancy concentration and perfect
conducting channels in resistive switching metal oxide
layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.