* 1902379
* Implementing the Mechanisms to Lessen the Talent Gap in Advanced Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Eric Albert, Pennsylvania College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 10/31/2022
* USD 685,297.00

This project seeks to increase the number of qualified workers in advanced
manufacturing. First, to combat the growing skills gap between the entry-level
workforce and graduates of secondary school and community colleges, the project
will develop a one-year certificate program in Computer Numerical Control.
Second, project staff will deliver educational symposiums to high school
students and teachers to help dispel the myths of manufacturing as a non-
technical career path. These activities are expected to increase the pipeline of
trained precision machinists who can tackle the growing technologically complex
realities of today's manufacturing environment. Meeting this demand will help
U.S. manufacturing companies remain competitive in a global environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will benefit individuals by developing
educational opportunities that lead to a skilled technical workforce. The
project will provide evidence to the manufacturing industry on strategies that
can be successful in dispelling common myths in advanced manufacturing. The
project will feature five principal activities. First is attention to curriculum
development, course revisions, and alignment between the CNC certificate, AAS
programs in Machine Tool Technology and Automated Manufacturing Technology, and
industry needs. Second is a focus on high-level equipment acquisition in the
areas of multi-axis machining, coordinate measuring machines, and additive
manufacturing. Third is provision of professional development/faculty training
on new equipment. Fourth is the examination of apprenticeship programs to
facilitate the awarding of college credit where appropriate. Fifth is a
commitment to recruitment activities that focus on high school teachers,
guidance counselors, high school students, incumbent workers, and returning
adults. A research study will create new knowledge regarding the effectiveness
of teacher externships and a student symposium on changing participant
perceptions of the field. The project evaluation will examine the effectiveness
and impact of Penn College's industry relationships, curriculum development, use
of new equipment, and recruitment activities. The project will also evaluate the
alignment of the intended learning outcomes with the needs of students and
employers. The primary audiences for project activities are certificate-level
and associate degree-level community college students; high school teachers,
guidance counselors, and students; and community college faculty. This project
is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.