* 1902375
* Improving Mechatronics Technician Training for the Advanced Manufacturing Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Marcella Gale, Central Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 276,861.00

The Central Workforce Region of Virginia is experiencing a shortage of
adequately trained manufacturing technicians due to the growing demand for
workers coupled with growing rate of retirements. This region is also
exceptional in that local manufacturers employ Rockwell Automation-based systems
at a higher rate than nearby regions. Through this project, Central Virginia
Community College (CVCC) will increase the rigor and competencies of
manufacturing technician education in mechatronics with an emphasis on
programmable logic controllers (PLCs). This project will focus on augmenting the
Mechatronics AAS degree program at CVCC with Rockwell Automation PLC Maintainer
Certifications. These certifications are industry recognized and valued by
employers. Through targeted outreach, the mechatronics program will work closely
with regional secondary school systems and local advanced manufacturing
industries to provide middle-school students with the opportunity to directly
experience mechatronics and advanced manufacturing. This will build a pipeline
to the college to develop and train the workers needed to sustain and grow the
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support mechatronics technician
training for the growing advanced manufacturing industry by 1) enhancing course
content and technical experiences for students, 2) providing comprehensive
professional development for technician educators, and 3) developing educational
pathways to support student recruitment, retention, and completion from middle
school to college. New equipment and revised courses will strengthen the
students' career pathway from the career studies certificate to the associate
degree and into the workforce. Faculty will receive professional development in
areas that directly impact technician education by providing the training
necessary to offer certification testing on the purchased training equipment.
Industry employers will engage with the program and its students in an
integrated advisory role. Middle school students and college students will be
engaged in collaborative learning opportunities to attract new talent and
sustain the mechatronics technician pipeline through summer camp opportunities
and joint problem-based learning projects. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.