* 1902797
* SG:  Fossils, fruits, and seeds: an integrative approach to estimating a timetree for the nightshades
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Stacey Smith, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2023
* USD 249,536.00

Reconstructing the timing of evolutionary events, from the invasion of land to
the origin of flowers, relies on evidence from the fossil record. For many
groups of organisms, available fossils are scant or poorly described, resulting
in uncertainty about when major evolutionary transitions occurred. This project
will expand knowledge about the fossil record and estimate an evolutionary
timeline for a large and economically important plant group, the nightshades.
This family of nearly 3000 species includes many crops, such as tomato, potato,
and tobacco, and yet is represented in the fossil record by only a handful of
described specimens. The researchers will survey putative nightshade fossils and
use morphological and statistical analyses to determine their placement in the
evolutionary history of the family. In the process, the researchers will be able
to estimate the timing of major evolutionary changes, such as the origin of
fleshy fruits and whole genome duplications. Understanding this evolutionary
history is fundamental for crop improvement, which relies on the morphological
and genetic variation accumulated through diversification over millions of
years. This project incorporates a range of training opportunities for early-
career researchers, and the results of the research will be widely disseminated
through public data repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Divergence times across
the nightshades (Solanaceae) will be estimated through three specific aims.
First, the researchers will revise all fossil records from the family and score
a suite of discrete and continuous characters using traditional and newly
developed techniques, including variable pressure scanning electron microscopy
and x-ray microcomputed tomography. Second, a matching morphological dataset
will be created for the roughly 1600 extant species with available molecular
data from previous phylogenetic analyses. Finally, Bayesian total-evidence
methods will be used to jointly estimate relationships among extant and extinct
species and divergence times across the family. This integrative project will be
carried out by a team of botanists, paleontologists, imaging specialists, and
methods developers. In addition to estimating a robust timeline for Solanaceae,
the project will expand knowledge of the plant fossil record, support training
of undergraduate and graduate students and a post-doctoral researcher, as well
as strengthen international scientific infrastructure and
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.