* 1902337
* The Corrosion Technology Expansion Project
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Chris Hickman, Seward County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 295,161.00

Seward County Community College will expand its current Corrosion Technology
(CT) program into an online instructional mode that increases access to CT
courses for two-year college students and industry workers needing a
certification or a degree. This will fill the need of industry for qualified CT
workers and build a career-ready workforce in this important sector. The field
of corrosion technology is vital for supporting U.S. infrastructure and
combating corrosion and decay in the nation's energy storage tanks and plants,
energy distribution pipelines, highway and bridge supports, ports and waterways,
docks, and military equipment and facilities. Only three colleges in the nation
offer CT programs and online instruction will increase the reach of this program
by using cutting-edge learning systems to convey the latest methods in virtual
instruction. This educationally innovative project will bring a successful
brick-and-mortar program online with the intention of scaling it to serve a
national industrial need in a field of critical
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Corrosion is a substantial expense in the U.S.
economy and consumes more than 6% of Gross Domestic Product. Qualified corrosion
technicians are in high demand, but supply is limited due to the small number of
national programs in this field. This online corrosion technology program will
use a hybrid BlendFlex delivery model that will allow students to attend courses
in-person, in a remote synchronous manner, or asynchronously as their schedule
demands. This hybrid model will provide new students the flexibility and allow
incumbent technicians to learn as they work in the field. Students will follow a
rigorous curriculum that integrates hands-on training with theoretical
understanding and incorporates the latest advances in the field. This will allow
the project to increase the number of qualified corrosion technicians and
provide an innovative approach that meets the needs of industry nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.