* 1902250
* Identifying Biomarkers to Optimize Bioremediation Approaches for Contaminated Groundwater
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Alison Cupples, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 285,704.00

Past activities have resulted in the contamination of many groundwater aquifers
with tetrachloroethene, trichloroethene, and 1,4-dioxane. These contaminants are
problematic because of their risks to human health. Unfortunately, current
methods to clean-up groundwater have not been successful for these pollutants.
As an alternative clean-up approach, scientists have explored the use of
bacteria to biodegrade these pollutants. However, little is known about the
identity and abundance of these bacteria in the groundwater. Without this
information, it is difficult to predict the time required for contaminant
removal. The specific goals of this research are to identify bacteria
responsible for 1,4-dioxane and chlorinated solvent biodegradation under
conditions in the groundwater. Knowledge concerning the quantity of bacteria in
groundwater will result in more effective management approaches for contaminated
groundwater. The research will involve underrepresented minority undergraduates
through the Michigan Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation. In
addition, research results will also be incorporated into activities at the High
School Engineering Institute. Together, these educational outreach activities
will help improve the Nation's scientific knowledge and increase diversity in
STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-contamination of many sites with the
chlorinated solvents, their metabolites and 1,4-dioxane is particularly
problematic because of the risks to human health and the lack of remediation
approaches to remove all chemicals concurrently. Although much research has been
directed towards the remediation of the chlorinated solvents, less is known
about the potential for 1,4-dioxane bioremediation. Here, the overall objective
is to develop biomarkers to optimize groundwater bioremediation approaches at
chlorinated solvent and 1,4-dioxane co-contaminated sites. The specific
objectives are to i) determine which microorganisms are responsible for carbon
uptake from 1,4-dioxane under methanogenic conditions using stable isotope
probing and generate methods/data for predicting in situ removal, ii) identify
biomarkers for in situ aerobic 1,4-dioxane biodegradation in groundwater, and
iii) determine which biomarkers are appropriate for aerobic co-metabolic
chlorinated ethene degradation. The research will include underrepresented
minority undergraduates through the Michigan Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation. Also, undergraduates will participate as part of the Engineering
Summer Undergraduate Research Experience Program (EnSURE). EnSURE is a 10-week
program involving professional development activities, mentoring of students in
a research project and participation in a campus-wide symposium for research.
Further, activities will include collaborative efforts in K-12 outreach
programs, such as the High School Engineering Institute (offered during the
summer). The project will also enhance educator development at the graduate
student level. The designed biomarkers will enable the remediation community to
determine if these functional genes are present at their sites and, if so,
quantify their abundance and determine the predicted time for contaminant
removal and site closure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.