* 1902003
* Educating Entrepreneurial Technicians for Unmanned Aerial Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Andrew Shepherd, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2022
* USD 546,207.00

The Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) industry continues to grow at a rapid rate,
creating new jobs and economic opportunities. As a result, there is a strong
demand for technicians with knowledge about the technology, operation, and rules
of UAS, as well as effective communication skills, business know-how, and the
skills to safely and effectively apply the technologies for commercial purposes.
Widespread commercial UAS activities in the United States have already increased
workforce demands, not just in UAS companies but also across a broad range of
industries that use UAS. Offering ways for students to obtain the skill sets to
work in existing companies, develop their own businesses, or create their own
inventions with UAS technologies is becoming increasingly important. To help
address this need, Sinclair Community College and their industry partners will
develop an education program that prepares the entrepreneurial technicians
needed in the UAS field. In this way, the project will seek to enhance the
number of well-qualified UAS technicians, thus supporting the continued growth
and integration of UAS solutions for the nation's
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to educate a new
type of entrepreneurial technician who is equipped with the technical and other
skills required for success in the dynamic, quickly evolving UAS industry. The
project partners will develop a competency-based curriculum that results in a
one-year UAS Entrepreneurship Certificate. This curriculum will include new
courses that focus on entrepreneurial principles and modified existing courses
that focus on UAS applications and technologies. Enhancements will include
hands-on and interactive project-based learning experiences through which
students can master UAS knowledge and skills. An innovative aspect of the
curriculum will be a UAS entrepreneurship kick-starter competition. This venture
capital style competition will engage students in applying course content to
create new ideas or new connections to available intellectual property. The
competition will cultivate students' entrepreneurship abilities by providing
them with access to mentoring from technical and business experts, as well as
access to cutting-edge UAS technologies. The project team will also develop
course modules on UAS technologies and entrepreneurial applications for high
school teachers and students. These materials will be used in outreach and
professional development activities with high schools to promote career interest
in this technology field. Project materials and results will be widely shared
and disseminated on websites of partnering organizations, in publications,
through webinars, and presentations at regional and national venues. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.