* 1902041
* Word Distributions in Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Nir Avni, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 235,000.00

Consider the collection of all rotations, of all possible angles, around a point
in the plane. Pick one---let's call it x---at random, such that every angle has
the same probability to appear. Now, apply the rotation x twice. In mathematical
notation, this is x*x. It is not hard to show that the rotation x*x is again
random, and every angle has the same probability to appear as the angle of
rotation of x*x. Surprisingly, this is false in three dimensions: if x is a
random rotation in space (each such looks like a rotation around some axis)
chosen in such a way that each rotation has the same probability to appear, then
some rotations have a higher probability of being x*x and some have lower
probability, although this probability is never zero. Similarly, one can take
two random rotations x and y and consider other expressions such as x*y*x*x*y
and understand their distributions. More generally, one can ask similar
questions replacing the collection of rotations by the collection of symmetries
of other mathematical objects. This award provides support for graduate students
working in areas related to the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In technical
terms, the PI will study word maps of groups---that is, maps from G^d to G that
are obtained by substitution into a fixed element w in the free group on d
generators. There are three parts of this project. In the first part, the PI
will study quantitative aspects of word maps for compact groups. This will be
expressed via the word measure, which is the push-forward of the Haar measure on
G^d by the word map. The goal of this part is to bound the Fourier coefficients
of the word measure, as well as to understand its density at the identity. In
the second part, the PI will study word maps in higher-rank arithmetic groups,
trying to determine whether words have finite widths in these groups. In the
third part, the PI will study word maps in finite groups. The big question there
is whether a word is determined by its distributions on all finite groups. A
major part of this project will be about applications of word maps. Most notably
are applications in logic (the model theory of arithmetic lattices),
representation theory (Kirillov's orbit method for algebraic groups over local
rings of positive characteristic), and connections of distributions of word
values and low-dimensional topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.