* 1902427
* Curriculum for Advanced Applicator Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Jenni Fridgen, Parkland College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 385,929.00

Advanced Applicator Technicians mix and/or apply pesticides, herbicides,
fungicides, or insecticides through sprays, dusts, vapors, soil incorporation,
or chemical applications. These jobs are critical for the modern agriculture
industry as they help ensure strong yields for farmers and agriculture
management companies. As the agriculture sector continues to modernize and
become more precision-based, the Applicator Technician position is also
modernizing and now requires greater technical expertise and training. Due to
the shortage of a qualified candidate pool, agribusiness organizations often
struggle to fill applicator positions. Existing programs at community colleges
are designed for either general agriculture or equipment technicians and do not
specifically address the specialized knowledge required by an Applicator
Technician. The goal of this project is to meet the educational and training
needs of this critical sector by preparing highly skilled technicians and
creating pathways for educational advancement in the state of
Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create four new courses, a
professional certificate program, and a two-year Associate of Applied Science
degree to prepare students and incumbent workers for careers as Advanced
Applicator Technicians. The creation of these credentials builds on previously
developed precision agriculture coursework through Parkland's prior NSF-ATE
funded Precision Agriculture Curriculum Enhancement project. Additionally, the
project will build relationships with high schools and industries, to increase
understanding and interest in the Applicator Technician sector, thus
contributing to a regional workforce pipeline. The project will also seek to
improve the representation of veterans in the precision agriculture sector to
ensure agribusiness industries have a diverse workforce. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.