* 1902460
* RAPID: Rural Loss Estimates of Hurricane Florence Enabled by Citizen Scientists
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Patricia Clayton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 10/31/2020
* USD 49,944.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project examines the ways in which everyday
citizen scientists might be able to effectively collect perishable research-
grade damage data following a hurricane that affects rural locales. This
research uses Hurricane Florence in 2018 as a test case. The project uniquely
leverages networks of journalists in rural areas to actively recruit local
citizen scientists to document damage using multiple channels. This project
directly enhances the understanding of rural damage from Florence and will
impact the immediate recovery of these often marginalized and neglected
communities. Furthermore, this research measures and tests the efficacy of
citizen-produced versus engineer-collected damage data in rural contexts,
validated by ground truth reconnaissance data. This scientific research
contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and
to advance our national welfare with benefits that will inform planning to
improve the resilience of United States communities, in particular to hurricanes
and flooding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If harnessing the untapped potential of
citizen scientists to collect large volumes of real-world visual and textual
data regarding all levels of hurricane damage in poorer rural agricultural areas
affected by Florence proves to be a successful method of collecting damage data,
this can transform the ways in which engineers can predict effects from and
study these events. Moreover, the new methodologies for rapid activation of
journalist and citizen scientist networks developed in this project can be
applied to other natural hazards (e.g., tsunamis, earthquakes, wind storms,
etc.) engineering efforts beyond the scope of the proposed work that might
involve similar remote and rural communities. By engaging the public in
participatory science, this work empowers rural citizens to learn about the
effects of hurricanes and take ownership of their contributions to this field of
research. Findings and data obtained from this study will be rapidly
disseminated to the public and research community through interactive and
accessible tools available via the DesignSafe
cyberinfrastructure..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.