* 1902499
* Technological Education in Cyber-Physical Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Jim Kroehn, Chippewa Valley Technical College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 599,737.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are engineered systems that are built from, and
depend upon, the seamless integration of computation and physical components.
CPS technologies are transforming the way people interact with engineered
systems, just as the Internet has transformed the way people interact with
information. Incorporating the ability to plan, react, adjust, and make
decisions in real time, these systems efficiently complement the processes and
the work of people in many industrial environments. This project focuses on the
rapidly changing needs for education related to CPS, including mechatronics,
industrial controls, industrial robotics, and industrial Internet of Things.
Working with regional industry leaders, other colleges, and K-12 schools, the
project will increase the capacity of instructors to provide comprehensive
education and training in CPS topics and will expand opportunities for future
technicians. Specifically, through the project, the college will increase
enrollments in its Automation Engineering Technology, Industrial Mechanical
Technician, and Information Technology Network Specialist programs; provide
industry certifications and work-based learning experiences to students enrolled
in those programs; enable high school students to earn dual credit and other
credentials in mechatronics, industrial controls, industrial robotics, or
industrial Internet of Things content areas; and provide professional
development and instructional support to assist college and high school
instructors in teaching CPS concepts and skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high
school and college students served by this project will gain knowledge and
skills in mechatronic systems, automation, electrical controls, pneumatic and
sensor systems, robot operation and programming, human-machine interfaces,
computer-controlled machines, mechanical and hydraulic systems, computer
numerical control programming, the industrial Internet of Things, data
analytics, and cybersecurity. The project will focus on rural high schools,
where there is a great need for education in critical technology areas such as
CPS. Building on two previously funded projects (NSF Award DUE-1304103 and
DUE-1700535), this project will use a mobile laboratory and online modules to
reach high school students and teachers in rural Wisconsin. An emphasis on work-
based learning will enable students to work directly with employers. High school
teachers will benefit from ongoing professional development, mentoring, and
support from college faculty. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program, which focuses on the education of technicians
for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.