* 1902069
* Processing and Properties of Entropy-Stabilized Boride Ceramics.
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Gregory Hilmas, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2022
* USD 406,427.00

In order to make advances in hypersonic flight, nuclear fusion, ballistic impact
protection, and concentrated solar power, materials are needed that can
withstand temperatures far above the melting point of typical high performance
materials. This project investigates the effects of composition and
microstructure on the properties of complex transition metal boride ceramics
which have melting temperatures above 3000 C and are among the highest melting
points for any known materials. This class of materials is known as ultra-high
temperature ceramics. Entropy stabilization, a concept whereby at least four
other elements in approximately equal ratios are added to a binary compound, has
been used to produce stable, high entropy borides. Initial studies using this
approach focused on synthesis and densification without analyzing properties.
Hence, this research addresses a gap in knowledge of fundamental composition-
microstructure-property relationships for boride ceramics. The scientific
outcomes of the project will include identification of relationships among
processing conditions, microstructures, and properties to enable design
selection of compositions and microstructures that will yield properties desired
for demanding applications. The broader impacts will include increased inter-
campus collaboration between a doctoral university with higher research activity
and a public university that offers terminal M.S. degrees. This collaboration
will include expanding distance methods to extend curricular offerings at both
schools, and establishing stronger research links between both to enhance
student recruitment and increase access to research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use an integrated
experimental and computational approach to provide an unprecedented level of
knowledge about the atomic structure, microstructure development, and
composition-microstructure-property relationships for boride ceramics containing
multiple transition metals. The main goals of the project are to: 1) utilize the
entropy stabilization effect to produce new boride compositions containing
metals that do not typically form borides; 2) control microstructure development
by manipulating densification kinetics through changes in composition; and 3)
establish ultra-high temperature structure-property relationships in this
emerging class of materials. Computational methods will be used to investigate
solution formation behavior, thermodynamic properties, and defect formation
energies. Complementary experimental studies will focus on processing and
properties of entropy stabilized boride ceramics. Reactive hot pressing will be
used to produce ceramics with controlled compositions ranging from highly pure
borides with containing one transition metal to entropy-stabilized compositions
containing five transition metals in roughly equal proportions. In addition,
reactive hot pressing offers the ability to control microstructure development
to enable studies of microstructure-property relationships. The project will
utilize advanced characterization tools to quantify metal distributions in
boride ceramics with complex compositions, which will help elucidate
densification kinetics, and measure intrinsic mechanical, thermal, and
electrical properties of high entropy boride compositions. This project will
lead to unprecedented knowledge of the thermochemical stability and inherent
properties of entropy stabilized ceramics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.