* 1902522
* Establishing a Rural Advanced Manufacturing Education Hub in the Upper Mississippi River Basin
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Marc Kalis, Minnesota State College - Southeast Technical
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 441,952.00

The need for STEM technicians in manufacturing fields continues to be a national
concern. It is also a specific workforce concern for the upper Mississippi river
basin, a rural area. Studies estimate that, due to a lack of skilled employment-
ready workers, more than half of the 3.5 million manufacturing jobs created in
the US between 2015 and 2025 will go unfilled. In rural areas in Minnesota,
manufacturing jobs account for more than 15% of the total workforce. However,
employers in this area report that at least 66% of current vacant positions in
manufacturing fields are already difficult to fill. This project seeks to
increase employment opportunities in advanced manufacturing across the Upper
Mississippi region of rural Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Iowa. To this end, the
project aims to meet local manufacturing workforce needs by providing an
educational pathway that starts in high school, leads to a vocational
engineering certificate, and extends to an engineering BS degree. A key goal of
the project is to build partnerships between employers, high schools, local
universities, and regional technical colleges to provide no-cost college
instruction for participating high school students. These high school graduates
will be able to pursue immediate employment, or to directly transfer into a
technical college or university program. This model may provide a replicable
approach that can be applied or adapted across disciplines to fit diverse
economies across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project goal is to
establish a sustainable and replicable model that will: 1) increase the STEM
pipeline to meet needs of regional manufacturers; 2) bridge the gap between
secondary and post-secondary institutions of higher education; and 3) increase
inclusion of women, Native Americans, and other groups that are underrepresented
in advanced manufacturing. To achieve these goals and outcomes, the project will
develop a hub-node structure, with the project serving as hub for nodes at high
schools in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Iowa. In this way, each project can achieve
the goals within relevant state/local laws and the local context. Specific
project objectives include: validating curricula with industry partners at each
high school site; equipping high schools for the planned courses in 3-D design,
3-D printing, quality measurement, and manual and computerized machine
processes; expanding awareness of career opportunities in advanced
manufacturing, including the awareness of students from groups that are
underrepresented in this sector, such as women and Native Americans. College
faculty, high school teachers, and industrial professionals will develop and
implement the curricula through joint professional development, integration of
working professionals into the classroom, and structured internships for
students. This project also proposes to focus specifically on the rural context
as it seeks to strengthen links between K-12 and post-secondary education and
increase the number of students matriculating to post-secondary pathways related
to advanced manufacturing. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.