* 1902491
* Manufacturing the Future - Expanding Student Interest in Manufacturing Technology Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Paige Wyatt, Columbia Basin College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2023
* USD 289,982.00

Columbia Basin College will develop a manufacturing technology program that
bridges students from high school to community college technical programs.
Demand for skilled manufacturing technicians is outpacing the supply and it is
projected that up to two million manufacturing jobs will go unfilled in the
coming decade. The bridge program will feature a summer Manufacturing Technology
Academy program for high school students and a Manufacturing Technology
Professional Development Workshop for secondary school teachers and high school
advisors. A Tool Kit for teaching hands-on manufacturing technology lessons in
the high school classroom will be developed. Access to hands-on learning and
skill development opportunities will boost student interest in pursuing
manufacturing careers by combatting negative stereotypes surrounding the
industry's image, as well as leading to increased self-efficacy in STEM
subjects, particularly for female and underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Columbia Basin College will actively partner with the Tri
Tech Skills Center, a local high school that specializes in career technical
education. These institutions will jointly pilot an Introduction to
Manufacturing course with high school students. During the Summer Academy,
students will undertake multiple experiential learning opportunities, including
the design and manufacturing of a take-home product, career exploration
presentations, field trips, and internships with industry partners. The
opportunity to earn both high school and college credit upon successful
completion of the academy will incentivize students and provide a cost-effective
means for students to transition into the Manufacturing Technology program at
the community college. This opportunity will stimulate the diverse high school
population in the Columbia Basin College service area to pursue post-secondary
Manufacturing Technology education and subsequently pursue technical careers in
manufacturing technology. What is learned will inform effective practices in
both bridging students into post-secondary education and effective practices
engaging rural students in higher education. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.