* 1902179
* Constraining the Nature and Formation Age of the Shyok Suture Zone in Ladakh, NE India
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Oliver Jagoutz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2023
* USD 409,903.00

The spectacular height and length of the Himalayan Mountain Belt has inspired
generations of people across the world. The mountain chain was formed during the
collision of the Indian and Eurasian continents approximately 40-50 million
years ago. Before this collision occurred, an ocean called the Neotethys
separated the two continents and the timing of its disappearance remains an open
question. This project will better constrain the timing of the collision between
the two continents by age dating and paleomagnetic measurements in the Kohistan-
Ladakh region of northern India. A better constraint on the timing of the
collision and disappearance of the Neotethys ocean is essential not only for our
understanding of the Himalayas, but also for addressing other big questions such
as the how tectonic plates reorganize during major collisional events and the
influence of tectonic forces on global climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal goals of this project are to better constrain the nature and age of
the Shyok suture zone, and to test alternative models for the Kohistan-Ladakh-
Eurasia collision. If the Shyok suture is younger than the Indus suture, then
the Shyok-Tsangpo suture zone, not the Indus-Tsangpo suture zone, records the
final collision of India and Asia, and two subduction systems were present in
the Neotethys ocean until approximately 50 Ma. We will conduct a detailed study
combining field geologic mapping, petrology/geochemistry, U-Pb zircon
geochronology, and paleomagnetic measurements. This work will constrain the
currently unknown age and provenance of multiple sedimentary sequences in the
suture zone as well as provide new information on the geochemical
characteristics and ages of plutonic rocks within the suture and in neighboring
terranes. Additionally, the proposed paleomagnetic work will determine the
unknown paleolatitudes of both the Kohistan-Ladakh arc and Eurasian margins
during the crucial time of the India-Eurasia collision and thus allow us to
evaluate the different collision scenarios. The work related to this project
constitutes a comprehensive and multifaceted documentation of a pivotal yet
unconstrained suture zone in the Himalaya and offers the opportunity to
capitalize on the recently increased access to crucial exposures in Ladakh,
India.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.