* 1902970
* P2C2: High-resolution dynamical and statistical downscaling of El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) response in proxy-critical locations across the tropical Pacific
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Christina Karamperidou, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 531,727.00

This project aims to use an atmosphere-only mesoscale weather forecasting model
(WRF) to downscale general circulation model (GCM) outputs in order to
investigate how local and regional climate in the tropical Pacific region
respond to different patterns (or flavors) of El Nino Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) from the last Glacial maximum to present. The downscaled GCM outputs will
then be compared to ENSO proxy-records where they exist (Galapagos, eastern
Pacific coasts, Line Islands and Palau) in order to quantitatively assess the
diversity of ENSO impacts in these locations. This approach considers how the
unique terrain and the local aspect of weather and climate modulate the
complexity of ENSO-induced regional atmospheric circulation. The ultimate goal
will be a better interpretation of ENSO proxy records and therefore a deeper
understanding of ENSO variability through model-data
comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include: 1) a
suite of downscaled climate variables with state-of-the-art models (e.g.
precipitation, soil moisture, temperature); 2) a database for expected range of
recorded ENSO events at several proxy-record locations and climates; 3) a
paleoclimate data-model comparison of ENSO at similar spatial scales (downscaled
model outputs). These products will be useful for the paleoclimate communities,
and for weather forecasting and risk prediction-associated with ENSO events-
communities. The researcher will establish a collaboration with the national
meteorology and hydrology service in Peru and develop an online course on
modeling and statistics of climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.