* 1902340
* Automating Alabama's Future: Producing Advanced Automation Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Jack Mayfield, Gadsden State Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 435,169.00

In the southern region of the United States, Alabama has become a manufacturing
hub for the automotive, aerospace and aviation industries. Technological
advances in recent years are changing Alabama's manufacturing industry. The
number of jobs for technicians in this advanced manufacturing industry is
growing rapidly, and there is shortage of skilled workers to fill this need. To
help meet this need, Gadsden State Community College will work with industry
partners to develop an advanced industrial automation program to prepare a
greater number of technicians skilled in the blend of mechanical, electrical,
and computerized technologies - also known as "mechatronics." The new program
will be designed to provide students with the important knowledge and skills to
operate, troubleshoot, repair, and make design changes to the kinds of equipment
and operations that they would work with on the job. The program will also allow
existing workers to upgrade their skills. This project will include activities
that help to increase the interest of more female students in advanced
technician careers. The Alabama Community College System will also promote the
new program as a teaching model for other colleges to help fill the demand for
skilled workers in Alabama and the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project will be to develop an advanced mechatronics program that has an
integrated lab component to prepare highly-skilled technicians in advanced
manufacturing. The curriculum will offer two new short-term programs leading to
advanced certificates in Mechatronics and Robotics. The program will incorporate
the innovative Mechatronics Laboratory comprised of an integrated and automated
production line. The laboratory equipment consists of a line-based manufacturing
system which integrates advanced programmable logic controllers, robotics, and
electronics with the intelligent machines used in production. This line system
will have the flexibility to be used as an entire production line for
troubleshooting or divided into individual stations. This new approach to lab
instruction will provide students with opportunities to learn integrated skills
required for the workplace. The project will hold outreach events to enhance the
interest and recruitment of females, high school students, as well as displaced
or underemployed workers into mechatronics and robotics areas of the advanced
manufacturing field. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.