* 1902359
* Regulation of Yeast Filamentous Morphogenesis By Inositol Polyphosphates
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Anuj Kumar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 443,350.00

This project will define critical steps in fungal growth for the development of
antifungal agents, relevant to the agricultural industry and other economic
sectors. Fungal cells regulate their growth in response to nutrient availability
in part by controlling the abundance of molecules that can act as messengers
within cells. One such class of messengers, inositol polyphosphates (InsPs),
contribute to the control of cell shape and the resulting physical properties of
fungal biofilm mats, resistant sheets of fungal cells that form on plastics and
other solid surfaces. Little is known about the regulation of these InsP
messengers or the cell components to which they attach. This research will
provide missing molecular and biophysical detail regarding InsP messengers and
their effect on fungal biology and growth. This level of understanding is
fundamental for the development of new methods to control fungal overgrowth.
From an educational perspective, undergraduate students from underrepresented
backgrounds will have the opportunity to receive summer training in molecular
and cellular biology for the analysis of InsPs. These students will also
participate in departmental events and diversity workshops to provide them with
the background and foundational resources to better succeed in graduate
educational settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells use metabolite levels to signal
conditions of nutritional stress for the regulation of cell shape, cell cycle
progression, gene expression, and polarized growth, but the molecular basis of
this signaling is incompletely understood. The yeasts S. cerevisiae and C.
albicans are highly informative fungal models of cell signaling. Under
conditions of nutrient limitation, yeast cells form extended and connected
filaments as pseudohyphae, hyphae, and biofilms, through a signaling network
recently found to involve the regulatory control of an important and conserved
metabolite, inositol polyphosphate (InsP). InsPs are phosphorylated variants of
the six-carbon inositol ring that regulate diverse cell processes. Pathways
required for yeast cell growth and filamentation are required for wild-type InsP
levels under conditions of nutrient limitation, and the genes encoding InsP
biosynthetic enzymes are required for wild-type filamentation. In particular,
the respective levels of pyrophosphorylated InsP species with doubly
phosphorylated carbon residues in the inositol ring correlates strongly with the
degree of filamentation in S. cerevisiae. This research will dissect the
molecular mechanisms linking the regulation of filamentation and biofilm
formation with InsP signaling. The molecular function of the conserved AMPK
family kinase Snf1p in modulating activity of the InsP kinases Kcs1p and Vip1p
will be determined. This research identifies the role of InsPs in controlling
the protein composition and structure of the plasma membrane. The effect of InsP
signaling on the filamentous morphology and rheological properties of biofilms
in C. albicans will be quantified. Collectively, the project investigates
conserved signaling pathways regulating InsP abundance and new downstream
effectors of this regulatory network. Further, the research quantifies the
effects of InsP signaling on the biophysics of C. albicans biofilms, presenting
an important advancement in understanding the molecular basis of this
economically significant fungal multicellular
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.