* 1902236
* Advancing Mechatronics Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Patricia Thompson, Community College of Allegheny County Allegheny Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2023
* USD 402,560.00

The manufacturing industry in the United States has an increasing need for well-
qualified workers. In the western region of Pennsylvania, there are growing
needs for skilled technicians in advanced manufacturing and energy companies. To
help address this situation, the Community College of Allegheny County will work
with industry partners and community organizations to develop courses in new
technology areas and expand the college's associate degree program in
mechatronics (a blend of mechanical, electrical, and computerized technologies).
These new courses will address areas such as robotics, plastics technology, and
process technology. Faculty will also be able to obtain certifications in these
new areas. This expansion of the program into areas of industrial growth will
serve as a model for the benefits of integrating industry certification with
academic coursework. The mechatronics program will be designed to offer a
variety of options that allow more students to participate and obtain degrees.
The project team will also work with secondary school teachers to increase the
interest of high school students in career pathways in advanced manufacturing
fields. The project will help increase the number of technicians with skills
needed for the workforce in the western Pennsylvania region and the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three goals will guide the project. First, to expand the
existing mechatronics degree program to include specialization courses in
Robotics, Plastics and Process Technology, and Green Manufacturing. Second, to
provide professional development and certifications for faculty in these new
technology areas. Three, to develop strategies to increase the exposure and
retention along career pathways for secondary school and community college
students. The new courses will cover concepts and skills based on industry-
relevant topics such as programming portable and customizable robots, injection
molding, plastic material selection, instrumentation and operations, quality
control, and equipment troubleshooting. These courses will have an overarching
theme of green manufacturing. The new curriculum will incorporate capstone
projects that include project-based learning activities and student internships.
The mechatronics program will also be enhanced to provide flexible evening and
weekend scheduling as well as self-paced, online courses to facilitate more
participation from a diverse population of students and students in rural areas.
Mechatronics faculty at the college will use transportable trainers to provide
hands-on guest lectures for secondary school students to showcase career
pathways or instruct course modules at high schools. The college will also host
Mechatronics Problem Solving Competitions for secondary school students to
encourage their engagement in, and awareness of, technician pathways for
advanced manufacturing fields. The curriculum materials and project results will
be shared regionally and nationally. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.