* 1902673
* Blended Learning for Biomanufacturing Education and Training in Emerging Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Yakov Cherner, Quincy College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,883.00

This project aims to contribute to the national priority of maintaining a
highly-capable workforce of skilled STEM technicians. The biomanufacturing
industry is one of the fastest growing sectors of the economy. It is also known
for its continuous attention to modernizing its facilities and adopting new
technologies. Emerging technologies are rapidly changing the landscape of
biomanufacturing. As a result, biomanufacturing technicians require new courses
and workforce skills to stay current. This project will facilitate development
of a learn-by-doing instructional model that combines a traditional, in-person
laboratory with virtual experimentation. The project predicts that this blended
learning environment, which includes in-person and virtual experiences, will
boost students' understanding of bioprocessing, prepare them for hands-on
training, add to their academic knowledge, and teach practical job-related
skills. Through a series of workshops, webinars, and other dissemination
activities, instructors around the country will learn how to incorporate project
materials and blended learning models into their biomanufacturing programs.
Short courses will be offered as professional development events that bring
biotech industry technicians up-to-speed with emerging technologies and the
latest advances in bioprocessing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an
activity-centered approach based on a theoretical framework of social
constructivism and situated cognition. It builds on a successful blended (in-
person and virtual) instructional model that responds to industry demand for
biomanufacturing technicians with modern, transferable skills. The modular
architecture and flexible framework of the instructional approach in conjunction
with reconfigurable and customizable interactive assignments will make it
possible to adapt online exercises to students' backgrounds and training needs.
The project will develop a cloud-based cyberinfrastructure to integrate and
organize curriculum resources and assure access to learning/training modules
from any computer or mobile device. Activity-based curriculum modules will be
developed in collaboration with academia, leading biopharma companies, and the
ATE National Center for the Biotechnology Workforce. All virtual modules will be
aligned with industry requirements, skills standards for biopharma technicians,
and the latest biomanufacturing trends including the paradigm shift toward
Manufacturing 4.0. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.