* 1902173
* The Subconvexity Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Simon Marshall, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 218,402.00

Prime numbers are of fundamental importance in mathematics, as every number can
be uniquely written as a product of primes. A mysterious feature of prime
numbers is that the statistics of how they are distributed is similar to what a
random sequence of numbers would produce. This is despite the fact that whether
a number is prime or not is in no respect random. L-functions are mathematical
objects that conjecturally allow us to understand this statistical feature of
primes and other objects from the theory of numbers. This project investigates
an important conjecture about L-functions, known as the subconvexity problem,
which states that the values taken by these L-functions are smaller than
expected. If true, it would be an important step in unlocking the statistical
information that L- functions contain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this
award is to make progress on the subconvexity problem for L-functions in higher
rank, and to prove subconvexity for as wide a range of automorphic forms as
possible. The project will focus on the groups U(n+1) x U(n) and GL(n+1) x
GL(n). The PI will approach the problem using arithmetic amplification,
representation theory, and ideas from microlocal analysis. A key role will be
played by microlocal lifts. The methods used will not depend on the rank of the
group in an essential way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.