* 1902428
* Worker 4.0:  Preparing Students for Today's Technician Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* James Hart, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 198,557.00

Missouri State University - West Plains will develop new advanced manufacturing
curricula to address the workforce shortage in middle-skill industrial
maintenance technicians. With a focus on advanced industrial maintenance,
manufacturing, and alternative energy, the curriculum redesign will use
stackable courses and a combination of project-based learning, hands-on computer
simulations, and real laboratory environments to model the industrial workplace.
Internships and registered apprenticeship opportunities with industry partners
will build students' workforce readiness. The project will incorporate portions
of the Greater Ozarks Center for Advanced Technology Fab Lab, the educational
outreach component of the Massachusetts Institute for Technology's Center for
Bits and Atoms, to engage a diverse group of students and interface with the
community. Collectively, these activities will fill the gap for middle-skilled
workers in the Industry 4.0 environment, which encompasses the computerization
of manufacturing. The project will meet the regional need for qualified middle-
skill advanced industrial maintenance and manufacturing technicians, and
increase the enrollment in the technology certificates and associate of applied
science in technology degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
Worker 4.0 includes adapting and adopting the Festo Industry 4.0 Certification
Program (FI4.0CP), an industry recognized credential, into current technology
courses, developing a new Advanced Industrial Maintenance Option in the A.A.S.
in Technology degree, and developing a certificate that focuses on Advanced
Industrial Maintenance. This includes creating three new courses: Introduction
to Industry 4.0, Industrial Controls and Troubleshooting, and Programmable Logic
Controllers and Sensors. Upon completion of the Advanced Industrial Maintenance
Option in the A.A.S. in Technology degree or the Certification in Advanced
Industrial Maintenance, the students will be prepared to complete the FI4.0CP
Level 1: Fundamentals certification exam. Additionally, certified students will
be able to continue their education with stackable FI4.0CP Level 2 and Level 3
courses and certifications. The broader impacts of Worker 4.0 include the
dissemination of the curricular materials specifically developed for middle-
skilled technicians in the next wave of an industrial
transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.