* 1902599
* Impact of System-Wide Contextualization of Math in Rural Arizona Colleges on Producing More Qualified Technicians (SFAz+8 CXM)
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Mara Lopez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 04/30/2023
* USD 599,929.00

Meeting the mathematics requirements for obtaining Career and Technical
Education (CTE) credentials is a common barrier for students who are pursuing
certificates and/or associated degrees needed for careers in STEM-oriented
technician fields. Based on current and prior work, an extensive review of the
literature, and examination of projects funded by the Advanced Technological
Education (ATE) program, a collaboration of eight rural Arizona community
colleges and the Science Foundation Arizona Center for STEM at Arizona State
University (SFAz) will continue on-going efforts to address this problem. As
contextualized mathematics modules are developed, adapted, and implemented,
these instructional materials will be shared through the STEM Network, a common
resource and repository. The goal of the project is to improve student
completion in Career and Technical (CTE) programs across rural institutions in
Arizona. Project deliverables include contextualized mathematics instructional
modules for use in either mathematics or technician courses. The project will
support students in overcoming barriers to earning the required credits in
mathematics that lead to successfully completing certificates and degrees in
STEM-oriented technician programs. The project has the potential to provide
Hispanic, Native American, and other students in rural areas with the
opportunity and credentials to join the STEM technical workforce in Arizona, in
welding, automotive, electronics, and construction technician fields. Moreover,
the team will examine the outcomes of students who participate in the treatment
(instruction using the modules) and those students who are in courses in which
faculty do not use the contextualized mathematics
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine and estimate the size of impact of the
use of contextualized mathematics modules in mathematics and technician courses,
a matched comparison group design will be implemented. This design will allow
the project to measure impact on student learning and retention as a result of
the intervention. Propensity score matching will be used to create a comparable,
matched pair of treatment and control students to examine and compare student
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.