* 1902006
* Collaborative Research: Smart Vehicle Platooning Built upon Real-Time Learning and Distributed Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Jinglai Shen, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 05/31/2023
* USD 130,000.00

Emerging connected and autonomous vehicle (CAV) technologies offer great
potentials to reduce traffic congestion and improve traffic efficiency. However,
much of the CAV related work focuses on individual vehicles' safety, which
compromises traffic efficiency when mixed traffic (CAVs and human-driven
vehicles) are on the road interacting with each other. This project aims to
study how a group of CAVs can respond to exogenous disturbances resulting from
human-driven vehicles, lane change requests and abnormal traffic and cyber
conditions through cooperative speed or acceleration control. The research will
improve road safety and traffic efficiency of future transportation systems
involving CAVs. This project will disseminate research and education outcomes to
broader audiences, including under-represented college and K-12 students with a
particular focus on minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
research objectives of this project are to develop vehicle platoon centered
optimal, adaptive, and resilient vehicle platooning control under various normal
or abnormal traffic and/or cyber conditions. The project will develop (a)
advanced model predictive control integrating distributed optimization for
optimal vehicle platooning control under normal traffic/cyber conditions; (b)
mixed integer programming based model predictive control for optimal vehicle
platooning control adaptive to lane change requests; (c) resilient vehicle
platooning control integrating real-time learning and distributed optimization
under abnormal traffic and/or cyber conditions. The project will integrate the
state of the art from multiple fields including traffic flows, control,
optimization, learning, and distributed computation and will establish an
interdisciplinary foundation for coordinated and automated vehicle platoon
centered traffic control under complex real-world traffic
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.