* 1902339
* Smart Advanced Manufacturing Education in the Silicon Valley
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Rose-Margaret Itua, Ohlone Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 542,998.00

A growing number of U.S. companies are finding ways to automate and control how
they manufacture products using digital, or "smart," technologies. This
manufacturing trend has created an unmet demand for well-qualified technicians
in the Silicon Valley region of California. To help address this need, Ohlone
College will develop a program in smart advanced manufacturing that offers new
courses, certificates, and an associate degree. The program will include
pathways and supports for students who might need more help building their math
skills. This structure will also be used to help encourage and retain more
students, particularly those from underrepresented groups. The program will
create learning communities with student cohorts and include internships
opportunities that allow students to connect their classroom learning to the
technical skills needed for the workplace. The project team will work closely
with local industries and organizations to design the program and courses to
make sure the necessary workforce skills are included. The project will also
expose high school students to advanced manufacturing projects and careers. It
is expected that these efforts will help to increase the number of qualified
technicians for the smart advanced manufacturing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop and certify a new
program that includes seven new courses, a Certificate of Achievement, and an
associate degree in smart advanced manufacturing. The associate degree will have
concentrations in the "Internet of Things," Automation &amp; Fabrication, and
Prototyping. The program will be designed in collaboration with local
manufacturing industries and will feature highly-supported pathways with defined
on-ramps aligned with the incoming students' level of preparation. Students will
progress through the courses and degree pathways in a block-scheduled, cohort-
based learning community that has wraparound academic and social support. This
wraparound support will emphasize elements such as study skills development,
field trips to industry sites, cohort meetings, and team-building activities.
Experiential learning will be integrated into the degree program through
internships in a three-credit Work-Based Project course that students will take
after they complete their first year of coursework. Outreach to increase the
interest of high school students in advanced manufacturing careers will include
hands-on projects, design challenges, and demonstrations of techniques and new
technologies. Project results, course materials, and best practices will be
widely disseminated, including to the Bay Area Community College Consortium and
regional hubs in the STEM Core Alliance of the Growth Sector non-profit. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.