* 1902014
* Synthetic biology approach to rewire carbon metabolism for efficient photoautotrophic chemical production
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Shota Atsumi, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 418,181.00

Climate change has spurred efforts to reduce net carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions.
To address this issue, photosynthetic microorganisms will be engineered to
recycle CO2 to produce biofuels or high-value chemicals. Undergraduate and
graduate students will participate in this project. They will gain perspective
on connections between biochemistry, microbiology, and bioengineering. The
project results will be integrated with science and engineering education at the
high school and college levels. Mentoring will be extended to high school
students, including those from underrepresented groups. This will provide them
with the opportunity to perform research in an academic setting.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate a strategy to improve CO2 fixation that
involves rewiring carbon metabolism in cyanobacteria. Cyanobacteria can directly
convert solar energy and CO2 to biofuels and bioproducts. Engineered
cyanobacteria can produce a variety of compounds, but the productivities are too
low to be commercially appealing. Also, current large-scale photosynthetic
production schemes rely on natural sunlight for energy, thereby limiting
production to daylight hours. The proposed production system is designed to
overcome these limitations. It has been shown previously that improvement of
RuBisCO, the CO2 fixation enzyme, is very challenging. Thus, this project will
develop an alternative strategy to improve carbon fixation by increasing
intracellular levels of the substrate for RuBisCO and directing carbon flux
towards chemical production. The strategies developed will also serve as tools
for probing and understanding phototrophic behavior and metabolism. This
approach addresses many of the issues raised concerning the commercial
feasibility of cyanobacterial chemical production. The proposed engineering
cyanobacteria to build chemicals from CO2 has the potential to result in more
efficient, economical, and controllable production
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.