* 1902385
* RAPID: Are short-lived storm surge events the key sources of long-term saltwater intrusion in coastal aquifers impacted by tropical cyclone activity?
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2019
* Alex Manda, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 11/30/2019
* USD 45,039.00

The hypothesis of this RAPID project is that hurricane activity is the cause of
a long-term saltwater intrusion into the coastal aquifer. There has been
numerous hurricane activity on the US east coast that has disrupted the
terrestrial hydrological system. One of this is storm surge following a
hurricane. Basically, the storm surge results in water ponding on the land
surface and the saltwater enters into the surface water storage as well as soil
and groundwater by infiltration. In this project the PI and his team will use
ground and surface water data for quantity, salinity and soil moisture
information along with information of soluble salts in the soil to estimate
saltwater intrusion in the fields. The methods will be based on field
observations, analysis and numerical models. The presence of salinity is harmful
to society - salinity in the soil results in lower agricultural productivity and
salinity in the groundwater may contaminate household drinking water supplies.
This work will be carried out along with extension personnel in North
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Storm surge resulting from hurricane activity
results in infiltration of saline water that displaces the fresh groundwater and
causes salinity of the soil and water table. There have been previous studies on
impact of storm surge on groundwater, but this proposal goes further by
quantifying the continuous high frequency variability of the solutes -
specifically the decay over a course of over six months in the terrestrial
surface and subsurface hydrologic system. The groundwater monitoring will be
carried out using salinity measurements and water level loggers at a series of
shallow intermediate and deep depths; surface water ? salinity loggers and water
level depths and various solute measurements by using samples for the soil. The
modeling system will use a combination of a one-dimensional analytical solution
and the modeling package visual MODFLOW. The decay of the solutes will occur
slowly after the recession of the storm surge and will continue for a period
over months. The data generated in this study will be applicable for other
locations in United States and globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.