* 1902139
* NASCRE 4 - Making Boundaries Malleable: Advancing Reaction Engineering through New Materials, Unique Chemistries and Advanced Computation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Linda Broadbelt, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/29/2020
* USD 30,000.00

This grant is to provide travel support for junior US-based academic researchers
to attend the 4th North American Symposium on Chemical Reaction Engineering
(NASCRE 4) in Houston, TX, on March 10-13, 2019. The scientific theme for NASCRE
4 is "Making Boundaries Malleable: Advancing Reaction Engineering through New
Materials, Unique Chemistries and Advanced Computation". Meeting the world's
demands for energy, food, water and medicine - in a sustainable way, while
protecting the environment - requires development of new technologies and
advanced materials, and computational science and engineering is a key enabler
of these developments. The theme of this symposium is to capture the essential
role that chemical reaction engineering (CRE) plays in addressing these
challenges with both an acknowledgement of the core of the discipline (inside
the boundary) and future directions (moving the boundary). The symposium will
feature communications of recent research on CRE fundamentals, enabling
technologies, and advanced materials, such as catalysts, membranes and solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical program of NASCRE 4 will consist of
plenary lectures, keynote lectures, presentations by invited young researchers,
the Amundson and Aris award addresses, and oral and poster presentations. The
plenary speakers, keynote speakers and invited young researchers were selected
based on input from the organizing and scientific committees, with the goal of
covering the diverse topics of the Symposium: Novel Reactors and Materials for
Reaction Engineering and Process Intensification, Advancing Reaction Engineering
through High Performance Computation, Fundamentals of Reaction Engineering, and
Applications of Reaction Engineering. A unique feature of NASCRE 4 will be two
workshops available for conference attendees: 1. Women in Engineering: Let's
Break the Boundaries. 2. Laboratory Reactors. The meeting participants will
benefit from state-of-the-art plenary talks and keynote lectures by leading
experts in academia and industry, by exchanging the latest advances on frontier
research subjects, and by debating controversial points with their peers in the
CRE discipline, including gender diversity. The meeting will also provide an
excellent opportunity for interaction and cooperation among industrial and
academic researchers. This will be especially beneficial to the young industrial
and academic researchers who will attend. The organizers expect to attract many
graduate students, including women and members of under-represented groups, to
the meeting that they may otherwise be unable to attend. These students will
have an opportunity to interact with each other and with experienced researchers
in the field, which will positively influence their professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.