* 1902723
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Metallurgical Production and Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,09/30/2020
* James Osborne, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2020
* USD 10,414.00

Mr. Michael Johnson, a PhD candidate at the University of Chicago, will
undertake research on how societies integrate new technologies socially and
economically. Early research typically treated technology as applied science
with a predetermined developmental trajectory that predicted specific outcomes.
Recent work contradicts this, suggesting that technologies and their structures
are the result of complex social dynamics between producers, consumers, and
other members of a society with a vested interest, often leading to conflict,
cooperation, and compromise. These interactions produce unique and materially
traceable patterns of specialization, organization, and consumption.
Archaeology, with a material dataset spanning millennia, is well suited to
studying the material aspects of these phenomena. When supported by ancient
textual records, as in the case of the present research, it is also possible to
investigate the social dynamics behind the material record, allowing researchers
to look at the tension between what people say (texts) and do (material
remains), which often reveals information about social ideals and the limits of
power. Over the long-term, how do different societies come to terms with new and
complex technological suites? Today, as societies grapple with the unforeseen
consequences of technologies like the internet, labor automation, and machine
learning, the importance of this question is clear - new technologies often do
not have straightforward and predictable effects, and different groups, based on
their unique priorities, will structure them differently and use them to meet a
wide variety of goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Johnson and his collaborators
will examine how metallurgical technologies were practiced, managed, and
perceived during a crucial transformative period where metallurgy underwent a
shift from a small-scale elite craft to a complex industry that facilitated the
development of wealth-based economies and increased productive capacity, thereby
laying part of the foundation for the formation of large territorial empires.
Working with material scientists, geologists, and archaeologists, Mr. Johnson
will utilize methods developed in the STEM disciplines to analyze metallurgical
debris excavated from the ancient city of Alalakh in southern Turkey. As the
capital of a small state with a diverse economic base that was frequently
subservient to much larger regional powers, Alalakh is an ideal setting for
studying these developments. Through these analyses, the researchers will
develop a comprehensive assessment of metallurgical technologies in use over a
400-year period (1600-1200 BC), during which the production of iron was mastered
and the manufacture of copper reached a truly industrial scale. Considered in
reference to local and regional textual records and their archaeological
contexts, the evaluation of these data will permit a thorough assessment of
changing methods of production, management, and consumption at a local level and
how these trends supported broader social developments. Using a robust
interdisciplinary program, Mr. Johnson and colleagues will generate a more
thorough protocol for the integration of STEM and humanities datasets, while the
international nature of the collaboration with create a valuable venue for
cross-cultural teaching and exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.