* 1902442
* Renewable Energy Systems Training (REST) Laboratory Development and Workforce Training
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Venancio Fuentes, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2023
* USD 440,608.00

To meet the immediate and long-term job market demands of the renewable-based
power generation and distribution industries across the U.S., New Jersey
Institute of Technology (NJIT), the County College of Morris (CCM), and
industrial partners will collaborate to develop a renewable energy systems
training (REST) laboratory and an associated curriculum for students preparing
to be technicians. Faculty development workshops will also be conducted by the
team of principal investigators. Through this project a new class of STEM
graduates will be trained who will be in high demand and able to quickly
integrate into the multi-billion dollar renewable energy power industries. This
project will significantly enhance STEM education nationwide by increasing
awareness of renewable energy resources and solar photovoltaic (PV)
technologies, and by illuminating the development and utilization challenges of
such technologies from socio-cultural, environmental, and economic perspectives.
It will also greatly contribute to the enrichment of the long-term diversity of
the undergraduate student bodies at the partner institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project will be to provide
trainees with functional knowledge and understanding of solar PV systems
integration, installation, startup, commissioning, protection, and
troubleshooting. The equipment in the REST laboratory will also be used for
capstone senior design and undergraduate research projects. A portable renewable
energy training package will be developed for outreach and demonstration to K-12
students, which will increase access to STEM fields among first-generation,
minority, and other underserved and underrepresented populations. An online
multimedia training package will be developed which will be accessible for free
to all remote scholars from universities and colleges across the U.S. The
disseminated results and publications of this project will be publicized on the
website of the project and will provide a clear road map and guidelines for
other institutions to develop a similar renewable energy laboratory and
curriculum. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program, which focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.