* 1902251
* Derived Categories and Other Invariants of Algebraic Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Martin Olsson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 170,000.00

The project is focused on a variety of questions in algebraic geometry, loosely
centered around the study of invariants, both cohomological and categorical.
Algebraic geometry is concerned with the study of the geometric spaces which
locally can be modeled as the set of solutions of systems of polynomials in
several variables, typically over a field but also over arithmetically
interesting rings such as the integers. Such spaces are ubiquitous in
mathematics, arising in many other areas such as representation theory,
combinatorics and mathematical physics. They also arise naturally in a variety
of applications in other disciplines such as computer science and engineering. A
common theme in mathematics when studying complex objects, such as algebraic
varieties, is to consider various features or invariants which are more
tractable yet rich enough to capture meaningful information. The project will
advance our understanding of several such invariants and study applications in
algebraic and arithmetic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically the
project is concerned with the following topics. Most of the work will be carried
out with collaborators and students. (1) Derived categories of coherent sheaves
on smooth projective algebraic varieties over a field and understanding
additional cohomological features of equivalences between such categories. The
goal is understand to what extent the derived category of coherent sheaves,
together with additional structure, determines the isomorphism class, or
possibly the birational equivalence class, of an algebraic variety. (2) Log
coherent sheaves and Hochschild and topological Hochschild homology for log
schemes. The objective is to understand a suitable dg category of coherent
sheaves associated to a morphism of log schemes. The investigation of such a
category also has broader implications for the study of degeneration phenomena
for coherent sheaves. (3) Reconstruction theorems for algebraic varieties. In
particular, the PI will investigate new approaches to, and generalizations of,
reconstruction results previously studied using model theory. (4) Homotopy
groups of log schemes and applications to the study of crystalline fundamental
groups. In addition to these four projects, the PI will investigate several
other projects together with graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.