* 1902518
* Guiding Underrepresented Students to Opportunities in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Scott Schlipp, Milwaukee Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2023
* USD 289,478.00

The Guiding Underrepresented Students to Opportunities in STEM (GUSTO-STEM)
project will recruit, retain, and graduate students from the college's Chemical
Technician Program to meet the needs of the local industry. Milwaukee Area
Technical College (MATC) has well equipped facilities and is well connected to
local industry, but historically has not prepared sufficient graduates to meet
local workforce needs. To recruit more students, the project will work with
advisors in the Milwaukee Public Schools and employ a traveling public outreach
team to interact directly with prospective students. To improve retention, the
project will host a two-week summer bridge/boot camp to help students transition
to college. An advisor will be assigned to assist the Chem Tech faculty in
purposefully building the new Chem Tech students into a cohort by grouping the
new students together in core classes and allowing them to socially interact in
a dedicated meeting space. To increase graduation rates, the project will adapt
and apply guided pathways to the Chem Tech program that help students complete
degrees in a timely fashion. By supporting these students through this rigorous
two-year program, the project will offer them the opportunity to make on
average, $50,000 per year, with full benefits, while providing them with
opportunities to advanced degrees if they return for further study. A broader
impact of this project will be to dramatically enhance the economic mobility of
students, who typically come from low-income families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
strategies to be used to increase the number of Chem Tech graduates fall into
two categories: enhanced recruiting and improved retention. Recruiting efforts
will include collaborations with Milwaukee Public Schools (MPS) at nine STEM-
focused high schools with whom MATC already has a working relationship. MATC
recruiters will work with MPS guidance counselors to steer future students
towards the Chem Tech program. The project leaders from MATC will facilitate
engaging "STEM Circus" events as public outreach that promotes the Chem Tech
program. Cohort building will be encouraged and supported as a retention
strategy through a pre-first semester transitional boot camp, small group
tutoring sessions, coaching, mentoring, and socializing during formal and
informal programming events at MATC and at several industrial partner sites.
Having a dedicated learning spaces on campus dedicated to Chem Tech students and
the opportunity to share science with the community through the STEM Circuses
will promote a learning community that feels connected to the program and the
college. In addition to providing Chem Tech students with industry lab field
trips, industrial partners have committed to providing these students with
critical soft-skills training: developing professionalism, resume writing,
interview preparation, and holding mock interviews. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.