* 1902366
* Conference on Biology and Medicine through Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Cheng Ly, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 04/30/2020
* USD 11,863.00

The Conference on Biology and Medicine through Mathematics will take place on
May 15-17, 2019, at Virginia Commonwealth University. The conference will
feature recent developments in the broad areas of mathematical biology and
medicine. The conference will: (1) be a regional mathematical biology conference
that promotes junior investigators that range from students, postdoctoral
fellows, to junior faculty; (2) give visibility to a wide range of applications
and methods in mathematical biology; and (3) provide a stimulating environment
for networking between junior and senior researchers, fostered by the size of
the conference (approximately 100 attendees). Scientific research of the highest
quality from four plenary speakers will be showcased. In addition, there will be
a mix of plenary talks, break-out networking sessions, and a poster session.
Travel support will be provided to junior researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide an intimate conference environment with opportunities to
present a poster or give a seminar talk to researchers at all levels. Junior
researchers will directly benefit from these opportunities because the travel
award funds will help promote attendance by junior presenters. Given the
diversity of the research topics (that includes topics from Ecology, Evolution,
Epidemiology, Medicine, Neuroscience and Fluid Dynamics), students relatively
new to research will have the opportunity to attend talks from many subfields.
Moreover, this conference is an excellent opportunity for undergraduate and
master's students from VCU and other regional institutions. Participation of
women and underrepresented minorities in mathematics and science will be
especially encouraged and supported. More information about this conference can
be found at https://scholarscompass.vcu.edu/bamm/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.