* 1902431
* Industry 4.0 Technicians in Advanced Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Alan Zube, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 555,507.00

The fourth industrial revolution, also known as Industry 4.0, is causing a new
wave of connected and smart manufacturing across the globe. Industry 4.0
combines advanced manufacturing systems with technologies such as cyber-physical
systems, the Internet of Things, and cloud computing. Companies are redesigning
and streamlining their production lines to include these technologies and
increase process automation. The growing complexity of advanced manufacturing
makes it even more important than ever before for manufacturing technicians to
understand advanced concepts and have good analytical and problem-solving
skills. To meet this workforce need, Florida State College at Jacksonville and
the College of Lake County in Illinois will partner with businesses and
industrial organizations. Through this partnership, they will add topics related
to new production methods to their associate degree programs in advanced
manufacturing. This project will help prepare technicians who have the necessary
knowledge and skills for the emerging innovations in the manufacturing industry.
The project will also focus on increasing the number students from under-
represented groups who enroll in and graduate from the advanced manufacturing
degree programs. As a result, the project aims to enhance the diversity of the
advanced manufacturing technician workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project will be to: 1) modify courses in the Automation, Robotics,
Mechatronics, and Engineering Technology associate degree programs at both
institutions to incorporate concepts relevant to Industry 4.0; 2) create a
simulated Smart Facility with state-of-the-art equipment in which students can
apply knowledge learned in the courses and strengthen their skills using real-
world scenarios; and 3) develop mini-labs and lab-based kits to provide hands-on
learning activities that engage high school students and teachers with new
advanced manufacturing technologies and concepts. The existing courses will be
modified to embed content related to system integration, digital manufacturing,
data analytics, and cybersecurity. The course enhancements will be designed to
increase students' understanding of the connections between manufacturing
hardware, automated processes and monitoring, and the relevant software
applications. The refined curriculum will be flexible, allowing students and
incumbent workers to obtain stackable certifications through the National
Coalition of Certification Centers. Faculty at the colleges will receive
professional development to promote their knowledge in the new content areas and
increase their ability to use the new software and equipment. Workshops and
outreach events for high school students and teachers will be conducted using
mini-labs and customized technical content. These activities will aim to
increase teaching and learning about these technologies in secondary schools as
well as increase awareness of career pathways in the evolving advanced
manufacturing industry. Project results and materials will be shared on a
dedicated website, in online repositories, and at regional and national venues.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.