* 1902076
* CIBR: Integrative Computational Platform for Biomolecular Solid-State NMR
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2019,11/30/2020
* John Markley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2020
* USD 682,467.00

X-ray crystallography, cryo-electron microscopy, and NMR spectroscopy are the
leading methods for determining protein structures at atomic or near-atomic
resolution. NMR spectroscopy is unique in its ability to support studies of
protein structure and dynamics at the atomic level under a variety of
physiologically relevant conditions. Solution NMR is suitable for investigations
of small to moderate size proteins and does not require protein crystallization.
However, solution NMR is unsuitable for studies of larger and less soluble
proteins, such as nano/microcrystalline globular proteins, membrane proteins,
and fibrils. These systems are of great interest because they are related to
many diseases with no cure. Such systems are becoming increasingly amenable to
solid-state NMR (ssNMR). This project aims to establish cyberinfrastructure for
fast and reliable analysis of ssNMR data through the development and
dissemination of intuitive software packages, algorithms for automated analysis,
web services providing computational resources for structure calculations, and
educational videos. The cyberinfrastructure will increase the efficiency and
reproducibility of solid-state NMR studies, simplify the archiving or results in
databases, and assist in the training of newcomers to the field. Solid-state NMR
workshops are also planned to be developed, which provide hands-on training for
student, postdocs, and junior faculties after completion of this project
equivalent to the ones that we have carried longer than a decade for solution
NMR. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural biology is benefiting greatly from recent
advances in solid-state NMR instrumentation, such as ultra-high-speed MAS (magic
angle spinning), and experimental technology, including proton or carbon-13
detection in N-dimensional experiments along with sparse sampling and spectral
reconstruction. The data sets collected for solid-state NMR that lead to
resonance assignments and structure determinations are quite different from
those used in solution NMR. The objectives of this project are to develop a
robust and efficient, end-to-end computational platform; a. To develop an
automation platform for ssNMR-based protein research. b. To develop graphical
user interfaces (GUIs) for the analysis of biomolecular ssNMR data. c. To
produce web services and public resources for biomolecular ssNMR. The software
and related educational materials will be freely disseminated by NMRFAM web
services (www.nmrfam.wisc.edu), the NMRbox Project (www.nmrbox.org), and the
SBGrid Consortium (www.sbgrid.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.