* 1902019
* Toward data-driven ATE program improvement: Leveraging statewide longitudinal data to create faculty-inspired tools for decision making
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Meza, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2023
* USD 794,675.00

Increased availability of student data, coupled with tools to analyze and
present such data, offer the opportunity to inform decision-making at community
and technical colleges. However, three sets of factors make this goal difficult
to achieve. First is the lack of resources, knowledge, and awareness of relevant
data sets. Second are shortfalls in quantitative research capacity. Third is a
dearth of examples of the ways data can be used to document and tell stories
about student success. To address these constraints, this study draws upon an
on-going collaboration among community college faculty and administrators,
university education researchers, and industry. In Phase 1, the research team
will collect and analyze technician education pathways in Washington State that
have received funding from the NSF's Advanced Technological Education (ATE)
program. In Phase 2, the study will examine cross-sector statewide longitudinal
data to identify and investigate key momentum points and employment outcomes
that indicate critical milestones along technician education pathways. The study
will establish and investigate the collaborative processes that lead to the
development, implementation, and use of tools, guides, and interactive data
dashboards that visualize descriptive and predictive analytics. The study will
illuminate the extent to which the availability of data analytic tools and
findings influences the effective use of statewide longitudinal data and, in
turn, shape the organizational cultures of three community colleges toward
heightened awareness and use of data analytic processes and results for the
improvement of STEM-oriented technician education pathways. Phase 3 will
synthesize findings from Phase 2, in a manner that produces replicable processes
and a set of promising practices for developing and investigating cross sector
longitudinal data systems (LDS) for improving and documenting milestones and
outcomes of technician education pathways at other institutions within
Washington state and across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this study is to investigate (1) critical milestones and students outcomes along
technician education pathways; (2) critical cross sector statewide longitudinal
data that can be incorporated into interactive data dashboards to enhance
decisions on improving technical education pathways; and (3) the extent to which
the availability of interactive data analytic tools and findings affect
organizational culture around improving technical education pathways. The
qualitative case study research project offers the research team the ability to
systematically collect, examine, code, triangulate, test, and develop a deep
understanding of organizational learning involved in culture change directed
toward heightened awareness and use of data analytics to improve education
pathways. Systematic data collection, analysis, and interpretation will be
guided by deductive and inductive approaches. The project's conceptual
foundation (Guided Pathways, Equity Scorecard, and Pathways to Results) will
provide the deductive framework for the project. The team will inductively
uncover, investigate, and coalesce emerging themes as team members participate
in and observe the complex relationships among faculty experience, learning, the
project's conceptual framework, and the changing organizational culture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.