* 1902075
* Increasing the Number of Workforce-ready Engineering Technicians in Southeastern Pennsylvania
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Vladimir Genis, Bucks County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 391,101.00

This project aims to contribute to the national need for a skilled STEM
workforce by increasing the number of well-trained engineering technicians. To
recruit more students into the Engineering Technology program, the project will
develop articulation agreements with the College's Center for Workforce
Development. Through this articulation, credits toward an Associate of Applied
Science Degree in Engineering Technology will be granted for specific
certifications obtained through the Center for Workforce Development. In
addition, the project will award certifications, digital badges, or college
credits for other prior learning, including knowledge and skills gained from
military training. The project intends to strengthen the Engineering Technology
curriculum by including a new course on manufacturing technology, requiring
business courses that emphasize entrepreneurship, and developing practical
experiences such as job-shadowing and internships. The project will also support
a collaboration between Bucks County Community College and Drexel University to
strengthen the education of both engineering technicians and engineering
technologists. It is expected that the improved Engineering Technology
curriculum and the innovative connection between certifications and an associate
degree will increase the number of engineering technicians who can meet the
needs of local and regional employers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
develop robust collaborations between four Bucks County Community College
programs or departments: The Engineering Technology program, the Business
Studies Department, the Center for Workforce Development (which awards several
engineering-relevant certifications), and the Industry Advisory Board (which
advises the College on issues related to industry needs and trends). Through
this collaboration, the project aims to modernize the Engineering Technology
curriculum to increase the emphasis on soft skills training and career
exploration, and to develop associated certifications and/or other credentials.
As part of this modernization, a credit-bearing manufacturing course with an
updated laboratory component will be developed. The project plans to offer
opportunities that help students explore engineering technician career options,
including a formalized job shadowing program. It is expected that the project
will contribute to the national need for a highly-trained STEM workforce by
increasing the number of students who pursue engineering technician careers, and
by better preparing these technicians to be successful on the job. It also has
the potential to create a model for how to successfully link certification
programs to credit-bearing programs. Such a model might be implemented by other
colleges and universities. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.