* 1902516
* Educating Robot Maintenance and Repair Technicians to Address Workforce Gaps in Automation and Skilled Trades
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* William Small, MONTCALM COMMUNITY COLLEGE
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2023
* USD 248,053.00

As technological advances increase the demand for skilled workers in automation
maintenance, local community colleges must educate and up-skill the technicians
needed to keep local industries productive and competitive. This project will
upgrade the automation program at Montcalm Community College to include robot
maintenance and repair. Robot maintenance and repair technicians need the skills
to maintain, correct, and repair robots so that automation operations can run
efficiently and safely. In many cases, when a robot faults, it needs a human to
correct its program and repair any damage. The ability of human technicians to
troubleshoot and solve operation errors in robots keeps manufacturing processes
running smoothly. The project will recruit new high school graduates and
incumbent workers into the robot repair and maintenance field. It will provide
these future technicians with hands-on learning experiences that build both the
knowledge and skills that are needed for robot maintenance and repair.
Professional development will be provided to enable current skilled trades
faculty to learn to use new equipment and to earn relevant industry-validated
credentials or certifications. Through interactions with local industry, the
College will help employers find or educate workers to meet their robot
maintenance and repair needs. The project includes a mobile advanced technology
learning facility that is housed in a trailer. The trailer can be deployed at
distant locations, enabling the College to meet robot maintenance/repair
training needs of employers by bringing the classroom to the workplace. Project
results and deliverables will be shared widely so successful practices can be
adopted to meet growing demands for automation maintenance workers as robotics
and automation expands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a
state-of-the-art curriculum in robot maintenance and repair that addresses the
needs of local businesses and provides students with a pathway from high school
into the skilled technical workforce. The project will build curricula that span
from entry level to advanced level, to enable multiple entry points into the
education needed to work in automation maintenance. To accomplish these goals,
the project will educate and up-skill faculty to teach robot maintenance and
repair. To better serve incumbent workers, the curriculum will be deliverable in
a mobile advanced technology learning facility that can be deployed at
workplaces. In addition, the mobile learning facility will also be used to host
hands-on activities involving robots at local workforce development offices and
adult education schools, with the expectation of engaging about 200 adults. The
mobile learning facility will also be used at outreach events at schools and
other venues to engage students in robot repair/maintenance activities and
illustrate the rewards of a career in automation and manufacturing. It is
expected that the outreach efforts will reach as many as 800 high school
students and generate increased enrollment in automation programs. As a result,
the project has the potential to increase the number of automation maintenance
and related industrial workers who are available to fill more than 100 current
openings in the local area. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.