* 1902694
* Collaborative research: CIBR: Geomorph - statistical software for shape analysis: Enhancing usability, performance, and methods
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Michael Collyer, Chatham College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 548,128.00

The analysis of anatomical shapes lies at the heart of much of biological
research, and methods for shape analysis have found widespread use in fields as
diverse as evolution, forensics, medicine, systematics, biomechanics,
anthropology, and many others. This project funds enhancement strategies for
developing the pre-eminent software package for shape analysis: geomorph.
Geomorph promotes an appreciation of the necessary stages of shape analysis, and
an understanding of the mathematical and statistical machinery required to
evaluate hypotheses in high-dimensional data. The grant supports continued
development of new analytical methods and graphical tools to be implemented in
geomorph, which will expand the scope of research questions that scientists can
address. New methods will transcend the focus of specific biological
disciplines, and will broadly stimulate research in any field where shape
analysis is important. Additionally, a new method of multivariate model
comparison developed here has the potential to transform how we make scientific
inquiry in the age of big data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geomorph is widely used by
biologists with over 1,500 authors of 1,000 citations since its 2013 release.
This grant will thus impact thousands of biologists who require fast, accurate,
and flexible software to accomplish shape analyses for their research. In
addition to research software and methods development, the grant will also help
train the next generation of scientists through workshops and other activities.
Workshops will be taught on several continents to provide maximal impact on the
scientific community through these training and educational activities. These
courses provide opportunities for scientists to learn and apply geomorph in
their own research while seeking guidance directly from the software's
developers. The project also supports open-source science by providing the
scientific community with access to all software updates via its Github
repository. The project will train undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers in research. The PIs will continue to support
undergraduate research for underrepresented minorities, through Iowa State's
LSAMP and McNair programs (PI Adams), and through the Diversity and Inclusion
Council of Chatham University (PI Collyer).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.