* 1902211
* Information Technology Career Pathways through a Flexible Apprenticeship Model
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Lawrence McWherter, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 560,501.00

Working with industry, high school, and college partners, this project aims to
create a model for a work study-based associates degree in Information
Technology. To accomplish this goal, the project will complete three specific
aims. First, it will establish an industry-aligned work study model for
information technology education. The program of study will align with flexible
industry-recognized apprenticeship approaches and enable students to
synergistically learn and earn. The curriculum will be designed to provide
foundational science, technology, engineering, and mathematics knowledge,
balanced with specific technology competencies. The second specific aim is to
establish a dual credit information technology pathway for high school students,
with professional development to enable high school teachers to teach the dual
credit courses. The third specific aim is to publish a technical guide to
facilitate replication of the program and pilot the program at Marion Technical
College in Ohio. The project has the potential to produce a replicable, flexible
work study program designed for the information technology industry that could
be implemented nationwide. As a result, it will contribute to building capacity
in the nation's cybersecurity workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal
is to leverage a collaboratively-developed and industry-led curriculum, leading
to the creation, pilot, and scaling of an experiential learning model for
students in Information Technology (IT) pathways starting in cybersecurity. An
Associate Degree in Cybersecurity will be adapted to incorporate the work study
experience. Work study orientation in the first year of the program and work
study opportunities in the second year will prepare students to enter the
workforce upon graduation. Wrap around services, including a comprehensive
orientation and intrusive advising will inform students about the details of the
program, and support them as they progress through it. Flexible schedules and
learning experiences will facilitate student/employer interactions. With
guidance from industry, essential skills and job tasks will be identified and
moved earlier in the program of study to better prepare students for their work
study experiences. Work study placements will include production-level roles
that are re-conceptualized to support student completion of a two-year degree.
To support veterans, current military codes and skills will be mapped to the
curriculum and the project team will provide training and strategies for
supporting military and veteran students in the classroom. Following development
of the cybersecurity work study model, the program will be scaled to other IT
pathways. The project team will collaborate with regional high schools to engage
students in IT dual credit pathways. A Cyber Institute recruiting event will
raise awareness of and interest in cybersecurity and IT, as well as recruit
students into the program. Project components include conducting work readiness
activities and providing competency-based modules to high school teachers to
credential them to teach dual credit IT courses. The project will develop
products that will be disseminated to other institutions, including a new
industry-led replicable work study model in IT pathways, Early IT Pathways
Initiative for high school, and a technical guide for replication and piloting
at other institutions nationwide. This project is funded by NSF's Advanced
Technological Education program, which focuses on the education of technicians
for the high-technology fields that drive our nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.