* 1902867
* Collaborative Research:  Effects of the Magnetic Field Shear and Flow Shear on Kinetic Physics in Relativistic Magnetic Reconnection
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Yi-Hsin Liu, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 525,000.00

Magnetic reconnection is a fundamental plasma process, where a change in the
connectivity of magnetic field lines rapidly converts energy of the magnetic
field into acceleration of charged particles in the plasma. This project aims to
improve our understanding of relativistic magnetic reconnection in astrophysical
systems. Prompted by the observation of superflares in the Crab Nebula, over the
past five years there has been a surge of interests in relativistic reconnection
in the high-energy astrophysics community. However, the rich physics of high
energy magnetic reconnection and its associated particle acceleration remain
less studied compared to their non-relativistic counterparts in Earth's
magnetosphere and solar wind. This project will serve to cross-fertilize
understanding of magnetic reconnection between the heliophysics and astrophysics
communities, which in turn will help develop new insights into this fundamental
process and its potential applications. The research activity will include
training of students and a postdoc at Dartmouth College and a summer student
intern through the New Mexico Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In astrophysical
systems such as pulsar wind nebulae and relativistic jets associated with gamma-
ray bursts and black holes, the magnetic energy density is much greater than the
plasma energy density. In such strongly magnetized plasmas, outflow speed from
magnetic reconnection events can reach values close to the speed of light with
relativistic effects becoming important. In a realistic system, magnetic
reconnection is also often accompanied by finite guide fields and flow shear. A
guide field can reduce the reconnection outflow speed, while a shear flow can
couple reconnection with flow vortices to affect plasma transport and energy
dissipation. It is thus imperative to study and identify how special relativity
can affect the dynamics of reconnection under these general conditions. To
obtain a self-consistent picture of particle acceleration and to resolve the
dissipation-scale physics that breaks the magnetic connectivity, the project
will employ a state-of-the-art particle-in-cell code VPIC and provide a fully
kinetic description of collisionless magnetic reconnection in the relativistic
regime. The results of this study will be relevant for many astrophysical
sources and will address the goals of NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" Big Idea. This project is jointly supported by the
Division of Physics and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.