* 1902419
* INFEWS:US-China: Collaborative Research: Investigating the role of wet wastes in the global circular economy: sustainable conversion to products using hydrothermal carbonization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Joseph Flora, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,942.00

This project was awarded through the "National Science Foundation (NSF) /
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Joint Research on
Environmental Sustainability Challenges" opportunity. The Food-Energy-Water
(FEW) Nexus, from a global perspective, can be described as the interconnected
and interdependent resource systems of food, energy, and water. Growing and
well-documented concerns are associated with the ability of interdependent FEW
systems to adapt to stresses resulting from population growth, climate
variability, land use changes, and environmental pollution. Developing
innovative and sustainable technological solutions that work across all 3 system
components to overcome implications associated with anticipated demands is
critical to ensure future societal food, energy, and water needs are met.
Resource recovery from wastes will play an important role in such solutions, but
this recovery will require a change in how waste streams are currently managed.
Waste management practices must transition from the "take-make-consume and
dispose" model currently practiced, to that of a circular economy (CE) model,
during which wastes are reduced and resources from the wastes are efficiently
extracted and reused. This reuse will minimize reliance on natural resources,
reduce environmental impacts, and promote a sustainable economy. This project
focuses on exploring the role food production-related wastes may play in a
circular economy. This work, a collaborative project between the University of
South Carolina-Columbia, the University of Utah, California State University
Fresno, and Nanjing Agricultural University in China, will be conducted to
determine whether extracting, reusing resources, and creating products of value
from wet food-production wastes using a process called hydrothermal
carbonization (HTC) is a more sustainable and economically viable approach than
traditionally used processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will advance the
science and technology needed to: (1) improve fundamental knowledge associated
with the link between waste properties, HTC process conditions, and HTC-
generated product characteristics to promote sustainable and successful
integration within the FEW systems, (2) systematically evaluate how HTC-
generated products can be recycled to minimize anticipated challenges in FEW
systems, including soil health, microbial population dynamics, and energy and
water scarcity, and (3) develop implementation strategies for global application
of the CE model under various scenarios by using life cycle assessment (LCA) and
technoeconomic analysis (TEA) modeling. This project has a strong international
component with China. A series of laboratory and greenhouse-scale experiments
will be conducted to understand how changes in food, agricultural, and livestock
wastes influence the HTC process, and to understand the ability of the generated
solid and liquid products to impact FEW systems. In addition, data-driven models
describing the resource recovery and subsequent recycling processes will be
generated and integrated into LCA and TEA models to detail how FEW system water
footprints, energy balances, and nutrient requirements are influenced by HTC
product introduction to the environment. Laboratory-scale testing and modeling
will be conducted in the United States, and greenhouse and small field-scale
testing of carbonization products will be performed in China. Results from this
work will determine the ability of a waste conversion technique to make a
significant impact in reducing reliance on dwindling virgin resource
consumption. Additionally, the project could provide the scientific basis needed
to initiate shifts in the current waste treatment/management paradigm to promote
sustainable material recovery and management, rather than focusing only on waste
disposal. It is anticipated that a large population of potential future
engineers and scientists and community members and leaders will be reached
through community engagement, undergraduate research experiences for
underrepresented populations in engineering, undergraduate education, graduate
student mentoring, and international research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.