* 1902537
* RAPID: Collaborative Research:  Building Digital Infrastructure and Communities to Assess Risk of Drinking Water Hazards Caused by Hurricanes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Lea Shanley, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 41,722.00

After a hurricane, responders need information to address immediate human needs.
Among the most important needs is to ensure that drinking water is not
contaminated by flooding or system failure. Information is also needed to learn
from past events to reduce the impacts in the future. This project will compile
environmental and related information from Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico and
Hurricane Florence in North Carolina to create a cohesive data system. A web
platform will enable the sharing of these data to help understand how hurricanes
and flooding impact physical and digital infrastructure. Increased public access
to environmental and health data will help communities prevent drinking water
contamination to protect human health, as well as plan for future
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Impacts from hurricanes and floods are
increasing; there is growing interest by communities to engage in research with
outcomes usable to protect and educate themselves against water hazards. The
recovery period is an important opportunity to engage the public in research to
assess drinking water related health risks and better prepare for future water
security for the most vulnerable populations. This project will create a
synthesized data and software system to advance our understanding of how digital
and physical infrastructure information reduce the impact of disasters using an
integrated collaborative platform for ongoing research. Current data collection
includes assessment of data and cyberinfrastructure needs as well as training
for archiving new datasets for Hurricane Florence and Hurricane Maria. Datasets
include hurricane observations, flood maps, storm track forecasts, National
Water Model forecasts, de-identified drinking water quality sampling, and other
public data sources including from non-profit, government, and open and crowd-
sourced datasets. The hydrologic research community repository, HydroShare, will
provide a point of access for research findings, with interoperability designed
to link to data models and repositories used by natural hazards, environmental
health, and environmental engineering communities in a consistent, documented
format. Networks disaster coordination data collection and information
dissemination are sharing educational tools to generate analyses and
visualization of hurricane impacts to address ongoing needs and prepare for the
next hurricane season. Public user engagement, research community support, and
ongoing software operations and maintenance are key to continuous development
and usability of the analysis tools and datasets. Our study uses Hurricanes
Florence and Maria datasets and case studies from North Carolina and Puerto Rico
to improve how we share knowledge and build capacity to support communities
around the world who may use digital infrastructure to foster self-
resiliency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.