* 1902642
* RAPID: 2018 Hurricane Season -- Assessing the Role of Antecedent Land State on Hurricane Post-landfall Rainfall
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Dev Niyogi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 130,280.00

Hurricane Florence dropped an extraordinary amount of rainfall on parts of the
eastern United States, particularly in coastal North Carolina. It has been
theorized that wet land conditions can provide a moisture feedback that sustains
landfalling hurricanes and tropical storms. The research team will collect data
and perform analyses to determine whether this mechanism played a role in the
progression of Florence and how it may impact other tropical systems. The end
goal of the research is to improve the forecasts of landfalling hurricanes and
the various hazards they pose. The project will also help to train the next
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This rapid-response award will
seek to determine the role of land-surface change during a tropical cyclone
landfall on resultant rainfall characteristics. Hurricane Florence will serve as
a case study to address the so-called "Brown Ocean Effect" where wet land
provides moisture feedback to sustain landfalling tropical systems. In this
project, the researchers will develop an observational analysis of rainfall and
land state during the Florence time period, develop a synthesis of the
antecedent and post-landfall land conditions with a focus on the moisture
transport and rainfall/water budget, conduct numerical experiments using WRF to
test the hypothesis regarding the role of antecedent land state in affecting the
inland rainfall from Florence, and compare Hurricane Florence to other similar
systems to help refine the conceptual processes involved. The time-sensitivity
of the project lies with the collection of datasets and the distribution of
analyses to the scientific community and collaborators from National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.