* 1902072
* RESEARCH: THE FORMATION OF ENGINEERS IN THE RESEARCH LAB:  A COGNITIVE ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Nicholas Gans, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

For engineering and science students at all levels, experience working in an
actual research laboratory is increasingly regarded as an essential part of
their education. Authentic research experiences, as opposed to laboratory
courses that simulate set experiments, are favored because they expose students
to the real practices of science and engineering. This exposure reinforces the
knowledge and understanding students gain in their formal coursework. However,
this movement raises a number of critical questions. How much is known about
whether, how, and why authentic research experiences contribute to the students?
learning? What are the learning outcomes of authentic research experiences? How
does learning and professionalization unfold in the lab? What are the problems
or dysfunctions that can arise? How do research experiences increase educational
opportunities or inequities? Previous studies have focused primarily on formal
laboratory simulation courses. Few studies of actual research labs have focused
on the details of the learning process. This study addresses a gap in the
research on engineering education and professional formation by examining the
processes of learning and professionalization as they play out in detail in a
single engineering research lab. The researchers collect detailed, qualitative
data on the inner workings of the laboratory, in order to understand the role of
learning and professionalization in the laboratory culture. This research traces
the fine details of the learning process in specific practices and moments of
learning. The approach is a useful precursor to designing more valid
quantitative investigations of student learning; it also plays an important role
in identifying myths and misconceptions about the learning process that can
impede engineering education efforts. This study will impact fields including
cognitive science and science and technology studies by extending the methods
and theories for studying learning and development in complex, social spaces in
rich, qualitative, situated detail. This research will specifically include a
focus on the relationship between authentic research experiences and educational
equity, to trace ways in which such research experiences might combat or
contribute to existing inequities. &lt;br/&gt;The methodological approach of our
study is cognitive ethnography, based in the theoretical frameworks of situated
learning and distributed cognition. Researchers will use general and cognitive
ethnography to understand the culture of the laboratory, trace the processes by
which students become enculturated into that laboratory, how they learn to
participate in the cognitive activities of the lab, and how this impacts their
professional formation. This study provides a crucial foundation for comparative
and hypothesis-driven explorations of student learning in authentic research
experiences. In particular, in-depth, situated, qualitative, process-focused
research can guide hypothesis-driven or quantitative research to be more
ecologically valid. This study will contribute to the field of engineering and
science education, and learning sciences more generally, by addressing the gaps
in those fields about the details of the learning process in authentic research
experiences, as well as directly and indirectly informing science and education
research and practices. As this project extends the range of work using methods
of cognitive ethnography and the theories of situated learning and distributed
cognition, this study will also provide advance knowledge and research methods
in the fields of cognitive science and science and technology studies, where
such approaches play an important role. This research will both directly guide
improvements to local and global pedagogical practices, and indirectly improve
it through providing a firmer foundation for future pedagogical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.