* 1902295
* Building Work Experience for Geospatial Analysts and Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Deborah Craven, Front Range Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,865.00

Despite a wealth of geospatial science technician jobs in Colorado, recent
graduates face the permission paradox: they cannot get a job without experience,
but they cannot get experience without a job. Many employers require at least a
year of practical work experience, which is often a significant barrier for
recent two-year college graduates. This barrier is especially true for low-
income students, because they often work in an unrelated field while completing
their coursework. This project will offer students in the Geospatial Science
program an opportunity to work with external partners on real-world geospatial
projects as they complete degrees and/or certificates. Each year, twenty
students will have a paid internship with an industry employer, which will allow
students to apply the technical skills acquired through coursework, gain work
experience, and build project management, critical thinking, and professional
skills. Thus, these work experiences will support learning outcomes in students'
courses and increase the employability of graduates. Students will also host
active learning workshops for middle and high school students from neighboring
school districts that serve a large underrepresented student population. These
workshops aim to raise awareness and engage secondary school students in
exploring and pursuing technical careers in the geospatial
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will offer a novel internship
approach by providing: 1) traditional, in-person work projects in collaboration
with northern Colorado workforce partners; and 2) virtual projects in
collaboration with the national ATE GeoTech Center. This project will pilot one
of the first virtual internship programs for geospatial community college
students in the nation. Geospatial Science students, with oversight from faculty
mentors, will build a middle and high school geospatial educational pipeline by
hosting active learning workshops using unmanned aerial vehicles. The workshops
will introduce students, including young women and underrepresented students, to
geospatial education and career paths, with the goal of increasing diversity in
the geoscience workforce. The workshops will simultaneously develop middle and
high school students' knowledge of geospatial education and careers while
providing a near-peer teaching experience for community college students. As
part of project dissemination, the project will develop a best practices guide
for building virtual geospatial internship program. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.