* 1902903
* New Statistical Methods for High-Dimensional Association Tests with Applications to Large-Scale Genetic Data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Baolin Wu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2023
* USD 999,986.00

The research tackles several challenges in large-scale biomedical studies
through the development and implementation of powerful and theoretically sound
statistical methods to detect robust biomarker associations. The developed
methods are motivated by and will have significant impact on large-scale genetic
association studies, and are also broadly applicable to other disciplines (e.g.
survey sampling and mental health imaging studies). The developed methods will
be applied to detect novel genetic biomarkers that are associated with multiple
cardiometabolic traits, and generate novel hypotheses for biological and
clinical investigation. The project will also solve some long-standing problems
in statistics, and will provide theoretically sound and much more powerful
methods than the commonly used ones. The project team will integrate the
research results into training the next generation undergraduate and graduate
students in the fast growing field of biomedical data science. This project will
also promote teaching, training and learning, and broaden the participation of
students from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
methodological and computational advances have facilitated the applications of
statistical methods to analyze simple (primarily single) disease outcomes in
large-scale genome-wide association studies in the field. However, these studies
have identified only a small proportion of the risk variants and there likely
remain many more common variants with modest effect sizes and/or rare variants
yet to be discovered. Existing methods and statistical theories are not adequate
for analyzing high-dimensional association with clustered outcomes (e.g.
longitudinal outcomes), and multiple correlated and/or secondary outcomes. This
project aims to address this urgent need by developing new statistical methods
with solid theoretical foundation to integrate multiple correlated phenotypes to
identify novel genetic variants for complex traits. In particular, the project
will (1) develop powerful statistical methods for testing high-dimensional
association with clustered outcomes; (2) develop theoretically sound and
powerful statistical methods for testing association with multiple secondary
traits; and (3) develop and apply a unified modeling framework that applies our
developed statistical methods, leverages the whole genome sequencing data, and
integrates functional annotation data to help identify and dissect the role of
rare variants on the cardiometabolic traits. The objective of the education plan
is to integrate the latest research development in statistical genetics into
existing/new courses to prepare students for their future professions in
biomedical/health informatics. The research will also include software
development to implement the methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.