* 1902463
* RAPID: Characterizing Inundation and Sediment Transport Associated with Hurricane Michael: A Modern Analog for Paleo-Hurricane Reconstructions
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 10/31/2019
* USD 51,285.00

Current efforts to understand the driving mechanisms responsible for modulating
hurricane activity are significantly hampered by a short instrumental record of
hurricane occurrence. Proxy records based on overwash layers deposited in
coastal ponds and marshes provide a means of extending our knowledge of
hurricane strikes back thousands of years. These paleo-records allow us to
elucidate millennial and centennial scale patterns in hurricane activity and
explore the mechanisms that drive changes in hurricane activity. Several of
these reconstructions have been developed from the Panhandle of Florida and have
extended our knowledge of hurricane activity in the area back more than 4000
years. However, well documented modern analogs are needed to help interpret the
long term records. The landfall of Hurricane Michael on the panhandle of Florida
in October 2018 provided an opportunity to investigate the character of overwash
deposits associated with a category 4 strike. This research will examine
sedimentological and landscape changes at three coastal sinkhole ponds on Bald
Point, Florida, a location that is about 100 km from the center of where
Hurricane Michael came ashore. The work will use elevation data and material
from new sediment cores, taken from the ponds, and compare this information to
results from longer term sedimentological records of previous studies from the
same ponds. Results of this research will help constrain the character of
prehistoric events that left deposits in the region over the past several
millennia. Broader impacts of the work include increasing knowledge for use by
federal disaster agencies, insurance companies, coastal managers, and
communities about the probability and timing of major storm strikes on the
Florida panhandle which should assist in better land and disaster planning.
Impacts also include graduate student training and public outreach via lectures
and conversations with community leaders. The latter outreach has strong
potential for project media coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is presently an
insufficient understanding of what drives variability of hurricane activity on
multidecadal and longer timescales due to the limited, in time and space,
instrumental record of these strong storm events. Geologic proxies such as
overwash layers preserved in coastal depositional settings provide an essential
tool for examining hurricane variability in prehistory. This research involves
the collection of drone-based aerial data and land surveys to examine geomorphic
and elevation changes resulting from the storm and its storm surge. It also
involves the collection of sediment cores on Bald Point on the Florida panhandle
within 100 km of Mexico Beach where the eye of Hurricane Michael came ashore in
October of 2018. Sediment sampling and surveys will be carried out at three
coastal sinkhole ponds that have been previously studied: Little Tucker, Mullet,
and Shotgun. Data collected in this study will be compared with the baseline
data from these three sites, some of which includes LIDAR (LIght Detecting and
Ranging) aircraft elevation surveys taken in 2010. Hurricane Michael sediment
cores will be taken and samples will be examined for grain size, event-bed
deposition, and clast composition. They will also be examined for the tests of
microfossils, like foraminifera, ripped from the seabed. The latter data will
provide insights into the extent and force of seabed wave/tide erosion and
marine sediment transport during the storm. Questions to be addressed include:
storm intensity and how that is recorded in the geological record and how close
a storm needs to come to a site to result in event-bed deposition. Studies of
modern analogs, such as the deposits left behind by Hurricane Michael, are
essential for being able to correctly interpret the sediment record at this and
other localities . It will also provide long-term reconstruction of strong storm
events in the area and findings and protocols that may be applicable more
widely. By characterizing the level of inundation and degree of sediment
transport to the three targeted study sites, the project will be able to better
interpret the nature of strong hurricane/storm events deposited over the last 4
millennia on the Florida panhandle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.