* 1902724
* Building a Culturally Responsive Degree Program in Information Security
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Brian Stokes, Northampton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,336.00

Community college students are the most culturally and racially diverse
population in higher education. However, limited attention is given to the
impact these differences have on their college experience. This project is built
upon the substantial body of research confirming that classroom and campus
climate have a major influence on the recruitment and retention of
underrepresented students in STEM. For example, women and other underrepresented
groups are more likely to choose and be retained in a STEM major when there is a
high degree of social capital, robust experiential learning, culturally-
competent academic support, and the use of critical pedagogy that incorporates a
multicultural approach to teaching. This project aims to develop a culturally-
responsive Information Security associate degree program that is responsive to
students' life experiences and the skills needed by industry. This project can
provide a foundation on which Northampton Community College and other community
colleges can advance strategies that broaden participation in STEM careers,
particularly in the skilled technical workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes a three-year comprehensive plan to achieve: 1) an enhanced
Information Security associate degree program curriculum that is aligned with
Center of Academic Excellence 2-Year designation requirements and regional
workforce needs; 2) a recruitment plan that attracts underrepresented students
into the cyber security field; 3) a retention plan that supports completion,
transfer, career placement and/or advancement; and 4) a faculty/staff
recruitment plan that meets future enrollment needs by incorporating strategies
to develop qualified and culturally-competent computer science faculty. The
project has the potential to illustrate the positive impacts of collaborations
between STEM faculty and the Office of Diversity and Inclusion. Specifically,
the project may demonstrate that educating a globally competitive skilled
technical workforce requires both an industry-driven curriculum and improvements
to the educational outcomes of underrepresented students. In addition, it has
the potential to demonstrate that a culturally competent learning environment
and student support system can improve student success in highly technical
fields such as cyber security. Thus, project outcomes will provide information
that can be used by educational institutions that are struggling to enroll,
engage, retain, and graduate diverse student populations in STEM fields. This
project is funded by the NSF Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.