* 1902409
* Hadley Cell and Subtropical Jet: Dynamics and Tracer Transport
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Darryn Waugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2024
* USD 567,995.00

The Hadley Cells (HCs, one for each hemisphere) are planetary overturning
circulations in which air rises in deep cumulus clouds near the equator and
subsides over the subtropics to either side. The subsidence favors clear skies
and promotes the hot, dry conditions found in regions like the Sahara, the
Kalahari, and the Southwestern United States. Model simulations of future
climate change consistently show an expansion of the HCs, by perhaps a degree of
latitude over the 21st century. Recent studies show evidence that HC expansion
has already taken place and is greater than model simulations would suggest. HC
expansion has clear implications for water resources and is thus a topic of
practical as well as scientific interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond their
impact on the climate of the tropics and subtropics the HCs play an important
global role through their transports of moisture, energy, angular momentum, and
chemical constituents. The angular momentum transport of the HCs is responsible
for the subtropical jets (STJs) which occur at the outer edge of the HC in each
hemisphere. Beyond the STJs there are eddy-driven jets (EDJs), which owe their
existence to the north-south temperature contrast of the middle latitudes and
the associated weather patterns. The expansion of the HCs is expected to cause
the EDJs and STJs to shift poleward, meaning to higher latitudes in each
hemisphere. But these expectations are not quite met. There is a robust
association between the expansion of the HC, the EDJ, and the poleward edge of
the subtropcal dry zone in each hemisphere. On the other hand, HC expansion has
at best a weak effect on STJ latitude, contrary to expectations based on the
dynamical connection between HCs and STJs. Also, measures of the width of the
subtropics based on satellite observations of outgoing longwave radiation do not
show the expected signature of HC expansion. The dynamical implications of these
discrepancies are examined in this project, as well as their consequences for
future climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A further issue addressed here is
the role of the HCs, STJs, and EDJs in the transport and planetary-scale
distribution of radiatively and chemically active trace gases. In particular, a
better understanding of this transport is important for understanding the
distribution of methane, the hydroxyl radical, and ozone depleting substances
relevant to the ozone hole. Previous research suggests a role for the latitude
of the Northern Hemisphere EDJ in regulating tracer transport into the Arctic,
and there are also indications that transport from the northern mid-latitudes
into the northern tropics and the Southern Hemisphere is sensitive to
characteristics of the HC and the STJ. These linkages are addressed here in a
suite of simulations from models at varying levels of complexity. In addition,
transport estimates differ widely among simulation from different models, and
models also tend to overestimate the length of time for which tracers remain in
the atmosphere. These differences and their dynamical causes are examined using
simulations from models participating in the Chemistry-Climate Model Initiative,
a coordinated international effort to produce simulations with a common protocol
that can be directly compared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts
due to the water resource implications of dry zone expansion, as noted above.
The work on tracer transport is also of societal interest due to the role of
long-range tracer transport in determining local air quality, and for
understanding potential obstacles to the recovery of the ozone hole. In
addition, the project promotes workforce development by providing support and
training for two graduate students. The students are encouraged to participate
in various forms of outreach, including outreach to K-12 schools and adult
education classes at Johns Hopkins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.