* 1902093
* Expanding Access to Cybersecurity Career Pathways for Rural Community College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* John Hadley, Palm Beach State College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 592,630.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches. The growth of cyber-threats has created
a need for many additional workers who have the necessary cybersecurity
knowledge and skills. This project aims to help address this need by promoting
students' movement along a cybersecurity career pathway from credit-bearing
certificates to baccalaureate degrees. The work will involve three major tasks.
First, the project team will collaborate with industry professionals to define
cybersecurity workforce needs. Cybersecurity students will have opportunities to
interact with industry professionals to learn what is required in real-world
work environments. Second, the project will use virtual, cloud-based classroom
and lab environments, with state-of-the-art videoconferencing technology, to
deliver courses and laboratory experiences to students at the college's rural
campuses in Belle Glade and Loxahatchee Groves. This approach will relieve
students of having to travel long distances to attend classes and will mitigate
the problem of finding qualified instructors for physical classes at the remote
locations. Third, project activities will be designed to serve all students,
targeting rural students, women, and students from groups that are
underrepresented in cybersecurity. These populations offer talent that must be
tapped to meet the region's and the nation's needs for maintaining a cybersecure
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate new knowledge
about cybersecurity education by testing the following hypothesis: Creating an
inclusive cybersecurity community that includes student learning communities and
cybersecurity professionals as mentors will enhance progress of students along a
cybersecurity career pathway. Project activities include (1) creating a learning
community to promote student engagement, (2) conducting specialized outreach
activities designed to recruit rural students, women, and other populations into
cybersecurity, and (3) improving academic instruction in cybersecurity and
access to cybersecurity career pathways by delivering educational opportunities
for students in rural areas. An objective of the project is to enable at least
half of participating students annually to complete at least four courses toward
a Network Support Technician College Credit Certificate or a Network Security
College Credit Certificate. The project has the potential to increase the number
and diversity of students who are interested in cybersecurity careers, who
pursue a pathway toward that goal, and who enter the technician-level
cybersecurity workforce in Florida. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program, which focuses on the education of technicians
for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.