* 1902290
* Industrial Controls and Telematics Across Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* John Prouty, Morgan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 04/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Morgan Community College will develop an Industrial Controls and Telematics
(ICT) certificate to provide access to high-tech and high-wage employment
opportunities for a diverse rural region in Colorado. This will bring modern
practices of telematics and industrial controls into the current precision
agriculture and industrial maintenance technician programs. This will help meet
local workforce needs in a rapidly emerging technology field. Often employees
gain knowledge of ICT through on-the-job training, however, industry states that
having this knowledge as employees on-board is imperative in today's technical
fields. The ICT certificate will also add rigorous STEM content to courses in
telematics. This will ensure a greater number of students are entering the high-
performance workplace with enhanced STEM theoretical understanding, technical
skills, and relevant competencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Telematics data can be
leveraged in an array of challenges particularly through remote and mobile
equipment. Management and tracking of assets though telematics enables both
remote monitoring and predictive maintenance. This capability is a hallmark of
the computerization of manufacturing, also known as Industry 4.0. As smart
machines and sensors are used for manufacturing and agricultural environments,
processes will become more data-driven and data-enabled. This emerging field is
projected to save industry up to 50% of maintenance costs by 2022 through the
prevention of asset failure, improvement of asset performance, and lower
downtime of automation and process machinery. Having employees with the
knowledge of industrial controls, programmable logic controllers, principles of
relay logic, workflows, automation systems, and the ability to troubleshoot will
help industry minimize downtime and maximize returns. It will also address the
gap of the expected annual growth rate of this emerging field by providing a
knowledgeable and well-prepared workforce that will bring regional industry and
agricultural partners up-to-date with current technology to be competitive in a
rapidly evolving and technology-driven global economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.