* 1902364
* Adsorption in Confined Films
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* William Ducker, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2022
* USD 392,585.00

Many commonplace products are composed of collections of particles suspended in
liquid. Examples include paints, food products and cosmetics. An important
feature of these products is that the particles remain in particular
arrangements, rather than aggregating or separating from the suspending liquid.
Maintaining the proper arrangement of the particles can be challenging,
especially for products with long shelf lives. The key aspect of maintaining the
desired arrangement of particles is to control what happens in the small gaps
where the particles almost touch each other. This project takes advantage of a
recent development in our ability to make well-defined examples of these small
gaps. The project examines how molecules adsorb into the gaps, and how the
adsorption is affected by the gap size. This molecular adsorption is critical to
controlling whether the gaps close or widen with time, and thus whether consumer
products maintain the most useful arrangement. The research in this project will
be integrated into programs that teach undergraduate and graduate students, and
will provide educational tools to inspire high school students, especially those
underrepresented in STEM fields, to continue in science and engineering
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adsorption of ions, surfactants, polymers, and
particles is a key factor in determining the stability of colloidal dispersions
in thin wetting films, and thus is central to many engineering processes.
Adsorption at single interfaces has been well studied, but the directly relevant
quantity for colloid stabilization is adsorption in a thin film between two
interfaces. This has only rarely been measured in prior work. A new technique
has been developed to measure the amount of a species in nanometer-scale films
between two solids. This technique will be used to measure adsorption in
critical regimes where simple modeling based on Poisson-Boltzmann theory is
expected to fail, such as in concentrated solutions, multivalent ions,
surfactants, and particles. The technique has three elements: (1) fabrication of
a robust thin film between two solids with a continuous gradient of thicknesses
in the range of 1?200 nm; (2) measurement of film thickness by interferometry;
and (3) measurement of the amount of adsorbed molecules from the intensity of
fluorescence emission. The expected outcomes are: (1) accurate measurements of
amounts of species in thin films; (2) assessment of the validity of common
models; (3) insight into the stabilization of films in various applications; and
(4) some development of the method to measure the profile of fluorophore
concentration in the direction normal to a planar film. We will integrate this
work into the "Computers and Technology at Virginia Tech" (C-Tech2), which is an
annual two-week summer program for 120 female high school to participate in
hands-on activities to help develop and sustain interest in science and
engineering. The work will also provide interdisciplinary training for a
graduate student in the fields of optics, microfabrication, modelling, and
microscopy. Undergraduates will work on the project, with the aim of inspiring
them to pursue graduate study in engineering or
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.