* 1902401
* Collaborative: Multi-state Community College, University and Industry Collaboration to Prepare Learners for 21st Century Information Technology Jobs
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Paul Crump, STANLY COMMUNITY COLLEGE
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The University of South Carolina and Stanly Community College in North Carolina
will develop a 2+2+2 program with stackable credentials to increase capacity in
the information technology job pipeline. This program will enable students from
multiple institutions in the Carolinas to learn core IT concepts and master
essential hands-on skills using virtual laboratories, preparing them for the job
market. The Carolinas share a common pattern of growth and an increased demand
for IT labor. The number of job postings related to emerging technologies is
fueled by the central role of IT in general business operations and the growing
number of technology and manufacturing companies across the Carolinas. Major
cities with large demands for IT professionals, such as Columbia in South
Carolina and Charlotte in North Carolina, are less than 100 miles apart. This
project reinforces the educational links between sister states that have
historical connections and common needs. It addresses in a unified manner the
strong demand reflected in regional employment statistics. Deployment and
testing of the distributed platform and virtual laboratories will be performed
in the Carolinas, with the potential to be scaled and deployed
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of this project are five-fold.
First, it will enrich secondary-school, two-year, and four-year programs with
hands-on virtual laboratories and companion material. The material will cover
high-demand fields such as networking, platform technologies, and cybersecurity.
Course offerings will extend to Fort Jackson, the largest and most active U.S.
Army entry training center in the country. Second, the project will deploy a
distributed virtual platform which will provide remote-access capability to
laboratory equipment via the Internet. The platform will seamlessly pool and
share resources required to run virtual laboratories. Third, by collaborating
with leading technology companies such as Cisco Systems, VMware, Palo Alto
Networks, and Red Hat, the project will permit students to combine authentic
practice with the use of professional tools and platforms, supplementing the
coverage of theoretical concepts. Students will also have the option to obtain
highly recognized stackable credentials. Fourth, it will develop a training
program consisting of weeklong summer workshops to prepare instructors to use
virtual laboratories in their classes. Finally, by collaborating with the South
and North Carolina Chambers of Commerce and local industry, the project will
include internships that allow students to apply real-world IT skills. This
transformative technology will potentially provide access to essential IT
equipment, and hands-on training to students from hundreds of institutions,
facilitating the entrance of technologists into the regional as well as national
workforce. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.