* 1902282
* 2018 Hurricane Season: RAPID: Rural residents' self-protections to perceived and actual contamination risk in private drinking wells after Hurricane Florence
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2020
* Jamie Kruse, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 11/30/2020
* USD 179,223.00

Hurricane Florence dumped 8 trillion gallons of rain on North Carolina. Duplin
and Sampson Counties, which lead the nation in pork production (#1 and #2) and
poultry production (#2 and #3), were among the most affected areas receiving 20+
inches of rainfall, catastrophic flooding and hurricane force winds. Few
residents in the two rural counties have access to a public water supply and
therefore rely on groundwater wells. Inundated wells, and those wells downstream
of the state's 3,000+ open waste lagoons, are at severe risk of contamination
from coliform bacteria and nitrate. The extent to which this environmental
exposure occurs depends on residents' capacities to perceive, but not
necessarily confirm, this risk and respond with appropriate efforts to protect
themselves (e.g. purchasing bottled water, boiling water, installing water
filtration systems). The rate at which wells become polluted following a storm
event, the time required for the wells to return potable water and the actions
taken by homeowners to protect themselves in the interim all remain
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging recent water quality sampling prior
to Hurricane Florence in the storm-affected area, this research is a time-
sensitive and unique opportunity to document actual and perceived groundwater
contaminant exposures, measure the dissipation of actual and perceived
contamination over time and observe self-protective risk mitigation actions
taken. The research team conducts two follow-up rounds of water quality sampling
and resident interviews with the objective of measuring the perceived and actual
contamination impacts of an unexpected shock on groundwater purity and the
measures that rural homeowners take to self-protect. The findings inform whether
rural homeowners take appropriate and timely action to self-protect against
flood-related environmental exposures and whether self-protection efforts by
these homeowners is a substantial contributor to the social cost of groundwater
contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.