* 1902446
* Heat and Fluid Flow at Pythia's Oasis, Cascadia Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Robert Harris, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 68,870.00

There is intense interest in understanding the nature, magnitude, and conditions
of fluid flow deep within active continental margins due to the impact that
fluids and mineral alteration processes have on seismicity and earthquakes in
subduction zone environments. This is particularly true for the continental
margin off Oregon and Washington State and Southern Canada, which is called the
Cascadia Margin. This ~1000 kilometer-long subduction zone fault last ruptured
in 1700 which produced a magnitude 9 earthquake that resulted in a large tsunami
that impacted the Pacific Northwest and Japan and triggered significant
underwater landslides. Gaining access to deep subduction zone fluids, however,
is challenging because they are largely inaccessible, occurring at great depth
below the seafloor. In 2015, a seep site was discovered off the Oregon coast
where a jet of warm, hydrocarbon-enriched, low-salinity fluid was found venting
from the seafloor. This site, called Pythia's Oasis, is unlike any seep site yet
discovered, providing possible access to fluids formed deep within the Cascadia
Subduction Zone. A second adjacent site includes an extensive collapse zone
hosting multiple seeps that issue diffuse flows of warm and/or low salinity,
methane-rich fluids that support dense microbial and macrofaunal communities.
The goal of this research project is to better understand the heat flow around
the sites in order to test hypotheses about the origin of these fluids and their
effect on the environment. This will be done using a remotely operated vehicle
from the National Deep Submergence Facility at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution and heat-flow probes from the Oregon State University, U.S. Academic
Heat Flow Capability system. If these fluids come from deep in the subduction
zone, this site will provide an opportunity to study high-temperature fluid
sources and reactions in the only segment of the Cascadia Subduction Zone that
is inferred to be seismically active. Results of the work have implications for
understanding deep-seated fluid and seismogenic processes acting in other
subduction zones as well. Broader impacts include an at-sea student training
program in which at least 10 undergraduate and graduate students will
participate on the 13-day sea-going field expedition to the site where they will
learn about and participate in seagoing activities and the discovery processes.
The students will work alongside experienced scientists and ship and deep
submergence vehicle crews to conducting their own research using data collected
on the cruise and by later onshore analyses. Public outreach will be carried out
via students who will communicate their experiences and findings through a
cruise website and formal and informal presentations, with messaging focused on
K-20 opportunities in integrated oceanography-engineering programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will involve collecting heat flow data in
and around Pythia's Oasis, a submarine seep on the convergent Cascadia margin,
thereby providing a process-based understanding for the thermal and hydrologic
regime of the shallow Cascadia subduction zone (CSZ). Pythia's Oasis is located
~80 km offshore Oregon and approximately 19 km landward of the deformation
front. This seafloor seep has been discharging an enormous flux of warm (11.8
degree C), low salinity (-0.6 PSU), hydrocarbon bearing fluid over a multi-year
time scale. Fluids being discharged there are hypothesized to result from high
temperature (&gt; 250 degree C) dehydration reactions that provide a view of
deep-seated fluids. The principal goals of this experiment are to: 1) measure
heat flow in the region of Pythia's Oasis, on the incoming plate, across the
deformation front, and the accretionary prism, using a violin-bow style marine
heat flow probe; 2) link these observations with previously collected values of
heat flow (seafloor probe, BSR estimates and continental measurements), along
strike and across the forearc; and 3) develop models to better understand the
thermal regime of Pythia's Oasis and the Cascadia subduction zone. The proposed
work will address fundamental and long-standing questions about the links
between thermal, hydrologic and geodynamic processes and will advance discovery
and understanding of this unique seep.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.