* 1902647
* Eager: Inq-Blotter: Designing Supports for Teachers' Real Time Instruction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Janice Gobert, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

Teachers are often frustrated because large-scale assessment data are neither
timely nor adequate to understand students' needs so they can improve science
instruction. What is missing are diagnostic, real-time tools to support
teachers' practices and, in turn, students' learning. To address this challenge,
the principal investigators will utilize Inq-Blotter, a dashboard, that lets
teachers know who needs the most help and on which inquiry practices. Inq-
Blotter will be integrated with Inq-ITS (Inquiry Intelligent Tutoring System)
for middle school science, a learning environment in which students "show what
they know" by conducting inquiry within virtual labs. Early data on dashboards
for other domains (e.g. Mathematics) are promising, and pilot data collected
with Inq-Blotter also shows promise in that it supports teachers' assessment
practices. This project aims to develop Inq-ITS within virtual laboratories and
to develop teacher professional development materials for supporting teachers
content knowledge or inquiry practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
principal investigators will develop instructional scripts, with which teachers
can initiate class discussion or provide 1:1 support to students. They will
conduct analyses to evaluate if the discourse afforded by the scripts helps to
foster students' inquiry practices on their next inquiry activity (compared to
control teachers who will not be provided instructional scripts). Important to
the topic of classroom orchestration, the principal investigators will analyze
teachers' discourse to study how alerting and scripts supports students'
inquiry. The project combines techniques to measure students' inquiry practices
at scale to study how teachers interact with their students when provided real-
time alerts. In doing so, it can realize teachers' needs for formative
assessments for science practices as well as students' needs' for learning
inquiry. It will provide principles that can guide the design and development of
alerting tools for teachers by advancing the stateof-the-art using a
technologically-based approach to close the formative assessment loop for an
ill-defined domain, namely, science inquiry. This work contributes to the well-
acknowledged need to better support teachers' data use in classrooms, as well as
support students in STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.