* 1902408
* Analyzing and Exploiting Hybrid Dynamical Systems Containing Piecewise Linear Nonlinearities
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Kiran D'Souza, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 429,804.00

This project will advance national interests by supporting research that will
improve the design process of a variety of engineered systems where rubbing and
intermittent contact between components significantly affects performance. These
systems include damping devices for aircraft engines and turbomachinery, and
energy harvesters such as water buoys that provide green energy. Current
techniques are not able to predict the response of these complex systems and
hence obstruct the development of new technologies. This research will provide
new techniques to advance the design process of next-generation damping devices
and energy harvesters. The optimal damper design will address serious fatigue
problems and reduce required maintenance costs for flight vehicles and
turbomachinery. This research will also create a new class of energy harvesting
methods that will provide better power generation efficiency. The research will
be integrated with an educational component disseminating the work to
undergraduates and kindergarten through eighth grade underrepresented groups to
help broaden participation in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prediction and exploitation of the dynamics of
complex systems with dry friction and/or intermittent contact is challenging due
to the lack of computational efficiency and limited capability of current
methods to analyze the induced piecewise-linear nonlinearities. This research
will create a new class of effective techniques to enable the computation of the
responses, both transient and steady-state, of large piecewise-linear nonlinear
systems in order to analyze, monitor and control their dynamics. This research
has three main goals. First, create a method to compute the time-domain response
of complex systems with piecewise-linear nonlinearities. The project's approach
enables the analysis of any type of response (e.g., periodic, quasi-periodic,
and chaotic responses) of these systems. Second, create a method to rapidly
approximate the steady-state vibration amplitudes and frequencies of large
piecewise-linear nonlinear systems when they respond periodically. Parametric
and statistical studies and new vibration control strategies of these systems
will be enabled with this method. Third, apply the general methods to two real-
world applications: the analysis of turbomachinery containing nonlinear damping
and the active gap control for improved vibration performance of energy
harvesters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.