* 1902697
* Collaborative Research:   Improved Freeform Measurement through Fiber-based Metrology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,03/31/2022
* ChaBum Lee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 176,636.00

Metrology is the art and science of measurement, and is central to advanced
manufacturing. There is a critical need for improved metrology science in micro-
and nano-scale ultra-precision manufacturing of freeform surfaces. The objective
of this research is to improve measurement capabilities for such ultra-precision
optical surfaces. This surface measurement is important not only after an optic
device has been produced, but also during manufacturing to assess the process
performance. Existing measurement methods suffer from fundamental errors that
limit the achievable accuracy. Additionally, traditional techniques often
interrupt the manufacturing process and limit productivity. In this research,
on-machine metrology using a novel measurement strategy will be used to improve
manufacturing capabilities for challenging optical components. The results of
this work will be used to improve freeform measurement capabilities and will
therefore lead to scientific advances in the optical, illumination, energy,
aerospace, and biomedical fields. Other broader impacts include the two-week
"Precision Engineering-Oriented Multidisciplinary Internship Program" at
Tennessee Technological University, a permanent gallery that highlights
precision engineering-based historic devices at the Cookeville Children's
Museum, Cookeville, Tennessee, and "Project Engineering for Me (E4Me)" that
targets middle school girls in the urban Charlotte-Mecklenburg school system.
These educational efforts will expose K-12 students to STEM research and careers
with a focus on precision engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
objective is to eliminate cosine error in freeform surface measurement by
integrating a novel fiber-optic sensor in an on-machine measurement
configuration. Cosine error in surface profile measurement results from an
angular misalignment between the measurement axis and the axis of motion and
limits the measurement accuracy. This is especially true in measurements of
Fresnel lenses, gratings, spherical/aspherical surfaces, and high-order
polynomial surfaces, for example. Cosine error cannot be eliminated in current
freeform surface measurement strategies because the measuring tools do not
measure along the direction normal to the measurement plane. A novel methodology
for freeform surfaces by integrating fiber optic techniques (autofocusing,
Fizeau interferometry) in an on-machine configuration is planned. The project's
approach also avoids machine tool error motions because the measurement path
coincides with the machining path. By answering fundamental questions regarding
the performance limits of the approach, it is expected that this research will
produce new knowledge in high-precision, on-machine instrumentation.