* 1902080
* Digitization TCN:  Collaborative:  American Crossroads:  Digitizing the vascular flora of the south-central United States
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Bruce Hoagland, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 569,626.00

The advent of data mobilization from biological specimens housed in U.S.
institutions has profoundly enhanced the value of museum collections and has
allowed scientific questions to be addressed in novel ways. The process of
mobilization involves specimen digital image capture, transcription of label
data, addition of geographic coordinates, and dissemination of the data through
searchable online portals. This four-year project brings together 46
collaborating herbaria to mobilize the data from nearly two million plant
specimens collected in the states of Oklahoma and Texas. Most of the herbaria in
these states, as well as key herbaria from other states with large Oklahoma and
Texas holdings, will participate. Because these two states constitute a major
crossroads of North American ecological and plant diversity, digitizing their
plant specimen data can serve as a key element for understanding ecosystem
evolution across the North American continent. The project will include data for
species of conservation concern, invasives, and environmental health indicators,
thus enhancing species and habitat conservation and management and contributing
to wide-ranging applications in biodiversity science. It will also involve as
participants members of plant enthusiast organizations (such as native plant
societies) in specimen data entry. The project will contribute to a globally
competitive STEM workforce through workshops and lectures for its technicians
and practical training for undergraduate interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digitized
herbarium specimen data for the South-Central U.S. are sparse relative to other
parts of the country, leaving a large geographic gap in our knowledge of North
American plant biodiversity that impedes both regional and larger-scale efforts
in solving environmental issues. To address this problem, the researchers will
1) establish a Thematic Collections Network (TCN) to digitize the data from
nearly two million vascular plant herbarium specimens collected in Oklahoma and
Texas; 2) disseminate the digitized data through an integrated online platform;
3) develop and implement innovative strategies to increase efficiency in
specimen digitization; and 4) engage citizen scientists and students on project-
based activities. The project is primed for action by its strong integration
with the well-established Texas and Oklahoma Regional Consortium of Herbaria
(TORCH; www.torcherbaria.org), which will help oversee and guide the project.
Coordination with Integrated Digitized Biocollections (iDigBio.org) hub will
facilitate team-wide meetings, broader impact elements, and data workflows,
mobilization, and access. Natural history collections are well positioned for
the analysis of global change and the resulting impacts on regional biota. In
this context, the digitized herbarium specimen data from the TORCH TCN will
provide the capacity for addressing major hypotheses in the region concerning
patterns of species richness and phylogenetic diversity, vegetation responses to
climate change, and species distribution models based on substrate versus
climatic data. Results of the project will be widely disseminated through
professional publications and society meetings, local chapters of plant-
enthusiast communities, social media outlets, and blogs on the TORCH
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.