* 1902524
* Meeting Industry Needs through a Two-Year Data Science Technician Education Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Pamela Brauda, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 566,953.00

According to the Business-Higher Education Forum, well over half of employers
surveyed expect that candidates with data science and analytics skills will get
preference during the hiring process for job openings in 2021. In fact, the data
science technician is predicted to be one of the fastest growing jobs by 2030,
as employers address the velocity, volume, value, variety, and veracity of the
Big Data that inundates businesses. However, less than a quarter of college and
university leaders report that their graduates will have those skills. To help
address this gap, this project aims to develop Florida's first Associate of
Science in Data Science program. With the support of higher education partners,
government entities, and industry partners, the project will develop educational
and career pathways to prepare students for data science roles, particularly in
entry and middle-skill data science jobs. Preparation of these students will
help to address the growing state-wide and national demand for a data science
workforce. The project includes professional development for college faculty to
adapt the A.S. program for implementation at other institutions, thus building
state-wide capacity in data science education. Because the data science
technician program will be on-line, it will be accessible to a broader range of
students, including non-traditional students and incumbent workers. This A.S.
degree framework has the potential to serve as a model to enhance the state's
educational infrastructure and will be available to 28 institutions in the
Florida College System and publicly shared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will investigate the development of students' knowledge of data science,
technical skills, and analytical abilities to provide entry- or technician-level
career pathways. The data science technician program will enroll 100
undergraduate students who will have the opportunity to earn up to six industry-
recognized certifications and two college credit certifications in data science
as they move toward completing their A.S. degree. The project will develop
online formats and resources for each course to expand student access and
provide distance learning options through both hybrid and online courses for
rural technician education. The data science technician courses will advance
students' knowledge and competencies in core foundational data science skills
including statistical software, data management and analysis, and data
visualization. Sixty college faculty across multiple disciplines will
participate in forty hours of faculty development in data science, to enable the
data science technician program to be replicated at other institutions. The
project team will measure the impact of the data science technician courses on
student learning and determine their effectiveness in meeting industry partners'
needs for qualified data science technicians. The team will also work with
industry partners to explore opportunities for internships and career employment
as a data science technician. In addition to the A.S. Degree in Data Science
Technology, the program will also feature milestone-based recognition, such as
local certifications and industry certifications, which will serve as
motivational instruments. The project will emphasize recruitment of students
from groups that are underrepresented in data science, including women,
veterans, students from underrepresented minorities, and adult learners. This
project is funded by NSF's Advanced Technological Education program, which
focuses on the education of technicians for the high-technology fields that
drive our nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.