* 1902437
* Mobile Additive Manufacturing Platform for 21st Century STEM Workforce Enhancement
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Elaine Kohrman, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 588,340.00

Additive manufacturing (3D printing) has become an increasingly common
manufacturing production method. As a result, industries in eastern Kentucky and
Tennessee have begun to shift their production to additive manufacturing.
However, this region has a shortage in the skilled technicians needed to meet
the resulting workforce demands. Also, manufacturers and potential workers in
rural and underserved areas in this region might benefit from increased
awareness of the advantages that additive manufacturing can provide. In this
project, Somerset Community College (Kentucky) and Tennessee Technological
University will work together to help address these workforce and education
needs. Specifically, this project aims to help educate a new generation of
qualified employees for the region's manufacturing workforce. To achieve this
goal, the project partners will update the curriculum for an existing
certificate in additive manufacturing to include advanced concepts and design
methods for 3D printing. A mobile equipment platform for additive manufacturing
will also be developed. This mobile additive manufacturing platform will enable
learning activities in additive manufacturing to be brought to high schools,
community colleges, and workplaces across the region. Through these efforts, the
project aims to help the regional population and companies to become more
familiar with additive manufacturing, and to create a generalizable approach
that can be adapted by other rural communities. The project will also provide
pathways for more community college students and workers to obtain credentials
in additive manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
project is to enhance workforce development opportunities in additive
manufacturing for high school students, community college students, incumbent
workers, and manufacturers in underserved regions of Kentucky and Tennessee. Two
courses will be developed to include advancements in powder-based printer and
metal printer applications. These courses will be integrated into the existing
curriculum for the 3D Printing Technician-Level 1 certificate at the
institutions. These courses will cover topics such as improved product topology,
metal sintering production, advanced composite materials, and generative design
concepts and techniques. Customized curriculum on these topics will also be
developed and offered in workshops for high school students and incumbent
workers. A mobile additive manufacturing platform will be designed to provide
hands-on learning experiences using high-grade industrial materials and state-
of-the-art 3D printing equipment. The use of this transportable equipment will
enable students and incumbent workers across the region to directly interact
with a full range of production techniques and capabilities. The project team
will study the effectiveness of this mobile educational delivery method in
achieving desired learning objectives and benchmark the results against
traditional educational approaches. The project materials, best practices, and
results will be shared on the project website, through Advanced Technological
Education Centers, and at regional and national venues. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.