* 1902888
* RAPID: Local Residents' Responses to the 2018 Indonesia Earthquake and Tsunami
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Michael Lindell, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 10/31/2020
* USD 30,000.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project examines fundamental issues on the
evacuation time estimates associated with earthquake and tsunami hazards by
linking social science warning research, transportation engineering, and
casualty modeling. This devastating event to Palu and the nearby cities of
Donggala and Mamuju, Indonesia is of major scientific relevance to American
researchers because it is similar in nature to the predicted M9.0 Cascadia
Subduction Zone (CSZ) earthquake. The Palu event has uniquely important
implications to the coastal communities in the CSZ. First, the 20-ft tsunami
generated by a M7.5 strike-slip earthquake resembles a similar local source of
tsunami generation on the Pacific Northwest (PNW) coast. Understanding people's
behavioral responses to the Palu earthquake and tsunami can provide unique
insights to improve the preparedness of PNW coastal communities and other
coastal areas of United States. Second, the Palu event represents a "worst case
scenario" (earthquake, tsunami, large inland flows of mud, and liquefaction,
where soil failure swallowed 1,400 houses) in which the event happened at the
same time a large number of people had congregated on a beach for a festival. It
is clear that the densely populated coastal areas took heavy damage because of
tsunami-generated large inland flows of mud. Intense ground shaking from the
preceding earthquake may have triggered soil liquefaction and lateral spreading.
These combined processes are also common near streams and on reclaimed land that
can produce destructive mudslides in relatively flat areas on the PNW coast from
the predicted CSZ event. Third, the unique geographic location of Palu sitting
at the end of a narrow 10km-long finger-like bay likely amplified the fast-
moving surge of water and wave energy on the relatively shallower seabed,
exacerbating the damaging power of the tsunami on the affected people and
communities. There are similar communities on the PNW coast located on this type
of bay. Lastly, many PNW coastal communities suffer a similar lack of tsunami
preparedness. In the CSZ, the threat of near-field tsunamis has been recognized
only recently, so many communities have based their evacuation plans on far-
field tsunami scenarios that provide 4-6 hours of forewarning. The difficulty of
predicting such events with the current technology for earthquake and tsunami
warning makes it essential to learn from the Palu event. In addition, a study of
Palu tsunami evacuations will inform evacuation planning for other similar type
rapid-onset disasters such as flash floods. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
uses the Protective Action Decision Model (PADM) as a guide to collecting
empirical data on people's behavioral responses to the Palu earthquake and
tsunami. Questions include: How many people recognized the earthquake shaking as
an environmental cue for a tsunami onset? How many people received warnings from
officials, news media, and peers? How did people respond to the threat? This
project uses a validated survey procedure previously used in American Samoa
(2009), Christchurch (2011), Tohoku (2011), Cook Strait (2013), and Lake
Grassmere (2013). Collected data focus on (1) the amount of time it took
officials to decide to issue tsunami evacuation warnings; (2) the tsunami
warning sources, channels, messages and warning dissemination times; (3)
people's evacuation participation rates, preparation times, and departure times;
and (4) people's evacuation logistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.