* 1902492
* Instrumentation Training for Hands-On Learning in the Engineering Technician Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Kenneth Floyd, Front Range Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 494,777.00

There is a nationwide shortage of skilled technicians in the manufacturing
industry. In northern Colorado, advanced manufacturing companies have
specifically noted a critical need for industrial maintenance workers. To help
fill this need, Front Range Community College will design and implement a new
associate degree program that will prepare students to be industrial maintenance
technicians. The project team will work in partnership with local manufacturing
companies in northern Colorado to develop courses for the program. These courses
will include active learning and skills-building instruction on new training
equipment to provide industry-relevant learning experiences for students. This
innovative degree program will provide students with options of certificates
that can be stacked toward the associate degree as part of an approach for
career advancement. The program will also provide the opportunity for students
to obtain industry-recognized certifications. The certifications will help
demonstrate students' readiness for employment. As a result, the project has the
potential to increase the number of skilled industrial maintenance technicians
available to meet workforce needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will seek
to: 1) provide enhanced learning experiences for engineering technology students
that respond to critical needs of the Northern Colorado advanced manufacturing
industry; and 2) grow and diversify the regional industrial maintenance
technician workforce. The project team will design a new Associate of Applied
Science degree in automation and engineering technology, in close collaboration
with subject matter experts in local manufacturing industries. The new
curriculum will use state-of-the-art industrial training equipment to
incorporate hands-on experiences that help students develop needed skills,
including skills in electrical circuits and instrumentation, industrial motors
and controls, basic machining, fluid power, and mechanical systems. The two-year
course of study will include two stackable certificates. At the end of the first
year in the program, students will earn a certificate in Industrial Maintenance.
During the second year, students will be able to earn an Industrial Automation
and Robotics certificate, as well as complete the National Institute of
Metalworking Skills (NIMS) Certification tests for Process Control Systems (Duty
Area 7). Student performance on the NIMS testing will be used to study the
effects of the new curriculum on student learning outcomes. The innovative
structuring of the course sequences will enable students to gain marketable
skills after only one year and will help provide a shortened path to an entry-
level job for students who may have financial obstacles. This flexible
structuring will also be used to attract, recruit, and retain more students from
underserved and underrepresented populations within the region. The content in
the new degree program, the project results, and best practices will be
disseminated in the local community, regionally, and nationally. This project is
funded by the NSF Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.