* 1902131
* 2018 Hurricane Season: Influence on organic carbon input and biodegradation in marsh-dominated estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2021
* Patricia Medeiros, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2021
* USD 127,146.00

This project will examine changes in dissolved organic matter (DOM) composition
and microbial decay processes in a marsh-dominated estuary that occur in
response to the passage of hurricanes and tropical storms. The investigators
will focus on the estuary around Sapelo Island off Georgia, which is the site of
the Georgia Coastal Ecosystem Long Term Ecological Research (GCE-LTER) program.
After decades escaping major storms, the estuary was hit by Hurricane Matthew in
October 2016 and by Hurricane Irma in September 2017, and it is likely to be
influenced by heavy rainfall from the passage of Hurricane Michael around
October 11-12th, 2018. Although pulses in river discharge can deliver fresh,
easily consumed organic matter to the estuary, the effects of DOM delivery
during hurricanes on microbial processes are not well constrained. This is
important because microbial processing of DOM can influence air-sea fluxes of
carbon dioxide and other biogeochemical processes. This project will promote
education by supporting a graduate student. Findings from this research will be
disseminated in the Schoolyard Program that is organized every summer by the
NSF-funded Georgia Coastal Ecosystem LTER. The program immerses science and math
K-12 teachers from across the State of Georgia in hands-on research activities
and discussions on coastal processes. All data generated as part of this project
will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A detailed year-long
investigation of DOM composition based on optical measurements and Fourier-
transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FT-ICR MS) data in
2015-2016 captured the effects of Hurricane Matthew, which resulted in a
significant input of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and change in DOM
composition in the estuary. Sampling in 2017 captured a similar effect shortly
after the passage of Hurricane Irma. DOC consumption by microbes was found to be
strongly tied to DOM composition. The investigators propose to collect
additional samples in the estuary in mid-October 2018, when Hurricane Michael is
expected to impact the region because of heavy rainfall inland. They will also
quantify biologically labile DOM via microbial dark incubations. They will
compare DOM composition and lability between background samples not influenced
by hurricanes and samples from the 3 hurricanes that will have been captured by
the combined studies. While the two earlier hurricanes caused large storm surges
in the estuary, Hurricane Michael is expected to cause heavy rainfall but
smaller storm surge. The occurrence of three major hurricanes in three
consecutive years is highly unusual for this estuary, and together with the
fortuitous fact that two detailed programs to investigate DOM dynamics were in
place, provides an excellent opportunity to quantify the impact of hurricanes on
organic carbon delivery and processing in a marsh-dominated
estuary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.