* 1902699
* Collaborative Research: GEM--Thermal Electron Anisotropy in the Earth's Magnetotail
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Andrei Runov, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2022
* USD 242,378.00

One of the most important problems of space plasma physics is understanding how
high-energy charged particles are generated. There are a huge variety of
mechanisms suggested for accelerating electrons in the region of the geomagnetic
field known as the current sheet. This project will help distinguish between
these theories to help determine which are at work in the magnetosphere. This is
directly relevant to the National Space Weather Plan, since the work can lead to
better models and forecasts of space weather, which affects national commercial
and defense satellites and space-based communications. Additionally, graduate
and undergraduate students will participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project quantifies the impact of the
electron thermal anisotropy on the magnetotail current sheet structure and
investigates the variation of characteristics of electron thermal anisotropy
with geomagnetic activity. The anisotropic electron population can be
responsible for generation of strong currents (induced by particle curvature
drifts) and can serve as an energy source for various electromagnetic wave
emissions. The project uses observations from five spacecraft missions (Geotail,
Cluster, THEMIS, ARTEMIS, and MMS) covering the entire magnetotail within the
radial distances from 10 to 80 Earth radii downtail. Using several years of
THEMIS/ARTEMIS observations in the near-Earth and middle magnetotail, the work
studies both the radial distribution of the electron thermal anisotropy and the
impact of electron anisotropic currents on current sheet structure for different
magnetotail configurations. Moreover, using MMS observations with the high-
resolution plasma measurements the work will for the first time statistically
reveal the fine structure of the electron anisotropic population and its
contribution to the current density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.