* 1902519
* Pathway to Advance Cybersecurity Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Behzad Izadi, North Orange County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 253,491.00

This project aims to address the national challenge of increasing the number and
skill-level of U.S. cybersecurity professionals. Over the past 30 years, the
U.S. economy has shifted from a manufacturing-based economy to one that is more
dependent on services, information, and technology. One resulting outcome is the
emergence of cybersecurity as a critical, high-demand, high-paying profession.
This project aims to improve cybersecurity technician education by enhancing
students' STEM knowledge, as well as ensuring that students gain the technical
skills and competencies needed to enter the cybersecurity workforce. The project
aims to provide a streamlined cybersecurity education pathway from high school
into high-paying careers in the cybersecurity industry, particularly for
nontraditional, at-risk, and returning high school students who may lack
academic preparation or have financial need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
focus of this project is on high school teachers and students, and community
college faculty and students (certificate-level and associate degree-level). The
overall goal is to develop a cybersecurity education pathway that has multiple
entry points and multiple exit points from which students can enter
cybersecurity jobs. The specific aims are to enhance cybersecurity curricula,
develop high school/college dual enrollment courses, and develop college-level
cybersecurity badges and certifications. The project activities are designed to
enhance articulation and alignment of cybersecurity education between high
schools and colleges, and support teaching of the cybersecurity curriculum by
providing professional development activities for secondary school teachers and
college faculty. Through outreach activities, the project intends to introduce
secondary students to the cybersecurity field, anticipating that many of these
students will begin cybersecurity training in high school. These high school
courses will build a foundation from which high school graduates could compete
for entry-level cybersecurity jobs or pursue higher levels of cybersecurity
education. The project will establish a framework for industry internships for
students and increase student employability in cybersecurity by awarding digital
badges and preparing students to obtain industry certifications. The project
will disseminate best practices in implementing cybersecurity guided pathways to
the educational community, including the Southern California Community College
Consortium and the National Center for Cybersecurity Education. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.