* 1902242
* The oUTCT PEN:  Outwardly Mobilizing the UTCT Vertebrate Archive for Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* David Blackburn, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 173,993.00

The University of Texas High-Resolution X-ray CT Facility (UTCT) was established
in 1997 to make HRXCT - a direct descendant of medical CT - available to
researchers in the natural sciences. Through this award, oUTCT will partner with
the oVert (openVertebrate) project to make nearly nine terabytes of existing
high-resolution X-ray computed tomographic (HRXCT) data publicly accessible, and
to train the next generation of students in best practices for these data.
Scientists from around the world have brought their most important and precious
natural history specimens to UTCT to image and measure their interior features
nondestructively. This application of HRXCT technology has been tremendously
successful, resulting in the proliferation of scanners at institutions across
the country. Over the course of two years, oUTCT will upload HRXCT data for 90
UTCT clients to MorphoSource. About 3000 specimen scans, representing nearly
1,500 fossil and extant vertebrate species, will be made available so they can
be easily discovered and downloaded by everyone from scientists to artists to
K-12 educators. This mobilization will be accomplished by undergraduate students
employed at UTCT, who will learn the basics of HRXCT data acquisition and
visualization as well as basic bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UTCT
datasets, acquired in part via dozens of NSF grants and cited more than 18,000
times in academic publications, remain in high demand due to their broad scope,
high data quality, and historical significance. This demand has been fueled in
part by the public-facing Digital Library of Morphology (DigiMorph.org), an NSF-
funded project online since 2002 and housed at UTCT, which serves HRXCT-derived
animations for more than 1,000 biological and paleontological specimens. In the
oUTCT project, UTCT and DigiMorph will partner with oVert and iDigBio, both at
the University of Florida, and the MorphoSource data repository at Duke
University to make this unparalleled collection of HRXCT datasets more readily
discoverable and more easily repurposed. As part of the educational outreach for
this project, oUTCT will also provide training to the oVert community, which
spans nearly 20 universities and academic institutions, to maximize the
scientific impact of that project. The UTCT will host two short courses per
year, cosponsored by oVert and iDigBio, to train students and scientists
associated with oVert and MorphoSource in the fundamentals of HRXCT data
acquisition, visualization, analysis, and long-term management. These activities
will expand the impact of the original oVert project and maximize the return on
NSF?s investment in it, UTCT, DigiMorph, iDigBio, and
MorphoSource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.