* 1902045
* Collaborative Research:  A Fundamentals-based Paradigm for Expansive Soil Classification
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Ning Lu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 04/30/2023
* USD 380,836.00

Damage and litigation costs from construction of buildings, roads, and bridges,
on expansive soils total billions of dollars each year in the US alone, yet the
current state of mitigation practice still heavily relies on antiquated,
uncertain, and highly empirical site characterization methods. A more systematic
and fundamentally sound approach for expansive soil classification is required
to alleviate the severe economic and social burden of damages resulting from
these materials. The new paradigm in this project for soil classification is
viewed as central to solving current global societal and environmental
challenges, including energy and resource needs, infrastructure development,
environmental protection and enhancement, and protection and recovery from
natural disasters. The framework will allow designers to more effectively
quantify site variability by allowing a larger and more diverse suite of samples
to be tested in a short amount of time. Improved basic understanding of
expansive clays will impact the tremendously broad range of applications where
they have found use, including environmental applications such as waste
containment, filtration and membranes, and as industrial adsorbents. Activities
will be integrated with the research to capitalize on the collaborative nature
of the project, including a summer exchange program for students at the
University of Wisconsin (UW) and the Colorado School of Mines (CSM) and
education/diversity initiatives implemented through existing programs at UW and
CSM. A hands-on training workshop will be organized to disseminate the new soil
classification system to the practicing geotechnical engineering
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to modernize
geotechnical engineering practice by developing a new paradigm for expansive
soil characterization based on fundamental soil properties and behavior. Two
distinct physicochemical mechanisms responsible for clay swelling behavior -
crystalline swelling and osmotic swelling - will form the basis of the new
framework. The approach in this project explicitly differentiates these
mechanisms to glean specific information about fundamental clay properties
including specific surface area and cation exchange capacity and to classify
expansive clays using independent mineralogy and pore fluid chemistry criteria.
Modern experimental approaches, including automated measurements of water vapor
sorption isotherms and soil shrinkage curves, will replace historical index
measurements (e.g. Atterberg Limits) in the new expansive soil classification
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.