* 1902172
* EAGER: Exfoliated and Oriented Graphene Channel-Enabled Multifunctional Nanocomposite Fibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Kenan Song, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 11/30/2022
* USD 418,224.00

Composite fibers made by including graphene in polymers offer a solution to many
materials challenges where low density and high performance requirements limit
the current applications. Theoretical predictions of materials performance show
promise for polymer nanocomposites, but experimentally manufactured fibers to
date have not demonstrated the efficiency and performance levels of theoretical
predictions. This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award
supports research to close the gap between theoretical predictions and
attainable materials performance, through the fabrication of a novel type of
composite fibers. A customized fabrication apparatus will be used to demonstrate
the capability to produce hierarchical microstructures in thin fibers, and to
characterize the fundamental processing-property relationships in the resulting
materials. These composite fibers can be tailored for a variety of functions,
including mechanical dampening, impact resistance, heat exchange, electrical
conductivity, sound absorption, drug loading/release, and water treatments. This
research contributes new knowledge to the manufacturing process of composite
fibers and will promote the progress of science and the development of new
materials for industry and national defense needs. The research utilizes a
multi-disciplinary approach, including polymer physics, mechanics, heat
transfer, manufacturing, and materials science. This integrated approach will
have a positive impact on engineering education and help engage the
participation of students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is scalable manufacturing of co-axial
polymer/graphene composite fibers with a uniformly distributed, continuously
bridged and anisotropically oriented single-layer graphene channel. The research
team will fabricate the polymer-graphite hybrid formations, perform multi-phase
fiber spinning processes, and characterize the mechanical and thermal
properties. Graphene exfoliations and orientations will be studied via relative
movement of molecular chains on top and bottom layers of the graphene channel.
The relationship among the graphene morphology evolution, the interfacial
interactions, and the constraining effects and shear forces from surrounding
polymer chains will be studied. This award supports the research of graphene
morphologies to develop multifunctional nanocomposite fibers, filling a
knowledge gap on the mechanism(s) of graphene exfoliation and orientation as a
function of fiber spinning parameters and material
configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.