* 1902859
* CAREER: Regulation of cargo selection and ubiquitination by protein trafficking adaptors
* BIO,MCB
* 08/22/2018,12/31/2022
* Allyson ODonnell, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2022
* USD 608,153.00

In response to a changing environment, proteins are reshuffled in the cell -
specific proteins are removed from the cell surface while others are selectively
targeted to the surface. This protein reshuffling is referred to as protein
trafficking and cells must make the correct 'decisions' to control protein
trafficking and ensure optimal cell growth and survival. The goal of this
research is to understand how the cellular decisions that dictate protein
trafficking are made. This multidisciplinary project pairs cell and molecular
biology with powerful new computational biology approaches to define the
parameters that determine how proteins are selectively relocalized in response
to environmental changes. Key players in regulating these cellular decisions are
a recently described, but poorly understood, family of proteins called the
alpha-arrestins. Alpha-arrestins act as cellular 'mail carriers' ensuring that
proteins are delivered to the right location at the right time. In spite of
their important role in protein trafficking, there remain critical, yet
unanswered questions about alpha-arrestin function including: 1) how do alpha-
arrestins recognize the discreet subset of proteins they regulate? and 2) what
factors control when and where alpha-arrestins interact with the proteins they
traffic? In other words, how do these molecular mail carriers know which letters
to pick up, when to pick them up and where to deliver them? Understanding the
answers to these questions is essential; defects in the trafficking decision
making process have catastrophic consequences for the cell. The
interdisciplinary nature of this research project ensures that trainees at all
levels - including high school, undergraduate and graduate students - gain
exposure to a wide-array of scientific approaches. The research objectives of
this project will be integrated into an undergraduate laboratory course to
ensure that undergraduate researchers get to experience the thrill of scientific
discovery while learning science fundamentals. Undergraduate and high school
student summer internships will also be created to allow students to contribute
to advancing the boundary of knowledge in the dynamic field of protein
trafficking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is to define
principles that govern selective protein trafficking using alpha-arrestins, an
exciting new class of trafficking adaptor, as a model. The alpha-arrestins,
conserved from yeast to humans and related to the well-characterized and
clinically important mammalian beta-arrestins, are a recently described class of
trafficking adaptor that play a critical role in selective protein trafficking.
While we have yet to appreciate the breadth of alpha-arrestin function, in yeast
they interact with the ubiquitin ligase Rsp5 to regulate the trafficking fate of
cargo proteins. The alpha-arrestins are little studied and the experiments
proposed here will define key posttranslational regulation of, and novel
biological functions for, these critical regulators of protein trafficking.
Specifically, this research will: 1) Define how disruption of the alpha-
arrestin-Rsp5 interface impairs the ubiquitin ligase efficiency of Rsp5; 2)
Determine how ubiquitination regulates alpha-arrestin-mediated trafficking and
determine how Rsp5 activity is restricted to permit alpha-arrestin mono-
ubiquitination; and 3) Comprehensively identify alpha-arrestin cargo proteins
and define motifs that dictate alpha-arrestin-cargo interaction using a robust,
new computational approach that employs evolutionary signatures to infer
functional relationships. The results of this project will yield new paradigms
for how trafficking adaptors are regulated, ubiquitin conjugation is restricted
and selective cargo trafficking is achieved. Through the use of novel
computational methods and complementary genetic and biochemical approaches, this
research will establish the rules that govern trafficking adaptor function.
Trafficking adaptors dictate cargo localization in all eukaryotes, thus the
'decision-making' rules identified from these experiments will provide vital
information to researchers with diverse interests.