* 1902917
* Synthetic Proteins: A Block Copolymer Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Marcus Weck, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Marcus Weck of the Department of
Chemistry at New York University to design and develop carbon-based polymeric
building blocks that fold into well-defined 3-dimentional aggregates that
resemble peptide motifs common in Nature. These polymers may be used in complex,
diverse, and highly functionalized polymers (plastics) for electro-optical,
optical, biological, energy, biomedical and computer-based applications. The
design principles that will be established as part of this research allow for
the controlled and pre-determined assembly of polymeric building blocks into
folded tertiary structures using non-covalent reaction chemistry. This project
pairs cutting edge research with the training of undergraduate and graduate
students. In addition, Professor Weck and his research team are developing an
educational program "STEM Job Shadowing Experience" involving all-girls schools.
Examples of other broader impact activities include hosting bimonthly third and
fourth grade inner city school children and introducing them to the excitement
of polymer science through a series of hands on
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is focused on the formation of
heterotelechelic polymers and their assembly into architecturally well-defined
3D structures reminiscent of peptidic motifs. The building blocks wherein
directional supramolecular motifs are installed on the polymer termini and the
side-chains are helical, coil-like or sheet-like. Methodologies are developed
towards multiblock helical copolymers based on methacrylamides and aryl
isocyanides. The synthesized building blocks are used to fabricate the synthetic
analog of peptidic motifs such as helix-bundles and zinc fingers. Folded motifs
associated with this award are characterized using a battery of techniques
including nuclear magnetic resonance, UV-Visible, fluorescence, and circular
dichroism spectroscopies, as well as light and X-ray scattering techniques and
atomic force microscopy. The research team performs systematic structure-
property relationship studies to elucidate the effect of specific non-covalent
interactions on the self-assembly behavior of the polymeric building blocks.
This use of a "plug-and-play" strategy allows for the realization of tertiary
and quaternary polymeric structures by design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.