* 1902392
* Molecular Mechanism for Genomic RNA Delivery in ssRNA Phages
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Lanying Zeng, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,078,355.00

Single-stranded RNA bacteriophages (or ssRNA phages) are a type of viruses that
infect Gram-negative bacteria and have RNA, not DNA as their genomes. Unlike
many double-stranded DNA phages, ssRNA phages do not have a pressurized capsid
or a "tail" to inject the genomic material into the host. Instead, they
recognize specific bacteria through a single phage capsid protein, the
maturation protein (MP), which binds both the phage genomic RNA (gRNA) and a
special structure of the host bacterium termed the retractile pilus which is a
spear-like component of the bacterial secretion system. It is thought that the
retraction of the pili brings ssRNA phages closer to the host; and upon further
retraction of the pili, the bacteria intake the MP/gRNA complex along with the
recycled pilin subunits, a strategy similar to the "Trojan horse" used by the
Greeks during the Trojan War. While this property can have immediate
biotechnological application to efficiently deliver large quantities of foreign
RNA into a host bacterium, the mechanisms of how the MP recognizes a specific
type of pili and how the MP/gRNA complex translocates from the phage capsid to
the cell are still not clear. This project is directed at investigating these
processes and compares the results of two related model E. coli ssRNA phages,
MS2 and Qbeta, which provide insights into the structure and dynamics of the
interaction between the virus and its host. The project will be accompanied by a
rich broader impact program that includes unique interdisciplinary training
activities, a seminar series to future STEM teachers, and the generation of
online-accessible animations and movies to be used by the public and STEM
teachers in their classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structure and dynamics of
the interaction between the ssRNA phage MS2 and the E. coli F-like type IV
secretion system (F-T4SS) will be studied by single-particle cryo-electron
microscopy (cryo-EM), fluorescence microscopy, cryo-electron tomography (cryo-
ET), molecular biology and computational modeling. This project has two
objectives. Objective 1: Molecular mechanism for the host attachment of ssRNA
phage. (a) An atomic structure of the MS2/pilus complex in vitro is to be solved
by single-particle cryo-EM. (b) The ssRNA phage-binding orientation to the cell
envelope in vivo is to be determined by cryo-ET. (c) The amino acid residues at
the ssRNA phage/pili interface will be genetically characterized. (d) The
interaction between ssRNA phage Qbeta and the F-pilus will be determined in
comparison to MS2. Objective 2: Molecular mechanism for the gRNA host entry
across the cell envelope. (a) The relationship between pili retraction and ssRNA
entry will be established by time-resolved wide-field fluorescence microscopy.
(b) The MS2 gRNA entry dynamics will be elucidated by live-cell super-resolution
microscopy. (c) The path of the gRNA into the cell will be revealed using smFISH
super-resolution microscopy and electron tomography. (d) The interaction between
MS2 and the F-T4SS machine in situ will be revealed by cryo-ET. (e) The
translocation of the gRNA from the capsid into the cell will be computationally
modeled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.