* 1902593
* RAPID: 2018 Hurricane Season -- Study of Hurricane Florence at Landfall
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Michael Biggerstaff, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2020
* USD 143,222.00

This RAPID project seeks to take advantage of a unique data set captured during
the landfall of Hurricane Florence in North Carolina during 13-14 September
2018. The University of Oklahoma C-band SR3 SMART radar, along with four
Portable Integrated Precipitation Sensors (PIPS), and a mobile mesonet with
radiosonde capability deployed in advance of Florence and collected more than 30
hours of radar and PIPS data along with twelve radiosonde profiles as the storm
came ashore. The SR3 radar formed a 50 km baseline with the Wilmington NWS
WSR-88D, providing two areas in which wind retrievals were able to be performed.
The slow-moving center of circulation passed through both dual-Doppler lobes and
generated numerous vortex Rossby wave (VRW) driven inner core rain bands and
numerous mesovortices along the inner edge of the shrinking
eyewall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The data will be
used to address the following scientific questions: (i) how frequently are
asymmetries in the eyewall able to shed VRWs? (ii) what mechanisms appear to
control the frequency of VRWs? (iii) to what extent do VRWs appear to be
correlated to the formation of mesovortices along the inner edge of the eyewall?
(iv) to what extent do eyewall mesovortices contribute to the maximum near-
surface wind observed during landfall? (v) how do propagating VRWs modulate the
boundary layer winds, thermodynamics, and atmospheric pressure? (vi) how is the
observed damage to built structures related to attributes of the wind
field?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much effort remains to be performed to quality
assure the data and generate high quality wind fields for the research as well
as to provide an unprecedented data set for validation of high-resolution
numerical simulations of Florence. The RAPID grant would allow immediate
processing of the data, ensuring quick publication of the research-quality
radar-derived wind fields and PIPs data that would enable future research
strategies by the PI and numerous other NSF sponsored
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID grant
would encourage continued university support for SMART radar deployments in
landfalling hurricanes. Data from the SMART radar deployment during Florence
were distributed in realtime to the NWS and emergency managers office as well as
the Office of Federal Coordinator in Meteorology through the Disaster Impacts
Assessment Plan distribution list, which includes FEMA. Real-time winds were
also sent to the NOAA National Hurricane Center. Additionally, the SMART radar
data are used in graduate and undergraduate education at University of Oklahoma
and made available to other university instructors for use in their class.
Finally, the wind attribute maps (WAMs) generated from this research will be
highly valued by the wind engineering community as they evaluate the causes of
damage to structures along the coast and by the modeling community since the
wind fields are needed for advanced validation of numerical simulations of
landfalling tropical cyclones. The project will embrace collaborations with
faculty at Texas Tech University, the University of Florida, Auburn University,
and University of Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.