* 1902568
* Mentoring to Support Designing and Launching of New Data Science Career Pathways at Community Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jaime Mahoney, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 592,185.00

This project aims to strengthen the capacity of faculty in community colleges to
design and launch new data science programs. The project includes a partnership
between Education Development Center's Oceans of Data Institute, and Bunker
Hill, Sinclair, and Normandale Community Colleges. The partnership will support
faculty from institutions with existing data science programs to mentor
institutions that want to establish their own programs. The mentors will guide
the mentees in assessing local industry needs and establishing curricula. The
project addresses the need to build the capacity of the nation's skilled data
workforce to fill the growing number jobs in data science and data analytics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train mentors to share their experiences
in developing data programs with faculty from four mentee institutions. The
mentors will guide mentees to lead institutional efforts to: 1) Conduct a self-
assessment of their college's data program development assets; 2) Develop and
implement a strategic plan to create a new data program; 3) Work with employers
to prioritize work tasks required to achieve success in local industries; 4)
Align courses and curriculum with local industry skill demand; 5) Establish
broad, internal support for the new data program; and 6) Develop a new program
proposal for their college's curriculum committee. The Oceans of Data Institute
will maintain a professional learning community to support mentors and mentees
throughout this process, and link them to best practices learned from the
Advanced Technological Education MentorLinks and Mentor-Connects projects.
Mentors will meet monthly to plan, to discuss challenges, and to share
successes. Mentors and mentees will visit each other's institutions to engage
college faculty and administrative staff in fact-finding and problem-solving
conversations. Mentors and mentees will meet annually in advance of the ATE
annual High Impact Technology Exchange Conference to engage in professional
development, plan, and problem-solve. The project will deploy resources to
support mentee institutions in their pursuit of developing data science
programs. These resources will also be made widely available to the public.
Outreach and dissemination efforts will target community colleges that would
most benefit from this information. The project has the potential to enable
community colleges to scale-up efforts and train the next generation of data
workers in a sustained and timely manner. This project is funded by NSF's
Advanced Technological Education program, which focuses on the education of
technicians for the high-technology fields that drive our nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.