* 1902574
* National Center for Autonomous Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Vincent DiNoto, Northland Community & Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 7,075,834.00

This ATE National Center aims to serve the national need for developing and
maintaining a skilled technical workforce in the field of autonomous
technologies. Autonomous technologies have the potential to revolutionize the
way people across the globe live, work, travel, and learn. They also have
critical implications for the national economy, as well as national safety and
security. The National Center for Autonomous Technologies will focus on three
areas of autonomous technology: unmanned aircraft systems, connected automated
vehicles, and unmanned underwater vehicles. These autonomous vehicles will have
tremendous impact on the quality of human life across the nation, from rural to
urban communities, as well on understanding of agriculture, the biosphere, and
sustaining life in the oceans. Successful deployment of autonomous vehicles
requires highly skilled, agile technicians who can support vehicle design,
monitoring, control, use, and repair. The mission of the National Center for
Autonomous Technologies will be to coordinate and lead efforts to educate the
skilled technical workforce in autonomous technologies. The Center aims to
achieve its mission through a concerted national effort that will develop and
disseminate educational resources to meet current and future workforce demands
and broadly engage stakeholders from industry, government, and related ATE
projects and centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center aims to improve student
learning and technician education by conducting research and analysis to design
quality curricula and content that meets the evolving demands of autonomous
technologies in unmanned aircraft systems, connected automated vehicles, and
unmanned underwater vehicles. The Center also aims to support recruitment and
success of rural and underrepresented students in careers related to autonomous
technologies, while developing replicable models that increase access to these
careers for all students. This work will build upon existing collaborations with
Tribal Serving Colleges and with high schools throughout the Northern Plains
region. The Center's specific objectives include to: 1) design, develop,
coordinate, and implement specialized and collaborative autonomous technology
workshops for educators and industry; 2) expand engagement in STEM and
autonomous technologies by increasing the quality and diversity of the STEM
workforce; 3) employ service learning activities that support community
engagement and increase the visibility and utility of careers in autonomous
technologies; and 4) establish an education resource hub for autonomous
technologies with a focus on outreach and expanded partnerships. The National
Center for Autonomous Technologies aims to achieve its mission through
partnerships with ATE Centers (e.g., CAAT; CA2VES; GeoTech; MATE; and SpaceTEC),
ATE projects, industry, and government. By supporting collaborations among these
stakeholders, the Center expects to develop and disseminate the content and
tools needed to educate technicians for careers in autonomous technologies. This
project is funded by the NSF Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.