* 1902207
* Remote Lab-Sharing Models for Additive Manufacturing Skills Training
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Nathan Roscup, Mohawk Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 04/30/2023
* USD 599,943.00

Additive manufacturing, which is also known as 3D printing, is transforming the
nation's manufacturing industry. A diverse and highly-skilled workforce is
needed to support the economic growth in this area of manufacturing. To help
address his need, Mohawk Valley Community College will partner with two colleges
to develop a new training model for manufacturing technicians. These partners
will develop courses that cover the most advanced technologies in this field,
including metal 3D printing. The project team will partner with local industries
to ensure that the courses contain the knowledge and skills desired for the
workforce. The courses will include the use of remotely-shared 3D printing
equipment for student design projects. The remote lab equipment will represent a
model for colleges across the country to prepare students with the necessary
skills, even if the colleges have limited budgets to purchase their own
equipment. This model will reduce cost barriers for institutions and help
increase the number of technicians that can be trained. The training model will
provide options for current workers who want to upgrade their skills. The
project will also create introductory courses for secondary school students, who
will also be able to use the remotely-shared 3D printing
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to increase the number of
skilled technicians in additive manufacturing design processes, with a special
focus on metal 3D printing. The goals include: the development of a one-
semester, 18-credit curriculum comprised of five courses that cover modeling,
materials, and additive manufacturing topics; the development of a remote lab-
sharing model for the curriculum that will be tested with the partner
institutions, Finger Lakes Community College and Western Technical College; and
research on the efficacy of the curriculum on student outcomes when used in
local-lab versus remote-lab learning environments. Students at the partnering
institutions will be able to remotely access the lab equipment to print
prototypes, which will then be shipped back to their campuses. The curriculum
will be designed for either seamless integration into existing two-year
engineering technology programs or as a standalone microcredential option for
incumbent workers. Dual-credit high school courses and mini modules for existing
high school courses will also be developed and implemented. An emphasis of this
project will be on engaging and recruiting students from underrepresented
populations to promote their interest in manufacturing careers and broaden
participation in the technician workforce. Course materials, project results,
and best practices will be widely disseminated to encourage the adoption or
adaptation of the approach by other colleges and institutions across the
country. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.