* 1902155
* Elliptic Curves and Cohomological Automorphic Forms over CM Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Patrick Allen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2022
* USD 100,006.00

The study of symmetry pervades mathematics. In number theory, interesting
symmetries exist among algebraic numbers, numbers which are roots of polynomials
with integer coefficients. These symmetries underpin a surprising connection,
known as Langlands reciprocity, between arithmetic, geometry, and analysis. The
resulting bridges constructed between seemingly disparate areas bring powerful
analytic and algebraic tools to bear on arithmetic questions. This project aims
to establish new cases Langlands reciprocity, and to apply the resulting tools
to questions in number theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proving automorphy of Galois
representations is an important theme in modern algebraic number theory, and is
currently the only known technique that establishes many conjectural properties
of arithmetic L-functions. Part of this project aims to establish automorphy of
many elliptic curves over imaginary quadratic fields, or more generally CM
number fields. The second part of this project aims to refine our knowledge of
local-global compatibility in the Langlands program over CM fields. This finer
compatibility will then be applied to the study of adjoint Selmer groups in the
third part of this project, establishing cases of conjectures of Bloch-Kato and
Perrin-Riou, as well as having applications to a program of
Venkatesh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.