* 1902523
* Enhancing Geographic Information Science Technology Education (eGIST)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* ERIC ROBERTS, Portland Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2023
* USD 652,845.00

Geographic Information Science Technology (GIST) is expanding in many industries
as more sophisticated technologies are developed. Geomatics, an emerging
interdisciplinary field within GIST, uses modern imaging technologies to measure
and map natural and man-made geographical features, making it critical to
national security and significant to businesses as they solve U.S. and global
societal, economic, and environmental challenges. This project aims to improve
STEM postsecondary education through collaboration with regional public and
private employers, post-secondary institutions, a national ATE center, and
relevant ATE projects to prepare a pipeline of diverse skilled workers in
Geomatics and other GIST-related fields. The project incorporates "real-world"
hands-on exercises proven to recruit and retain women and other underrepresented
students in STEM fields, and expands partnerships with industries and
postsecondary institutions to bring this emerging STEM field to regions across
the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to create a career
pathway with industry-validated curriculum in a one-year certificate in unmanned
aircraft systems (UAS) and a two-year degree in Geomatics that fills critically
needed existing and emerging jobs through collaboration with private/public
partners in government, science and engineering firms. Along with creating the
new Geomatics degree, the project embeds geospatial concepts, geodesy, and
mapping into targeted existing engineering technology courses to expand
understanding of new approaches needed in these fields. The project examines the
impact of industry partners' participation in upgrading students' technical
skills through collaboration on revised curriculum and work-based learning and
internships; the role of updated laboratory resources and peer tutors in
improving the learning environment quality; and how the updated curriculum
affects retention of women and other underrepresented groups in STEM. Formative
and summative evaluation using quantitative and qualitative measures will be
conducted to ensure that the project's goals and objectives are met, outcomes
and effectiveness are documented, and benefits to project partners and the wider
educational community are disseminated. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program, which focuses on the education of technicians
for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.