* 1902320
* Creating a Collaborative and Student Internships to Enhance Education and Career Pathways in Cybersecurity
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Brady Nielsen, Spokane Falls Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 211,027.00

Business, industry, and government must maintain security of their computers and
information systems. To do so, technicians must be well prepared to prevent,
detect, and investigate cybersecurity breaches. Because of the growing number
and scale of cyber-threats, there is also a growing need for many more
technicians who have the necessary cybersecurity knowledge and skills. In
Spokane County, Washington, demand for cybersecurity workers is projected to
grow four times faster than the countywide average for all occupations over the
next seven years. This project will help educate today's college students to
meet this demand. The project will create a "Cybersecurity Collaborative" that
engages regional information technology employers and leaders from area high
schools. With the help of this collaborative, Spokane Falls Community College
will align coursework in its relevant programs with the cybersecurity skills
needed by employers and will establish a sustainable internship program for
students pursuing a cybersecurity career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
draw on best practices from previous community college STEM internship programs
to design a sustainable cybersecurity internship program that engages
approximately 15 students each year. These students will be chosen from those
enrolled in the college's Associate of Applied Science degree program in
Information Technology. An innovative aspect of the project is that it will
recruit several students from the college's Bachelor of Applied Science program
in Applied Management to assist with the design and management of the internship
program. Through this work, the Applied Management students will gain
familiarity with cybersecurity concepts and work roles that could be part of
their management responsibilities in future employment. Major activities in the
project include creating, managing, and leveraging the new Cybersecurity
Collaborative with regional employers and high school leaders; designing and
implementing the new cybersecurity internship program; and evaluating longer-
term opportunities to enhance the college's responsiveness to the region's
cybersecurity workforce needs. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) program, which focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.