* 1902054
* Structure and Function of Plant Virus 3' RNA Translational Enhancer Elements
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Dixie Goss, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2024
* USD 829,059.00

Plant viruses affect a number of food crops leading to severe economic and food
supply problems. Barley yellow dwarf virus (BYDV) and maize necrotic streak
virus (MNeSV) are aphid-borne threats to cereal crops worldwide. These positive
strand RNA viruses are some of the most efficiently translated mRNA known, and
can therefore be co-opted in biotechnology for low-cost production of proteins;
however, emerging viruses remain a severe problem affecting crops. This project
will address major roadblocks in developing new anti-viral strategies by
determining mechanistic details of viral protein synthesis that identify target
steps for intervention. The project also provides excellent training for
students from high school through graduate levels. A structured summer research
program will be developed as a model for offering research opportunities to
larger numbers of undergraduates at the institution. Many of these students are
from under-represented minorities and their participation will contribute to a
diverse and well-trained scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate critical aspects in the selection of mRNA for
translation and assembly of an initiation complex. The role of protein synthesis
initiation factor 3 (eIF3) will be determined by using fluorescence spectroscopy
to measure affinity and kinetics of binding to the translation enhancer element,
and structural probing to determine how it remodels RNA. The mechanism of
ribosome recruitment will be investigated by single molecule fluorescence,
including comparative analysis of BYDV and the structurally simpler MNeSV to
understand common themes in viral protein synthesis. Cryo-EM experiments and
chemical probing will be employed to determine structural details about the
protein-RNA interactions. This comprehensive approach is expected to provide a
better understanding of how plant viruses outcompete host mRNA in translation.
Since these mechanisms likely occur in other eukaryotic systems and regulate
translation under stress conditions, the results of this project are expected to
be broadly applicable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.