* 1902225
* Scaling Elements of a Competency-Based Hybrid Instructional Model into Advanced Manufacturing Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Thomas Wylie, Northwest State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,005.00

A nationwide shortage of qualified manufacturing technicians and the demand for
training that keeps pace with rapidly changing technology has driven
collaboration between education and industry partners. To fill the need for
qualified manufacturing technicians, Northwest State Community College (NSCC)
will work with industries to improve a competency-based advanced manufacturing
program and promote its broader adoption. NSCC plans wide-spread implementation
of its instructional model through a Networked Improvement Community (NIC) of
partner colleges and their local industries across four states: Ohio, Michigan,
Indiana, and North Carolina. Through mentorship, professional development, and
focused cooperation, this project will improve the effectiveness of advanced
manufacturing courses, increase access to technical education programs, and
prepare technicians with the skillsets that employers require. On a broad scale,
this project will promote diversity by increasing opportunities for underserved
populations to pursue high-demand, family-sustaining occupations in the
technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to:
provide a more accessible method of instruction, remove barriers for existing
and potential college students, align students' skills attainment with workplace
demands, and increase the knowledge of implementing a competency-based hybrid
instructional model for advanced manufacturing courses. NSCC will demonstrate
the process of converting two traditional courses to the new model, and partner
colleges in the NIC will determine which elements of the model are best suited
to adapt within their programs. NSCC will then work with the partners to
incorporate the model into specific courses. In addition, NSCC will administer
nine, two-day professional development workshops for technical faculty from
additional colleges in the state-wide networks of the NIC partners, with the
potential to impact ninety colleges. NSCC will continue to mentor faculty on
scaling elements of the model into programs at their institutions and will
provide assistance with implementation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.