* 1902473
* Enhancing Minnesota's Science Technician Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Penny Starkey, Saint Paul College-A community & Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 08/31/2023
* USD 434,607.00

This project aims to educate skilled science technicians, thus supporting
Minnesota's goal of developing a high-tech industry corridor between the
metropolitan areas of Minneapolis and Saint Paul. The project will expand and
enhance the College's Science Technician Associate of Science (AS) degree
program. To increase the placement of Science Technician AS graduates directly
into the workforce, the project will: infuse science technician skills into
required courses; develop a job and internship center; formalize partnerships to
increase access to internship experiences; and develop an industry-relevant
capstone research experience for all Science Technician AS students. The project
intends to broaden participation in the science technician AS program by adding
a biology track and using targeted outreach and dissemination. As a result, this
project has the potential to broaden participation in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of the project is to include capstone
projects for all students in the Science Technician AS program. To this end, it
has already established agreements from at least six academic or industry
partners to provide internships for up to 14 students per semester. The
internships include traditional off-campus opportunities as well as on-campus
opportunities in which scientific equipment at St. Paul College will be used for
research and development needs of industry partners. The project includes a
mixed-methods evaluation plan that will be conducted by external experts.
Quantitative indicators will include data from ongoing national surveys in which
the College currently participates, disaggregated program and course enrollment
and completion counts, and the results from surveys designed specifically for
the evaluation of this project. Qualitative data will be collected through semi-
structured interviews with mentors at industry partner firms and faculty
members, and through focus groups with current and former students. Students
participating in the Science Technician Program will also compile research
portfolios that can be assessed for program improvement purposes as well as to
evaluate individual student progress. Project results will be disseminated at
conferences and in peer-reviewed journals, contributing to understanding the
impact of project-based education and authentic assessment. It is expected that
this project will improve the success of students in the science technician
program and strengthen connections between the College and businesses and
industries in the greater Minneapolis-St. Paul area. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.