* 1902358
* Responding to Post-Hurricane Maria Needs for Electronics and Photonics Technicians in Puerto Rico
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Andres Diaz, Universidad Metropolitana
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 107,138.00

The demand in Puerto Rico for highly-skilled technicians in the fiber-optics and
photonic fields has increased following the collapse of all basic services
following Hurricanes Irma and Maria in September 2018. STEM technicians in these
fields are critical for the reconstruction and maintenance of the island's
communication infrastructure. This work includes rebuilding and modernizing the
fiber-optic network that enables cell-phone and data transmission systems. It
also includes support of optical-based processing and quality control systems
used in the manufacturing, medical devices, security, metrology, and
pharmaceutical industries. This project proposes to meet local workforce needs
by increasing the number of graduates earning an Associate Degree in Photonics
and Lasers. Through a partnership with local industries, the current program
will be expanded to align the curriculum with local needs and to focus more
specifically on optics and photonics. This focus will serve the most pressing
local needs to support reconstruction and growth of the local optical fiber
network. Finally, this curriculum will provide an education that will allow
graduates to pursue opportunities in the continental
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build upon the one-year certificate
program that was previously developed under a Department of Labor TAACCCT grant.
Starting with this foundation, the project will identify, adopt, and adapt
relevant educational materials from existing ATE-supported projects and Centers
such as the National Center for Optics and Photonics Education and its affiliate
centers and colleges. These materials will be re-oriented to meet local
educational and community needs. Existing industry relationships will be
leveraged to better understand current local needs, and a Business and Industry
Leadership Team will be developed to provide the project with expert advice.
Outreach to high-schools will be expanded through a recruiting and outreach
program and annual summer workshops for science and math high-school teachers.
Project goals include offering a more flexible, industry-validated degree
program with embedded certificate options and educating students who are
proficient in optics, lasers, fiber optics, electronics, and control. In
addition, the project aims to ensure that students develop basic understandings
of how business and entrepreneurial skills can be applied to the use of
photonics and fiber optics in different industries. Proposed activities aim to
excite high-school students and teachers about the power and applicability of
light-based science and technology, and its current and potential impact on the
local STEM economy. In addition, because the College serves many Hispanic
students and women, the project has the potential to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in the technician workforce. This project is funded by
the NSF Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education
of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.