* 1902577
* EAGER: Direct Detection of MeV-Scale Dark Matter Utilizing Germanium Internal Amplification for the Charge Created by the Ionization of Impurities
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2019
* Dongming Mei, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 11/30/2019
* USD 69,049.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known elementary particles. Deciphering the
nature of this so-called Dark Matter (DM) is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. One of the most
exciting quests is the search for new particles beyond the Standard Model of
Particle Physics, which describes all the known elementary particles and the
interactions between them. Extensions of the model predict not only new
particles with large masses but also some with very small masses. The general
properties of neutrinos and the nature of DM are currently two of the most
important questions in fundamental physics. This EAGER award will explore a new
germanium (Ge) detector technology utilizing Charge Internal Amplification
(GeCIA) for the charge carriers created by the ionization of impurities, which
is a promising new technology with experimental sensitivity for detecting MeV-
scale dark matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel direct-detection strategies to
probe non-gravitational interactions between DM and ordinary matter are needed
to discover DM. The broad resources gained through this exploratory work will
enable the development of next generation detectors that meet sensitivity
requirements in a cost-effective manner. The techniques developed will have
immediate application to several experiments, including the DM program and low
energy neutrino program in the U.S. and elsewhere in the world. Equally
important and central to the planned activities is its work to develop the next
generation of diverse workers. One female postdoc will fully work on the project
and become expertise in developing GeCIA detectors. In addition, three PhD
students will also work on the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GeCIA will adopt a
phased approach to build an experiment at Sanford Underground Research Facility
(SURF) to directly search for DM with a mass range from 0.1 MeV to 1 GeV.
GeCIA-0 is an exploratory project that will innovate GeCIA detectors at a mass
of 300 grams to demonstrate the technology for a p-type planar geometry. They
will fabricate a planar detector with amorphous Ge (a-Ge) contact technology,
which has been successfully used to fabricate detectors at USD with home-grown
crystals. This funding will support the group to (1) optimize the design of such
a planar detector with Monte Carlo simulation; (2) fabricate a planar detector
with a-Ge contact technology; (3) prove GeCIA technology with appropriate
electronic read-out system; and (4) calibrate detectors with optical and low
energy radiative sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.