* 1902310
* Universal Series, Chow Rings, and Dualities in the Moduli Theory of Sheaves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Alina Marian, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This project is in the field of algebraic geometry which can be described as the
study of geometric spaces cut out by solution sets of systems of polynomial
equations. The subject has a strong classical tradition. At present, in one
significant strand, research efforts in the field go toward establishing
mathematical foundations for the physics of the early universe. A particularly
important role in this effort is played by moduli theory, which deals with the
classification and deformation properties of important geometric objects of the
same type. The current project will investigate moduli theory of sheaves,
objects corresponding to gauge fields (such as the electromagnetic field) in
physics. Mathematical quantities associated with moduli spaces of sheaves
correspond to amplitudes of scattering processes in particle physics. Studying
the structure of these quantities therefore bears on important questions in both
geometry and high-energy physics. Thus, while contributing to geometry, the
project also seeks to improve our understanding of theoretical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In one direction, the PI will investigate central
series of invariants on Hilbert schemes of points on surfaces -- spaces which
have emerged as essential objects in both geometry and representation theory.
She will also try to put on rigorous geometric footing a q-deformation of two
dimensional Yang-Mills theory, by interpreting it in a four-dimensional context,
and connecting it with recent work on modularity of invariants for moduli spaces
of stable sheaves on surfaces. In a different direction, the PI's efforts will
be concentrated on understanding the groups of cycles modulo rational
equivalence of moduli spaces of stable sheaves on curves and K3 surfaces, not
least with a view toward confirming the Hodge conjecture for these
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.