* 1902704
* Collaborative Research:  TIDE:  Legacy effects of long-term nutrient enrichment on recovery of saltmarsh ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* James Nelson, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 04/30/2023
* USD 107,291.00

Coastal nutrient enrichment has resulted in saltmarshes being one of the most
endangered ecosystems in the world. This over enrichment has compromised the
ability of saltmarshes to provide key ecosystem services such as buffering
coastal cities from storms, providing habitat for fish and shellfish, and
mitigating climate impacts by storing carbon. The U.S. is investing millions of
dollars to reduce nitrogen to coastal regions and embarking on large-scale
saltmarsh restoration costing millions to billions of dollars to restore lost
ecosystem services. Currently, it is unknown how quickly or if ecosystem
services will return after nutrient inputs are cut. This research will provide
insight into nitrogen pollution as a cause of marsh loss and the potential for
ecosystem recovery with management strategies. There are several education
efforts associated with this project that will train students. The project
enhances education by developing high school curriculum on "Research and
Resiliency: Investigating the Local Effects of Global Changes" in collaboration
with the Massachusetts Audubon Society. A program for mid-career journalists
about environmental science will also be developed. This project will facilitate
sustainability and provide a science-based foundation for state and federal
nutrient standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address how the
effects of historical nutrient over enrichment influences the ability of marshes
to recover their ability to provide ecosystem services. The project will use a
combination of whole-ecosystem experimental manipulations, field measurements of
key species, assays of genetic change, nutrient and carbon cycle processes, and
food-web structure in six experimental sites to determine recovery trajectories.
Researchers will measure changes in the decomposer community genetic diversity
and activity by sequence amplicons of functional genes responsible for encoding
key enzymes in the nitrogen cycling processes. The project will measure plant
traits and genotypic diversity. The recovery of carbon and nitrogen cycling will
be determined from marsh geomorphology, habitat-specific denitrification rates,
nitrogen exchange with the open bay, and decomposition. Measuring the species
diversity, abundance and productivity and stable isotope of invertebrates and
fish will assess food web recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.