* 1902329
* Expansion of the CyberWatch West Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Philip Craiger, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 930,000.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a critical need and a major
challenge. To meet this need, business, industry, and government need well-
prepared technicians who can prevent, detect, and investigate cybersecurity
breaches. The growth of cyber-threats has created a need for many more workers
who have the knowledge and skills needed to protect digital infrastructure. In
2018, NSF funded the CyberWatch West Resource Center as an Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) Resource Center to support cybersecurity education
at two-year colleges across the nation (NSF Award DUE-1800589). In 2019, the
funding level for new Resource Centers was raised to $1.65 million (NSF 18-571).
With this new award, the CyberWatch West Resource Center will be fully funded as
an ATE resource center, enabling the Center to expand the scope of its
activities. Specifically, the CyberWatch West Resource Center will expand its
mentoring efforts to help more colleges build and strengthen their cybersecurity
programs. The Center will also develop additional curricular resources and
conduct additional educational activities to inform students about careers in
cybersecurity and match them with employers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expanded Center will undertake four interrelated efforts that complement and/or
expand the previously funded activities: (1) provide mentoring, technical
assistance, and leadership training to educators and prospective grantees who
want to implement and improve cybersecurity education programs; (2) convert,
consolidate, and disseminate cybersecurity curricula (including modules
developed through the Catalyzing Computing and Cybersecurity in Community
Colleges project, NSF Award DGE-1548315) in accessible formats that integrate
with common online learning management systems; (3) partner with business and
industry to provide credit-bearing cybersecurity training modules that meet the
needs of current employees in small businesses, fit into college curricula, and
are aligned with the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education Framework's
work roles; and (4) host virtual career fairs and operate an online job board,
which will broadly disseminate employment opportunities and directly connect
students with prospective employers. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program, which focuses on the education of technicians
for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.