* 1902301
* Fourier and Fourier-type Algebras of Lie Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Mahya Ghandehari, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 11/30/2023
* USD 156,432.00

Harmonic analysis is a fundamental branch of mathematics that addresses the
following central problem: How can a function or signal be represented or
approximated as a combination of basic waves? Such representations of signals
are heavily used in today's technology for storage, transmission, and noise
reduction of signals. Unfortunately, harmonic analytic methods perform poorly in
various circumstances, as they are designed based on the assumption that the
outcome of a series of actions is unchanged, regardless of the order in which
the actions are performed. However, actions are often not interchangeable. For
example, the result of performing consecutive rotations in three-dimensional
(3D) space is highly sensitive to the order of rotations. Indeed, the real world
is a very "non-commutative" universe. The space of 3D rotations is a simple
example of a Lie group, which arise naturally in physics. This project will use
techniques of functional analysis and Lie theory to advance the theory of non-
commutative harmonic analysis for Lie groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fourier
transforms and its analogues are the cornerstone of classical harmonic analysis.
To generalize the concept of a Fourier transform to non-Abelian groups, the
modern field of non-commutative harmonic analysis was initiated. The broad
philosophy here is to employ group representations and the theory of operators
on Hilbert spaces to capture the non-Abelian nature of a group. A major trend in
non-commutative harmonic analysis is to investigate function algebras related to
the Fourier analysis (and representation theory) of non-Abelian groups. The
Fourier algebra, which is associated with the regular representation of the
ambient group, is a fundamental example of such function algebras. This project
investigates Banach algebraic behavior, in particular derivation theory and
spectral theory, of the Fourier algebra and its weighted versions for various
classes of locally compact (Lie) groups. The ultimate goal is to investigate the
connections between the Lie structure of a group and the Banach algebraic
properties of its Fourier algebra. This project is jointly funded by the
Analysis Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.