* 1902032
* Quaternary Oxide P-type and Ambipolar Semiconductors for Large-Area CMOS
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Douglas Keszler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 05/31/2022
* USD 401,044.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Low-cost, large-area electronics represent a bold vision
of the future. If circuits could be printed inexpensively, one could add smart
devices to normal objects as easily as affixing a sticker. For this vision to be
realized, high-performance, low-cost, large-area thin-film transistors (TFTs)
are needed. To process information effectively, such circuits need to be formed
of devices capable of transporting both holes and electrons. This would enable
complementary logic circuits. Semiconducting metal oxides are one of the most
promising material systems for these applications. While electron transporting
(n-type) metal oxides are used commercially, hole transporting (p-type) oxides
have lagged behind. If p-type oxides with comparable performance to their n-type
counterparts were realized, the prospect of ubiquitous, low-cost, large area
electronics takes a significant step closer to reality. In the proposed program
of research, the authors will advance a unique, and seldom-studied, family of
p-type and ambipolar metal oxide semiconductors. New semiconductors composed of
four different elements will be synthesized and formed into thin films. The
electronic and structural properties of these quaternary oxides will be studied,
and thin-film transistors based on these materials will be fabricated. The end
goal is to demonstrate simple all-oxide complementary electronic circuits.
Researchers will participate in the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
Science Communication Fellowship. This enables researchers to interact with the
general public through lectures and
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Disordered metal oxide
semiconductors possess high electron mobilities, and are employed commercially
in unipolar applications, such as television backplanes. Unfortunately, the
mobility of hole-transporting (p-type) metal oxide semiconductors remains
approximately 2 orders of magnitude below than that of electron-transporting
(n-type) materials. While unipolar (n-type) TFTs are adequate for certain
applications, such as active matrix displays, complementary (n- and p-type)
logic circuits provide greater noise-margins, and ultimately greater yield, than
unipolar circuits. In this program of research, a unique family of oxide
semiconductors of the general composition 1:1:1:1 MAEO (which may be exemplified
by the composition YZnPO, i.e. M=Y, A=Zn, and E=P) will be advanced. Such
compounds are believed to share the electronic properties of both binary oxides,
and covalent semiconductors such as zinc phosphide. The objective of this
project is to identify compounds which exhibit hole field effect mobilities
comparable to or greater than that of electrons in amorphous indium gallium zinc
oxide&lt;br/&gt;(IGZO), for use in all-oxide complementary logic circuits. This
project will involve the identification and synthesis of a range of promising
new MAEO compounds. These compounds will be characterized electronically in
powder form, using contactless techniques, before optimizing and studying the
processes required to grow optimal thin film morphology. Electronic devices will
serve both as a tool to study these materials and, through extensive
optimization, structures to demonstrate high-performance proof-of-principle
TFTs. Finally, simple all-oxide complementary opto-electronic circuits (such as
inverters) will be demonstrated employing newly-identified MAEO compounds, and
appropriate n-type oxide semiconductors materials, such as
IGZO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.