* 1902503
* Ultracompact sample-to-answer nucleic acid test on USB stick
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Weihua Guan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Increased malaria control efforts have resulted in a dramatic reduction in the
global malaria incidence over the past decade, and the World Health Organization
has endorsed the ambitious goal of achieving worldwide malaria elimination and
eradication. A change in focus from malaria control to malaria elimination
requires easy and efficient ways to rapidly screen for malaria. Current malaria
screening tests rely almost exclusively on microscopy and immunological tests.
Both methods could miss significant information due to their limited detection
abilities. Nucleic acid testing (NAT) is currently the most sensitive method
available. Unfortunately, NAT-based methods developed to date mostly require
certain infrastructures and skilled technicians. There is a critical need for an
improved malaria screening test that combines the benefits of lateral flow-based
testing (scalable throughput, minimal training) and the NATs (highly sensitive
and specific). The success of the proposed research would enhance the health
care system domestically and globally. As a platform technology, it would allow
for delivering the highly sensitive test to remote, underserved and resource-
limited communities. In addition, the proposed educational and outreach activity
would foster student engagement through unique hands-on-experience-based
interactive activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
proposal is to take a multidisciplinary approach to explore a highly sensitive
and scalable malaria nucleic acid screening test on a USB interfaced device.
This research objective will be achieved by carrying out the following three
research tasks. Task 1, assay optimization and validation, with the goal to
increase the DNA extraction yield and to increase the loop-mediated isothermal
amplification assay copy number sensitivity. Task 2, device integration and
instrumentation, with the goal to develop the disposable microfluidic chip and
the ultracompact USB interfaced analyzer. Task 3, device performance evaluation
with lab-archived blood samples collected from field sites, with the goal to
determine its sensitivity, specificity, reproducibility and limits of detection.
The innovation of the proposed work are three folds: (1) Highly sensitive
malaria isothermal amplification assay could be performed as simple as lateral
flow-based testing, (2) Scalable nucleic acid testing throughput and
asynchronous processing capability provided by the cascading capability of a
tier tree topology of USB hubs, and (3) Versatile platform technology that can
be widely disseminated to situations that demand portability, connectivity and
ease-of-use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.