* 1902369
* The NSF Advanced Technological Education Resource Center for Advanced Automotive Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Shannon Williams, Macomb Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,050,000.00

The auto industry is changing faster today than it has in 100 years. These
changes disrupt many traditional facets of this industry. For example,
cybersecurity is now a major safety challenge for automakers working on
automated vehicles, and current projections are that a quarter billion connected
vehicles will be on the road by 2020. With these changes, the need for
automotive technicians is expected to increase while the work becomes more
technically complex. With support from NSF, Center for Advanced Automotive
Technology (CAAT) responded to increasing employment opportunities in this
employment segment, which offers sustainable wage employment. In this role, CAAT
served as a communication conduit and connector between education and industry
to expand the scope and availability of technicians and technologists in the
automotive sector. In 2018, CAAT transitioned to become the NSF Advanced
Technological Education Resource Center for Advanced Automotive Technology
(RCAAT). RCAAT aims to support the ability of industry and education to keep
pace with the technological advances in the automotive
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RCAAT's leadership team will work closely with
auto manufacturers and their suppliers to determine emerging education needs,
and to ensure that the materials shared through RCAAT can prepare a skilled
technical workforce that meets the needs of automotive industry employers.
Through meetings, conferences, and reports, RCAAT will remain an essential
connection point between academia, government, and industry to provide and
disseminate vital advanced automotive technology education resources. The
workforce necessary for tomorrow's automotive industry needs access to
appropriate and effective education today. RCAAT aims to contribute to meeting
this technological education need by expanding its library of industry-reviewed
and industry-approved curricula and learning resources. In addition, the center
will continue to provide a collaborative network for professional development
for educators in programs supporting the rapidly evolving automotive industry.
This project is funded by the NSF Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.