* 1902307
* Automorphic Forms and Galois Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Matthew Emerton, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2023
* USD 390,000.00

Number theory is the branch of mathematics that studies phenomena related to
properties of whole numbers. A typical number theoretic question is to determine
the number of whole number solutions of some equation of interest. The answers
to such questions can often be encoded in certain mathematical functions known
as L-functions. The mathematician Robert Langlands has developed a series of
conjectures (or mathematical predictions) regarding L-functions, which predict
that any L-function should arise from another kind of mathematical function
called an automorphic form. (Number theorists refer to the conjectured
relationship between L-functions and automorphic forms as a "reciprocity law.")
Langlands developed an array of powerful representation theoretic methods to
study the conjectures. These are methods that exploit the many symmetries of
automorphic forms and L-functions to analyze their mathematical properties;
these methods have been incorporated into a body of mathematics known as "the
Langlands program." A more recent approach to the study of automorphic forms and
L-functions is the use of p-adic methods. These are methods that involve using
divisibility properties with respect to some fixed prime number p to study the
Taylor series coefficients of the automorphic forms and L-functions. Recently,
the representation theoretic methods and p-adic methods have begun to be unified
into a so-called "p-adic Langlands program." This project aims to develop new
results and methods in the p-adic Langlands program, and to use them to
establish new reciprocity laws.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
research project is to investigate the p-adic aspects of the Langlands program.
At the heart of the Langlands program is a conjectured reciprocity law relating
automorphic representations to p-adic Galois representations. The precise
description of the manner in which automorphic forms and Galois representations
are supposed to correspond involves local reciprocity laws, that is, reciprocity
laws that relate the behavior of the automorphic representation at a prime q to
the behavior of the Galois representation at that same prime. These local laws
are most subtle when q is taken to be the same prime p that governs the
coefficients of the Galois representation; indeed, in this case such a local
reciprocity law would constitute a p-adic local Langlands correspondence, and
its existence remains conjectural other than in the abelian case, and the case
of GL_2(Q_p). Together with various collaborators, the principal investigator
aims to investigate this hoped-for but mysterious p-adic local reciprocity law
in various ways. The PI's study of moduli stacks of p-adic Galois
representations will provide new geometric insight into p-adic local Langlands
and related problems such as the Breuil--Mezard conjecture. The PI's proposed
trace formula for p-adically completed cohomology should yield new insight into
local-global compatibility in the p-adic context. The PI's research on growth of
cohomology will increase the range of applicability of stable trace formula, one
of the most powerful tools available for studying reciprocity laws associated to
automorphic forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.