* 1902737
* Electric-Field-Assisted Formic Acid Decomposition at Ambient Conditions for Carbon Neutral Hydrogen Production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Su Ha, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 442,483.00

Hydrogen-powered fuel cells offer the cleanest and most energy-efficient source
of power available today. Clean generation of hydrogen (H2) and its distribution
and storage present challenges with conventional fossil fuel starting materials.
In contrast, this project utilizes formic acid (HCOOH) as a hydrogen carrier in
a regenerative cycle based on water (H2O) and carbon dioxide (CO2) as the
starting materials. Currently, the high cost of precious metal catalysts -
needed to decompose the formic acid and generate the hydrogen - limits the
commercial implementation of the technology. The project investigates a novel
concept by which less active, low-cost, earth-abundant catalytic materials such
as copper (Cu) or nickel (Ni) can be made to perform like the precious metals
with the aid of an electric field-assisted fuel reforming unit that will
generate the hydrogen to power the fuel cell. The investigators plan several
educational and outreach activities to demonstrate the technology while also
educating students at all levels on the ways in which electrochemistry and
catalysis can facilitate the transition to a sustainable energy future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential use of CO2-based regenerative fuel cell
technology holds interesting prospects for future energy systems based on non-
fossil energy sources. Because the kinetics of the selective electrochemical
reduction of CO2 to HCOOH are favorable, a regenerative fuel cell system
utilizing on-demand H2 production from HCOOH decomposition is highly promising
for practical purposes. However, the most efficient catalysts for HCOOH
decomposition require a large amount of expensive noble metals such as platinum
(Pt) and palladium (Pd). Earth-abundant pure Cu metal has shown both high
activity and selectivity toward HCOOH decomposition at elevated temperatures,
but no activity at ambient temperatures. This limitation can be circumvented by
applying an electric field of optimum strength and orientation to the surface.
The applied field will significantly increase the rate of HCOOH decomposition
toward H2/CO2 production over Cu and Ni metals at ambient conditions, while
preventing its undesired side reaction that leads to H2O/CO production. The
project will address fundamental aspects of how this applied electric field
influences both the HCOOH decomposition kinetics and catalytic properties of the
metal surface through detailed kinetic studies utilizing field ion/electron
microscopy in combination with atom-probe mass spectrometry, and by
investigating the nature of the interactions (orientation and relative
adsorption energy) between surface intermediates and an applied field using in-
situ FTIR. Based on this fundamental electric field-activity-selectivity
relationship, a lab-scale HCOOH reforming system will be fabricated and
evaluated. HCOOH decomposition is an ideal model reaction to investigate the
effect of an applied electric field on the catalytic properties of metals
because of its significant permanent dipole moment and high polarizability,
which makes its chemistry very sensitive to changes in surrounding electric
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.