* 1902536
* Storybook STEM: Professional Convening for Cross-Sector Understanding of Children's Literature as a Tool for Supporting Informal STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Gina Svarovsky, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 01/31/2021
* USD 75,000.00

A large body of research highlights the benefits of storybooks for children's
learning. In the context of preschool classrooms, the use of storybooks to
engage young children in STEM is a frequent topic of practitioner-oriented
articles. There is also an increasing number of informal STEM education (ISE)
projects exploring how to leverage storybooks to engage young children and their
families in different STEM content domains. While there is universal excitement
for the potential of storybooks in ISE, there is an acknowledgment of a critical
need for more cross-project sharing, more research, and more efforts to
synthesize and share findings. This award will catalyze new research studies and
partnerships to advance efforts in ISE contexts, including the role of books in
the overall learning experience or program, how books are selected or designed,
and how the reading is facilitated by teachers and families. Participants will
be educators and researchers working with or studying family learning for
preschool-age children (three to five years) using early childhood fiction books
as a tool for engaging families in STEM topics and
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Storybook STEM will be implemented in four phases:
(1) pre-convening activities to plan, synthesize existing resources, engage a
broader group of educators and researchers beyond convening attendees, and
prepare convening participants to maximize the value of the in-person
discussions; (2) in-person convening to catalyze cross-project discussions,
outline promising practices, and identify questions and ideas for the future;
(3) evaluation of the impact and value of the convening, from the perspective of
participants and a project steering committee; and (4) dissemination of findings
and recommendations to educators and researchers within and beyond the ISE
field. Outcomes include: (1) documenting current and past work in ISE and other
fields; (2) summarizing key recommendations and resources from the reading,
literacy, and early childhood development fields; and (3) outlining promising
directions for future work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences.
The findings from this project will provide a critical resource to help these
efforts be more effective and inclusive for audiences across the country.
Research studies motivated by the convening will address the lack of empirical
work on storybooks as a tool for ISE programs and advance the ISE field's
knowledge of how to integrate these books effectively. Because storybooks are a
highly accessible and almost universally used family learning resource, the
topic of the convening will be relevant to a wide range of audiences and will
help educators broaden access to ISE for traditionally underserved and under-
resourced communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.