* 1902356
* Topological Heat Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Dmitri Feldman, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2022
* USD 390,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on topological quantum materials, which are a special
class of materials that have been bestowed with exceptionally stable properties.
That feature is known as topological protection. Quantum mechanics is
responsible for the exceptional properties of topological materials. Consider,
for example, electrons, which in reality do not have constituent particles. In
certain topological matter, they appear as if they have split into particles,
called anyons, which also carry an equally distributed fraction of the original
electric charge. These anyons are promising for building the fundamental
components of a quantum computer, in which topological protection would help
reduce otherwise unavoidable computational errors introduced by the material's
interaction with its environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop
theoretical approaches for understanding quantum topological materials and their
properties. Recent breakthroughs in experiments have uncovered how heat travels
through topological matter. A major goal of this project consists of providing a
theoretical understanding of quantum heat transport, and also resolving tensions
between the existing theoretical framework and the newest experimental data on
the behavior of quantum topological matter in two
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will advance fundamental
understanding of topological matter and quantum transport, both of which are
directions of crucial importance for quantum science and technology that have
become a national priority. Through research and education opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students, which include collaborations with leading
experimentalists, students under the award will be trained to eventually join
the future workforce in modern quantum science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on topological quantum materials with a focus on heat transport and
the related physics of neutral modes. The non-Abelian fractional statistics of
anyons in topological matter may find significant applications in quantum
information storage and processing. The understanding of non-Abelian statistics
and many other phenomena in topological matter requires experimental access to
neutral excitations, which comes from thermal transport experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research direction is motivated by recent
experimental developments and aims at achieving theoretical understanding of
thermal equilibration and transport on the edges of quantum Hall liquids,
including the effects of upstream neutral modes. The closely related second
direction addresses poorly understood quantum Hall states in the second Landau
level in GaAs and related systems. The observation of half-integer quantized
thermal conductance at filling factor 5/2 strongly supports the existence of
non-Abelian anyons in the second Landau level. Yet, many open problems remain,
including an apparent conflict between the existing experimental results and
numerics. The research builds upon recent experimental results and the
breakthrough work by Son on the relation of 2D electron gases and topological
insulators. The objective is to reconcile the theory of the 5/2 state with
experiments. A third research direction focuses on newly developed topological
systems with neutral modes but without charged modes. The methods employed will
include a combination of analytical and numerical tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will advance fundamental knowledge of
topological matter and quantum transport, both of which are directions of
crucial importance for quantum science and technology that have become a
national priority. Through research and education opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, which include collaborations with leading
experimentalists, students under the award will be trained to eventually join
the future workforce in modern quantum science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.