* 1902787
* Collaborative Research: Innovative Approaches for Robust and Reliable Operation of Voltage Source Converters in Critical Conditions of Emerging Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Masoud Davari, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 111,147.00

Collaborative Research: Innovative Approaches for Robust and Reliable Operation
of Voltage Source Converters in Critical Conditions of Emerging
Grids&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grid-connected voltage source converters are
increasingly deployed in the energy sector, e.g. for the interconnection of
distributed energy resources to the power grid. An instant of the converter's
poor functionality can cause local and system level problems. For example, the
cause of the 1,200 MW fault-induced solar photovoltaic resource interruption in
Southern California is identified in erroneous functioning of the phase-locked
loop employed in the inverter control system. The field data also show an
unstable operation of photovoltaic inverters caused by grid voltage harmonics
and partial or full generation loss caused by routine utility-owned capacitor
switching incidents. Functions such as accurate and robust frequency estimation,
voltage synchronization, and current generation during challenging conditions
are crucial to maintaining the reliability of a power grid with high penetration
of distributed resources. This research has identified 1) grid weakness, 2) grid
voltage distortions, and 3) grid voltage and frequency disturbances, as broadly
describing the major critical grid conditions. Thus, it proposes to 1)
investigate the impacts of these conditions on the inverter functions, and 2) to
synthesize Innovative and Effective Solutions. The proposed research invests in
developing Modular, Practical and Efficient solutions that fully integrate the
converter components and minimize demanding components that compromise the
integrity of this multi-objective system. The project results will advance the
quality and strength of inverter responses during critical conditions of future
grids and will lead to the 1) improvement in the power system reliability, 2)
improvement in its power quality, and 3) increase in its inverter hosting
capacity. This will enhance the public power delivery services, empower the
related energy industry, and develop new ties among various education and
research communities. The project will stimulate and sustain the cross-
disciplinary training of diversified students, particularly the underrepresented
minorities enrolled in STEM programs at Mississippi State University and Georgia
Southern University, and improve the broad STEM curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will establish theories to effectively
formulate interactions among components of a grid-connected converter such as
its phase-locked loop and its controller and between the converter and its
hosting power network. Effective modeling, analysis and control processes will
be developed for robust integration of the converter to the weak, polluted, and
disturbed grid conditions. The phase-locked loop, optimal and robust controls,
signals, and generator emulation theories are used to solidly tie the converter
components together and design them in an optimal way. The project's approach is
to fully integrate and optimize the converter components without adding
redundant and disjoint components which may compromise other aspects of this
multi-faceted and highly coupled engineering system. Particularly, recent
advanced models of the phase-locked loops and recent optimal control design
approaches will be deployed and joined to fully integrate the phase-locked loop
into the entire control system of the converter and to design the entire control
system in an optimal and robust way. High-fidelity power-hardware-in-the-loop
testing will be used to examine the practicality and effectiveness of the
proposed methods. Through full components integration leading to reduced
oscillations and instabilities, the proposed project will increase the inverter
hosting capacity of a given power grid, as well as its reliability and power
quality. The project will also enhance the fundamental knowledge in those
multiple fields (i.e. the phase-locked loops, optimal and robust controls, and
signals) as applied to the crucial problems of integrating renewable resources
to the power and energy system of our twenty-first
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.