* 1902332
* Building Equity for Aerospace Training
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Dana Riley Black, Everett Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 03/31/2024
* USD 412,000.00

Aerospace companies in the state of Washington have struggled to meet existing
needs for skilled technical workers and this gap between industry needs and
qualified candidates is expected to grow. This need is particularly critical in
jobs related to air passenger safety. The number of technicians needed to do
aircraft inspections, preventative and routine maintenance, and repairs greatly
exceeds the number of students who choose an education in avionics and aviation
maintenance. At the same time, young women in high school continue to be less
likely than young men to choose to enter or to stay in career and technical
education classes tied to these careers. This proposal aims to help meet the
need for aerospace technicians by broadening participation in aerospace
technician education. To achieve this goal, Everett Community College will work
with regional aerospace companies, local schools, and a national organization to
train teachers and counselors how to equally encourage all students along an
aerospace education pathway. A specific emphasis will be on encouraging female
students, so that more stay in this pathway. The project will offer an education
model that could be used by secondary schools and colleges across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to improve the capability of
educators, career counselors, and academic advisors to encourage students,
particularly young women, to enter and persist in aerospace education pathways.
To achieve this goal, the project will support a partnership between Everett
Community College, aerospace companies (Boeing, Delta Airlines, and Glasair
Aviation), middle and high schools (Everett Public School District, Marysville
Public School District, and Mukilteo Public School District), and the National
Girls Collaborative Project, which is dedicated to advancing best practices for
engaging females in STEM-related careers. The project will offer training and
summer institutes for educators and counselors, focused on equity-based and
culturally-responsive teaching strategies. The relevant technical curriculum
will be examined through the lens of equity and inclusion. The training will
include teaching and professional development strategies that are known to
improve the interest, retention, and achievement of young women. Educator
learning communities will be created to support exchange of ideas, curriculum
materials, and best practices. Each secondary-school partner will identify a
project liaison to engage cohorts of female students in career-connected
afterschool activities, courses, and events. Female role models in aerospace
careers will participate in after-school activities and support the students'
engagement with technical coursework. The project team will also work with
industry to provide students with early exposure to typical technician careers,
near-peer mentoring experiences, and other identity-building activities. The
project will enhance understanding about how to increase the ability of
educators and counselors to nurture young women by enhancing their technical
confidence to pursue aerospace and related career pathways. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.