* 1902298
* Integrating Interdisciplinary Design Thinking: Developing High Demand Workforce Skills at the Intersection of Art and Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Christine Davis, NorthWest Arkansas Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 586,900.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by expanding the skilled
technical workforce, especially in construction fields and engineering design.
To accomplish this goal, the project will create a Technical Certificate in
Integrated Design. This certificate will stack into several two-year degrees,
including Associate of Applied Science degrees in Construction Technology and in
Computer-aided Design. Curricula and educational resources for an Integrated
Design Lab will be developed to support the certificate. This lab will provide
students with an interdisciplinary, hands-on learning environment in which they
can learn and practice design thinking. Design thinking activities will also be
integrated into workforce-directed programs such as CAD, construction, 2D/3D
design, and arts. These additions will help students develop the design-related
skills that are in high demand in engineering, graphic design, and fine arts.
The project aims to serve a diverse student population that includes incumbent
workers and high school students, including those from groups that are
traditionally under-served. In this way, the project aims to help meet the need
for a diverse and creative STEM national workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the project is to develop pathways for high school students, college
students, and incumbent workers to learn design thinking as part of their STEM
education. The project has three objectives. First, the project seeks to create
a market-driven and competency-based curriculum in design thinking. Second, it
will provide an interdisciplinary and experiential learning environment focused
on design thinking and make the environment available to students and the
community. Third, the project will establish Northwest Arkansas Community
College as a technical and logistical hub for regional coordination, planning,
and workforce training and produce certified students to fill workforce needs in
local industry. Students in the program will develop Professional Portfolios to
help them get jobs and develop careers. A portion of the curriculum will be
designed for the incumbent workforce, as well as for portability and
transferabilty. Articulation agreements will extend post-secondary partnerships
with regional four-year programs in industrial automation and design.
Specialized equipment will support hands-on fabrication and production of
functional products. The project builds upon previous NSF-funded work that
explored the inclusion of design thinking and fabrication resources in the
formation of design skills in baccalaureate engineering and graduate programs.
This project will extend that research with the inclusion of interdisciplinary
elements utilizing design aesthetic and workforce-ready fabrication skills in
associate degree programs. The project will additionally benefit the community
through specialized workforce training and workshops for a general audience.
This project is funded by NSF's Advanced Technological Education program, which
focuses on the education of technicians for the high-technology fields that
drive our nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.