* 1902188
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Enhancing Access to Taxonomic and Biogeographical Data to Stem the Tide of Extinction of the Highly Imperiled Pacific Island Land Snails
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* James Hanken, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 140,412.00

Biodiversity is declining globally and any effective actions to halt or slow
extinctions requires precise knowledge of species identities and distributions.
Natural history collections are critical to fully understanding historical and
contemporary biodiversity patterns, yet most of the museum specimens and their
associated data remain inaccessible without directly visiting the museum
collection, and even then, only to a select few. Digitizing these data and
making it more broadly available electronically will facilitate biodiversity
conservation efforts. Land snails, with approximately 25,000 species globally,
are a major component of terrestrial habitats and provide services crucial for
maintaining intact and fully functional ecosystems. Unfortunately, land snails
have the highest number of documented extinctions of any major animal group,
with the greatest losses among Pacific islands. Conservation assessments and
identification of the remaining fauna are hampered because a large portion of
this fauna has not been comprehensively studied for more than 100 years.
Increased understanding of threatened biodiversity should be a national
priority, particularly given the current biodiversity crisis. One goal of this
project is to develop a comprehensive data resource (the Pacific Island Land
Snail Biodiversity Repository; PILSBRY) to provide information needed to
identify and assess the distributions and conservation status of Pacific island
land snails. Researchers from five of the largest natural history collections in
the nation will be joining forces to build an educational program to train and
engage the science community, students, and citizen scientists to aid them in
the digitization, mobilization, and enhancement of 3.6 million Pacific island
land snail specimen records. This project will increase capacity of experts to
support tropical island biodiversity research and conservation and accelerate
species discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants of this project, including
the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum, Academy of Natural Sciences at Drexel, Museum
of Zoology at the University of Michigan, Harvard Museum of Natural History,
Florida Museum of Natural History, and the Field Museum, will digitize and
mobilize data for 3.6 million specimens of Pacific island land snails held in
these collections. These data, enhanced through georeferencing and imaging of
primary types, will be made available to the public and science community via a
centralized online database and integrated into multiple public data
repositories, including iDigBio (idigbio.org), which is supported by the NSF's
ADBC program. High school and undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups in STEM will receive training in data management, bioinformatics,
taxonomy and museum curation and will contribute to formal (e.g. conference
presentations and publications) and informal (e.g. exhibits, social media and
blogs) educational activities to improve their science communication skills and
connect research to the science community and public. Additionally, citizen
scientists will be able to assist in enhancing specimen records by transcribing
data from scanned ledgers, field notes, and other associated data through online
portals. Eventually additional web-based tools and smart phone applications can
be developed for conservation managers, researchers, citizen scientists and the
public to access Pacific Island land snail specimen records to further research
and conservation management of this highly endangered
fauna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.