* 1902292
* Improving the Education of Mechatronics Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Norman Carignan, Manchester Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 12/31/2022
* USD 299,529.00

Blue collar jobs are being replaced with "new-collar" jobs that use technology
to solve multidisciplinary problems. Building on prior accomplishments supported
by federal funding under the Department of Labor's Trade Adjustment Assistance
Community College and Career Training program, this project focuses the new-
collar field of mechatronics, which combines mechanical, electronic, and
computer technologies. Mechatronics technicians work with 3D printers,
electromechanical systems, robotic devices, and other technologies to contribute
to sectors ranging from agriculture and advanced manufacturing to renewable
energy and telecommunications. The project will implement the Siemens
Mechatronic Systems curriculum to develop a stackable, industry-recognized
certification program and an Associate of Science degree. The Siemens curriculum
uses a systems approach to mechatronics education that emphasizes how multiple
technologies coexist and interact. This approach helps students learn how to
troubleshoot, maintain, and operate an entire automated system, rather than just
individual components. As a result, students who complete the mechatronics
certification and/or degree will be prepared for well-paying jobs in growing
industries, thus contributing to the US skilled technical workforce and
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has four goals: 1) redevelop the
curriculum to realign the current Advanced Manufacturing Mechatronics
Certificate with the Siemens Mechatronics Level 1 Certification; 2) provide
professional development and training for College faculty to earn Siemens Level
1 Mechatronics Instructor certification; 3) investigate the program enhancements
needed to implement Siemens Level 2 certification at a later date; 4) raise
interest in and awareness of an advanced manufacturing career involving
mechatronics in the local area. The project will leverage the work of other NSF
Advanced Technological Education (ATE) projects to build low cost mechatronics
training kits and will disseminate the curriculum and materials it develops to
the ATE community. As traditional manufacturing becomes more automated and
dependent on computers, the need for technicians with advanced problem-solving
skills is increasing. This project will contribute to educating this next
generation of skilled technical workers. This project is funded by the NSF ATE
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.