* 1902501
* Developing Resources for Enhancing Additive Manufacturing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Hans Mikelson, Chippewa Valley Technical College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 567,350.00

Additive manufacturing, which uses multiple layers of materials to create 3D
objects, is increasingly important in the nation's manufacturing industry. The
need for workers with the skills to design and create products using additive
manufacturing technologies is also increasing. To help meet this need, Chippewa
Valley Technical College will work with industry partners and secondary schools
to develop new courses related to additive manufacturing, which is also called
3D printing. A Fabrication Laboratory (Fab Lab) facility will be created to
provide students with hands-on learning opportunities. Students will have the
opportunity to learn about the processes, materials, and design approaches used
in additive manufacturing and to develop the skills needed to create items using
those approaches. The knowledge and skills they develop, in turn, will prepare
students for high-demand technician careers in manufacturing industries. The Fab
Lab will also be available as a space for local entrepreneurs and makers to
explore the use of modern equipment and technology. It is expected that the
project will contribute to increasing the number of skilled technicians for the
regional and national manufacturing workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
the project are to: 1) prepare manufacturing technicians with skills in additive
manufacturing processes and concepts; and 2) increase the capability of
secondary school teachers to teach additive manufacturing topics. Course content
for five modules on additive manufacturing will be developed to augment the
Manufacturing Engineering Technologist and Mechanical Design associate degree
programs at the college. These modules will cover topics such as material
properties, metal additive manufacturing, design principles, and quality
assurance for digital manufacturing. The new Fab Lab high-quality makerspace
will be equipped with multiple types of 3D printers (including thermoplastic,
stereolithography, composite material, and metal 3D printers) and a 3D laser
scanner. Students will participate in a capstone experience that incorporates
project-based learning on real-world projects that allow students to work
collaboratively with industry partners. Course modules with appropriate content
for middle and high school students will also be developed. All students will
have the opportunity to earn industry-recognized credentials after completing
the modules. Secondary school teachers will have access to faculty mentors and
professional development workshops, to help them work with the Fab Lab equipment
and integrate the modules and course activities into their curriculum. The
project includes evaluation by an external expert. Results of this evaluation
could inform other institutions about effective approaches to recruiting and
educating technicians for additive manufacturing jobs. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.