* 1902595
* Collaborative Research: The Arctic Observing Network - Capturing and Understanding Arctic Change with Renewed Observations at the Davis Strait Gateway
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Craig Lee, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,819,695.00

Oceanic freshwater and heat exchange between the Arctic and North Atlantic
provide critical mechanisms through which the Arctic and global climate
interact. Arctic freshwater, from riverine input and melting sea ice, flows
southward through the Arctic ?Gateways? to the west (Davis Strait) and east
(Fram Strait) of Greenland into the regions of the subpolar North Atlantic where
the waters that occupy the deep ocean interior are formed. At these sites,
strong wintertime storms cool the upper ocean, making these waters dense enough
to cause them to sink to depth, effectively communicating this atmospheric
forcing into the ocean interior and driving the equator-to-pole transport of
heat. Fresh, buoyant Arctic outflow reduces the density of surface waters in
these deepwater formation regions, and thus has the potential to slow the
sinking and modulate equator-to-pole heat transport. Changes in Arctic outflow
also impact broad North Atlantic circulation patterns and circulation off the
Labrador coast, with wide-ranging impacts to ecosystems. Conversely, the
northward flow of relatively warm Atlantic waters can supply oceanic heat to
melt Greenlandic glaciers where they encounter the ocean, thus accelerating the
melting of Greenland ice cap. Uncertainty surrounding the role of oceanic heat
in accelerating the melt of Greenland?s glaciers is one of the largest sources
of uncertainty in numerical predictions of future sea level rise. The critical
role of Arctic-subpolar heat and freshwater exchange motivates renewed efforts
to maintain sustained, persistent, measurements across Davis Strait, capturing
exchange between the Arctic and subpolar North Atlantic (Labrador Sea) at a
choke point at the southern end of Baffin Bay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will renew the integrated observational program at Davis Strait, delivering data
to the community and matching ongoing collections at Bering Strait, Utqiagvik,
Alaska, and Fram Strait to extend the time series of concurrent measurements
across the major Arctic Gateways. The extended timeseries will document changes
in freshwater and heat fluxes, and will be combined with numerical modeling to
investigate the processes that control variability in the strait and the
potential impacts. The backbone system relies on the tested combination of
moorings instrumented with sensors to measure ice thickness and motion, ocean
currents, temperature and salinity, and biennial ship-based sampling of chemical
and biological properties that have successfully delivered core measurements for
the past decade. Bottom pressure sensors augment the system to quantify sea
surface height gradients, which will support investigations of the primary
forcing mechanisms. Integrated marine ecosystem observing includes
biogeochemical and marine mammal passive acoustic measurements augmented with
tracking of key fish species, and zooplankton and phytoplankton observations.
These observations will launch the Davis Strait/Baffin Bay Distributed
Biological Observatory (DBO) in Davis Strait, complementing the developing
Atlantic DBO that includes transect lines in Fram Strait and Barents Sea, and
the existing Pacific DBO in the northern Bering, Chukchi and Beaufort
Seas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.