* 1902411
* Improving Success in Math Gateway Courses for STEM Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Mysti Hobson, Zane State College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 243,934.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in developing and maintaining a
highly skilled technical workforce. Success in math courses is a barrier for
students pursuing degrees in engineering technology and environmental technology
programs at Zane State College. Thus, improving success in math gateway courses
is essential to support student degree completion and employment in well-paid
technician jobs that are in-demand in this region of Appalachian Ohio. This
project will research, design, and pilot best practices in math education,
evaluate the results, and customize and cement successes into the foundation of
gateway math courses. Through continual assessment of progress, it will strive
to implement a continuous improvement model. The project team will share
information about the structure and outcomes of the modified mathematics courses
with high schools, colleges, and universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will begin with an in-depth analysis of institutional success data and a
literature review of best practices in math education. This information will
then be used to develop: (1) mathematics skills workshops for students held in
term intercessions to prepare for the upcoming semester math course; (2)
supplemental mathematics instruction including just-in-time co-requisite models
designed with input from industry and business, as well as an embedded
professional tutor in math courses; (3) professional development about active
and contextualized learning for faculty teaching math courses or teaching math
within technical courses; and (4) a math department assessment and review plan
to help ensure future student success by building on the data collected and
materials/curriculum designed during the project. In the curricular design
process, the College will consider the needs of industry (through the technology
program Advisory Committees), students (through the validated Math Belonging
survey, satisfaction surveys, interviews, and course success data), and faculty
(through professional development activities and feedback). It is anticipated
that these math course improvements will improve student success in math gateway
courses and result in an increase in completion rates of students in STEM
technology programs. This project is funded by the NSF Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.