* 1902936
* Collaborative Research: Computational methods for understanding the influence of cellular geometry and substructure on signaling
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Carolyn Larabell, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

To be able to predict and control the behavior of cells, it is necessary to
understand how they detect, process and respond to external signals. This award
will develop accurate and efficient numerical methods with which to study at the
whole-cell scale how cells respond and process external signals. This will be
done by developing new particle-based stochastic reaction-diffusion methods that
allow the numerical simulation of the motion of, and reactions between, proteins
on the surface of cells and within cells. High-resolution soft X-ray tomographic
images of cells will be reconstructed to provide an accurate picture of the
interfaces between immune cells. Geometries reconstructed from these images will
then be used in computational modeling studies to investigate how the activation
of immune cells depends on the structure of contact geometries between cells,
and on physical properties of proteins involved in the signaling process. As
immune cells play a key role in the body's response to pathogens and cancer,
such studies have the potential to ultimately further our understanding and
treatment of disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how both
the shape of cell membranes, and cellular substructures within the cytosol, can
modify the predicted dynamics of cell signaling pathways. This will be achieved
by developing new particle-based stochastic reaction-diffusion (PBSRD) models in
realistic cellular geometries of T cells, reconstructed from X-ray tomographic
images. The studies will focus on T cell signaling pathways, where membrane-
based signaling is critical for T cell activation in response to antigens, and
highly regulated by the dynamics of cytosolic enzymes. In such pathways,
membrane geometry is thought to play a major role through interactions of
microvilli and filopodia with antigen presenting cells (APCs). The combination
of modeling and imaging studies will give quantitative answers to the question
of what the magnitude of these geometric effects are on T-cell signaling. Four-
dimensional spatial stochastic models will be developed as they are necessary to
accurately capture the dynamics of successfully functioning cellular signaling
processes, in situations where cell shape, and internal substructure, can
significantly influence the behavior of signaling pathways. The primary research
objectives of this project are to: 1) Develop new PBSRD that incorporate the
surface diffusion and reaction of molecules. 2) Develop efficient, exact
numerical methods for sampling spatial jump processes associated with PBSRD
models. 3) Conduct 3D X-ray tomographic imaging studies of T cells and T cells
engaged with APCs to understand the variation in the shape of cells, organelles,
and density of material within T cells. 4) Apply the new PBSRD methods in 3D
geometries reconstructed from the imaging studies to investigate how cell shape
and organelle barriers can influence the dynamics of T cell
signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.