* 1902617
* Intelligent Biology and Medicine in 2019: Accelerating Interdisciplinary Education, Collaboration, and Innovation in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Zhongming Zhao, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2020
* USD 17,950.00

In the era of data science, covering data process and standardization, algorithm
and tool development, statistics, machine learning and related approaches new
opportunities for dealing with the amazing data growth rate are critical. This
coupled with new technologies leads to advances in health and biomedical
research. The 2019 conference on Intelligent Biology and Medicine will be held
June 9-11 in Columbus, Ohio, led by a stellar field of keynote speakers to
address themes of omics- and data-based systems, translational science and
personalized medicine. The conference promotes extensive interaction and
provides opportunities for junior faculty and students to participate and
learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the International
Conference on Intelligent Biology and Medicine (ICIBM) is to promote information
science, technology, and education to a great variety of trainees and young
investigators, including trainees, faculty, teachers, scientists, and engineers,
and to provide a forum for the cross-fertilization of ideas. ICIBM will provide
a forum to accelerate data science method development and application, to
explore complex and dynamic functions and regulation in cellular systems and
organisms, and to improve algorithms, deep learning, computational tools,
knowledgebase, and biotechniques for better diagnosis, prevention, and treatment
of diseases. ICIBM 2019 conference programs will include four distinguished
keynote speakers, four eminent scholars' talks, four tutorial and workshop
sessions, scientific presentations, a poster session, and other activities. Top
manuscripts will be selected for special journal
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.