* 1902496
* 2018 Hurricane Season: RAPID: Associated Priming of Carbon in the Albemarle-Pamlico Estuarine System (APES), the Mid-Atlantic Bight and Gulf Stream
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2021
* David Corbett, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2021
* USD 101,532.00

In the early fall of 2018, two Atlantic hurricanes (Florence and Michael)
deposited substantial amounts of rainfall in North Carolina. The Albemarle-
Pamlico Estuarine System (APES), which was impacted by these storms, is the
second largest estuary in the United States, receiving freshwater from the
Coastal Plain region of North Carolina and bounded on its seaward side by the
Outer Banks (OBX). The exchange of water and suspended materials between the
APES and the Atlantic Ocean occurs through three inlets (Oregon, Hatteras, and
Ocracoke Inlets). This proposed research explores the overarching hypothesis
that extreme precipitation from the 2018 Hurricane Season flushed land-derived
organic material and microbes into the APES and that material will be exported
into the North Atlantic through the OBX inlets, and impact coastal ocean
ecosystems. The project will support a graduate student and two undergraduates.
The investigators will present a summary of this research and synopsis of the
impacts from the 2018 Hurricane Season to the OBX coastal community through the
"Science on the Sound" presentation series at the Coastal Studies Institute. The
investigators propose two research questions to address their hypothesis: 1)
will the pulse of the terrigenous dissolved organic matter and microbes from
Florence and Michael change the regional Gulf Stream from a net sink to a net
source of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, and 2) will deposition of this
elevated organic material and nutrients to the seabed seaward of the inlets,
promote anaerobic and fermentation processes that will lead to algal blooms in
surface waters adjacent to the Gulf Stream? Because marine dissolved organic
matter is a highly complex and polydisperse mixture of different compounds, its
priming and biodegradation resulting from the storms, even at rudimentary
levels, may significantly affect coastal carbon cycling. Large uncertainties
exist in the regional carbon budgets of North America. Intense rain events (as
defined by the upper 0.3% of daily rain events) and Category 4 and 5 Atlantic
hurricanes are predicted to increase in frequency in extratropical regions,
globally. Also, the erosion and entrainment of the substantial amounts of land-
derived organic matter, nutrients, and microbes, collectively contribute to
broad spatial and temporal uncertainties in regional carbon budgets. This study
will provide data reducing these uncertainties in the Atlantic seaboard, in an
area adjacent to the Gulf Stream.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.