* 1902205
* Hands-on Technician Training (HoTT)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* David Carty, SOUTH ARKANSAS COMMUNITY COLLEGE
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2023
* USD 242,413.00

South Arkansas Community College will redesign three foundational advanced
manufacturing courses in Process Technology and Industrial Technology, and offer
them in a hybrid format. These courses will form the foundation of a new one-
semester Certificate of Proficiency that can lead directly to an entry-level job
or establish a foundation upon which students can stack additional credentials
in the Industrial Technology or Process Technology degree tracks. The courses
will incorporate industry-driven, competency-based learning outcomes and
integrate employability skills, complemented by open labs with industry-
specified hands-on activities and assessments. The project will address
industry's need for qualified technicians and industry's desire for more hands-
on training and integration of employability skills into coursework. The
flexible scheduling built into the hybrid course model will afford students new
educational opportunities and offer students a flexible schedule so they can
meet family obligations and address financial concerns. Although the region has
varied industries that offer well-paying jobs, industries have not been able to
hire enough qualified technicians who meet workforce needs and there is a need
to educate more advanced manufacturing technicians and raise their skill levels
to meet the needs of regional and state-wide employers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hands-on Technician Training (HoTT) project will allow
industrial technology students to earn an industry-acknowledged, employment-
ready Certificate of Proficiency (CP). Students will complete a shared-core,
one-semester certificate that qualifies them for entry-level technician jobs or
for continued studies in either Industrial Technology or Process Technology
toward an associate of applied science degree. Professional development for
faculty will occur through mentoring, local industry cooperators (externships),
and committee involvement with national advocacy organizations such as the North
American Process Technology Alliance (NAPTA). Videography and posting of
lectures and relevant online-available resources will be developed, embraced by
time-constrained students, and evaluated by appropriate testing. Open laboratory
sessions will similarly appeal to busy students (and industry), provide
necessary time for immersion in proper hands-on practices, and mirror equipment
and system qualification protocols commonly utilized by
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.