* 1902413
* Developing Spatial Reasoning through Unmanned Aircraft Systems Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* David Boles, Colorado Northwestern Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,586.00

A high growth sector of the national economy involves small unmanned aircraft
systems, also called drones. These computer-controlled aircraft can be used in
situations where manned flight is too risky or difficult. Drone technology is
estimated to have a national economic impact of $100 billion, with an annual
average growth of 23%. Drone technology has uses in many different industries,
including farming, building construction, search and rescue, filmmaking,
ecological studies, firefighting, coal extraction, national and state park
surveillance, economic land development, and recreational pursuits. Drone
technology also serves as the technological platform for the next generation of
scientific data collection, requiring greater collaboration between information
technology, geospatial sciences, and aviation-aeronautical technologies. As
such, drones are already acting as a relatable science product in the general
population and increasing the science literacy of hobbyists. This project aims
to develop industry-specific curricula related to small unmanned aircraft
systems. In this way, it intends to build the network of educational pathways
and job pipelines for a skilled aviation workforce in Colorado, strengthening
alignment between research, educational, and industry
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colorado Northwestern Community College will develop a
new academic program and educational pathway to prepare the next generation of
unmanned aircraft systems technicians for Colorado. The College is a rural two-
year technical college with an established aviation program. Modifications to
this current program will result in an accelerated program that allows industry
to choose an accredited educational approach for educating its unmanned aircraft
systems technicians. Working with its industry partners, the project will adapt
and implement current drone courses into a condensed, accelerated, and hybrid
class format, consistent with industry needs in Northwest Colorado. Students
will self-complete an initial online pre-qualifying exam, called an
Individualized Competency STEM Assessment, prior to acceptance into the
accelerated on-site classroom training program. The online, self-paced
assessment will provide detailed Concept Modules that instantly address and
subsequently correct students' proficiency gaps during the pre-exam curriculum,
with the goal of guaranteeing that each students' working knowledge reaches the
required skill proficiency needed for subsequent coursework. Upon satisfactorily
completing the online assessment prerequisite, students will register for
accelerated/condensed on-site field and classroom unmanned aircraft systems
coursework with Colorado Northwestern Community College. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.