* 1902685
* Manufacturing a Robust Thermal Metamaterial Platform based on Carbon Nanolattices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Lorenzo Valdevit, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 399,717.00

While the abilities to control electricity and light have led to revolutionary
progress in electronics and photonics, the ability to control heat has made
relatively little progress. This is mainly due to the limited understanding of
thermal transport at the nanoscale and the lack of metamaterials designed to
control heat transfer. The Principal Investigators (PIs) plan to manufacture
carbon-based cellular materials (i.e. carbon nanolattices) and establish a new
field of thermal metamaterials. The new thermal transport and manufacturing
knowledge developed in this program will guide future designs of metamaterial
systems and enable developments of novel thermal insulators and thermal
rectifiers. The outcomes of this research will strengthen innovation in the
areas of thermal control, thermal insulation, and waste heat recovery, which
will enhance the energy production in the United States, so that the research
directly impacts economic welfare and national security. The research outputs
will be integrated with educational activities and outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of main challenges in studying thermal
transport mechanisms or manipulating heat flows is the diffusive nature of
phonon transport, which takes over when the material size is greater than the
phonon mean-free-path. The PIs will utilize the measurement and processing
capabilities of two synergistic labs to create a novel metamaterial platform
with feature sizes smaller than the phonon mean-free-path. The first objective
is to control size, geometry, and nanostructure of carbon nanolattices via a
state-of-the-art two-step additive manufacturing process, consisting of two-
photon polymerization direct laser writing of a polymeric template, followed by
pyrolysis of the template. The process allows fabrication of structurally robust
and dense polymeric lattice materials with feature sizes at the submicron range
(200-1000 nm); by accurate control of the pyrolysis, the PIs will further
improve the resolution, enabling fabrication of carbon structures with exquisite
control of the feature size (20-200 nm). At the same time, this process allows
realization of complex three-dimensional (3D) geometries that are difficult to
fabricate with conventional subtractive processes, enabling an enormous design
space. By simultaneously optimizing the lattice topology and the pyrolytic
carbon nanostructure, the project will exploit unique size effects in thermal
conductivity. The second objective is to demonstrate a new thermal metamaterial
platform based on carbon nanolattices, and this project will present two target
systems including a robust thermal insulator that offers a unique combination of
low thermal conductivity and high mechanical strength, and a thermal rectifier
that offers novel direction-dependent thermal transport properties. The project
will identify thermal transport mechanisms in architected nanolattices and
develop multiscale and multifunctional optimal design models that incorporate
size effects and allow exploitation of asymmetric geometries. The PIs will
achieve these objectives by combining their complementary expertise in thermal
and mechanical sciences, microscale metrology, 3D manufacturing, and topology
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.