* 1902610
* Agriculture Mechanic Technicians: Meeting the Demands of Rural Washington's Agricultural Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Landra Kosa, Big Bend Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,774.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in educating a skilled
technical workforce in agricultural industries. In response to local and
regional demands, Big Bend Community College will develop a curriculum that
allows students to earn a certificate or a degree in Agricultural Mechanics.
Agricultural equipment has increased in size and value, as well as become more
technologically complicated. Precision agriculture hardware and capabilities are
now standard features on most agriculture equipment. This equipment requires
service and maintenance from skilled technicians with both mechanical and
technological skills. This project will develop a new curriculum that begins
with basic shop competencies and culminates in a projects that requires students
to combine multiple skills in mechanics, fabrication, and precision technology.
The College will house this new program in the new Workforce Education Center,
which includes a 5,000 square foot Agriculture Mechanics Laboratory. This
project will serve Big Bend Community College's students, the agriculture
workforce, and the agriculture industry with the training and skills needed in
agricultural mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals for this project include:
1) developing an Agricultural Mechanics program that produces workforce-ready
agriculture mechanic technicians; 2) developing educational pathways from local
high school agriculture programs to the College's Agriculture Mechanics program;
3) supporting the teaching and learning of workplace competencies and skills;
and 4) building program enrollment through outreach and dissemination. Today's
agricultural mechanic technicians need to know more than how to turn a wrench
and work on large pieces of equipment. Modern agricultural equipment now
includes global positioning systems, mapping, and variable rate application and
seeding capabilities. These "precision capabilities" are leading to
efficiencies, cost savings, and reduced environmental impacts in agriculture.
Adoption of precision agriculture results in decreased inputs and higher quality
outputs. The agriculture industry has a long-term demand for agricultural
mechanic technicians who have both mechanical skills and technological
knowledge. This well-trained workforce is essential to support sustained
advances in agricultural mechanization and precision practices. As a result,
this project has the potential to provide career opportunities for students in
the service district and the region, especially place-bound students. In
addition, it can provide students a pathway for improving their personal quality
of life while providing the workforce needed in the region's largest industry.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.