* 1902652
* Imaging Ultrafast and Ultrasmall: Understanding and Manipulating Phase Transitions in Correlated Oxides Using Coherent X-Ray Diffraction
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Roopali Kukreja, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 04/30/2024
* USD 553,915.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Modern-day semiconductor devices have led to
important advances in diverse areas including information technology, energy,
health, and education. To overcome the current plateau in performance of the
existing microelectronics and enable energy-efficient high-speed operation,
complex oxides have been identified as a possible alternative to semiconductors.
This project explores the novel approach of utilizing optical lasers to
manipulate magnetic and electronic properties of complex nickel oxides at
ultrafast timescales. Research activities involve synthesis and advanced
characterization of complex oxides at nanometer lengthscales and femtosecond
timescales. The fundamental understanding of nanoscale and ultrafast phenomenon
is expected to significantly impact the development of future generations of
computing devices. Education activities includes introducing women and minority
undergraduate students to opportunities at U.S. National Laboratories and
collaborating with University of California Davis Mathematics Engineering
Science Achievement (MESA) Schools Program to engage high school students in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. This project will provide
graduate and undergraduate students training in interdisciplinary fields at the
intersection of materials science, physics, and electrical engineering.
Graduates are likely to find future employment in the information technology
sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The goal of this research
project is to elucidate fundamental limits and mechanisms to tailor material
properties at ultrasmall lengthscales and ultrafast timescales in correlated
oxides including rare-earth nickelates such as neodymium nickelate and samarium
nickelate. The project focuses on optically induced metal-insulator phase
transitions in rare earth nickelate thin films by utilizing synchrotron and free
electron laser based coherent X-ray techniques. Specific objectives include: (i)
deciphering fundamental lengthscales and timescales associated with ultrafast
behavior, (ii) understanding the influence of nanoscale morphology in optically
induced phase transitions, and (iii) investigating the coupling of electronic,
magnetic and structural degrees of freedom at femtosecond timescales. The
scientific knowledge at the ultimate limits of the ultrafast/ultrasmall frontier
in materials behavior discovered in this project will enable development of
future generations of computing devices based on light-matter interactions.
Education activities include the training of undergraduate and graduate students
in state-of-the art deposition and characterization tools, including synchrotron
radiation and free electron laser-based characterization techniques at U.S.
National Laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.