* 1902691
* Global Dynamics of Nonlinear Dispersive Evolution Equations and Spectral Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Wilhelm Schlag, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 09/30/2021
* USD 270,000.00

This project aims at understanding the propagation of waves in a wide sense. On
the one hand, the PI will investigate the behavior of waves in space, as they
interact nonlinearly with themselves and matter over large space-time scales.
The ultimate goal is to explain how the energy, which is stored in a wave
undergoing a nonlinear dynamical evolution, ultimately splits into quantized
pieces and a wave "at the horizon". The latter refers to energy, possibly of
large size, which is infinitely spread out and does not interact with anything
in a noticeable fashion. In contrast with this macroscopic behavior, the project
also aims at understanding the behavior of waves on the microscopic scale, such
as in crystals or quasi-crystals. The goal is to explain transitions from an
insulating state to that of a conductor, which these materials may exhibit as
they undergo changes on the molecular level. Such changes may occur through the
insertion of impurities, or changes in the environment. Both the macroscopic as
well as the microscopic behavior of waves is of crucial importance to science
and engineering, and profoundly affects our daily modern lives. Modern
communication relies on waves transmitted over large distances both in space but
also along glass fiber cables. For the latter the properties of the material are
crucial and both nonlinear effects as well as aforementioned microscopic
phenomena decide the suitability of the underlying medium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically speaking, the PI intends to further
investigate the rigorous mathematical theory of focusing dispersive semilinear
evolution equations. A major open problem is to analyze the resolution of any
solution into moving solitons and radiation. Some success has been achieved in
recent years on this important problem, but for nonintegrable equations we are
far from a satisfactory understanding. The PI is currently involved in the study
of this problem in the dissipative setting in which some damping is added to the
equation. The Hamiltonian setting appears to be very difficult at the moment,
especially in the subcritical regime. The methods involved derive from dynamical
systems, invariant manifold theory, and dispersive PDEs. The quantum mechanical
problems alluded in the previous paragraph belong to the area of Anderson
localization. Together with his long-standing collaborator Michael Goldstein at
Toronto, but also with young collaborators which are joining the field, the PI
intends to bring the body of techniques which were developed over the past 20
years based on large deviation estimates, the avalanche principle, semi-
algebraic sets, and harmonic analysis such as (pluri)subharmonic functions and
the Cartan estimate, to bear on both linear and nonlinear problems in dynamical
systems and spectral theory. Ultimately, the goal here is also to better
describe the behavior of wave propagation in disordered
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.