* 1902318
* Bridging the Instruction-Industry Divide: Multidisciplinary Approaches to 3D Technology Education and the Future of 3D Technology Certification
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yasmin Gulzar, Dallas County Community College Dist Mountain View College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 298,272.00

Over the past decade, rapid advances have been made in 3D technologies,
including 3D printing, 3D scanning, and 3D graphics programming. As a result,
the workforce increasingly needs technicians with skills in 3D technologies and
the education of these technicians is increasingly important for maintaining the
Nation's skilled technical workforce. However, a gap often exists between
classroom instruction related to 3D technologies and the current skills required
in industry. To help narrow this gap, Mountain View College in Texas will work
closely with industry to develop a curriculum that provides relevant instruction
in current 3D technology areas. The project partners will design courses that
align with the knowledge and skills valued by experts in the field. To this end,
instruction about 3D technologies will be integrated into courses across
technician disciplines at the institution. Mountain View College is a Hispanic-
serving institution with a long history of advancing the education of
underserved student groups. As a result, this project has the potential to not
only improve the skills of the entry-level workforce to meet regional and
national employment needs, but also to broaden participation in the skilled
technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is
to provide educational experiences that enable students to leave college with
highly-marketable and valuable skills in 3D technologies, ready to enter the
technician workforce. To achieve this goal, the project will: 1) perform a gap
analysis to uncover mismatches between course content and industry needs; 2)
develop interdisciplinary modules on topics in 3D printing, scanning, and
modeling that address identified gaps, and implement the modules within courses
across multiple disciplines; 3) develop and implement a capstone course on 3D
technologies and their application; 4) organize and host bi-annual workshops for
faculty professional development and a 3D Technology Conference to share project
findings; and 5) use results and best practices from these activities to design
and propose a new industry-endorsed 3D technology certificate program at the
institution. The project team will collaborate with local and regional industry
professionals to identify areas for optimal implementation of content and hands-
on learning with 3D technologies into existing coursework. The new capstone
course will provide cohesive, progressively complex learning and hands-on
experiences with 3D technologies, culminating in student capstone projects that
feature 3D technology. The approach may augment partnerships between higher
education, research, and industry across the region and pave the way for other
two-year institutions to expand and enhance their instruction on 3D
technologies. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.