* 1902403
* Super Resolution THz Imaging of Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Gregory Hartland, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 420,827.00

Recently invented super-resolution microscopes are having a large impact on the
fields of chemistry, biology, and materials science, due to these microscopes
providing previously unheard-of images of objects with dimensions approaching
that of molecules. However, important chemical and electrical features of
conducting and semiconducting nanomaterials cannot be visualized with existing
microscopes, because of energy limitations associated with the light used. With
support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, and partial co-
funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry and the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program in
the Division of Materials Research of the National Science Foundation, Professor
Hartland and his group at the University of Notre Dame are developing a new
super-resolution microscope for recording images of materials through a novel
approach that takes advantage of low-energy light in the terahertz region of the
electromagnetic spectrum. The smallest sized feature the terahertz microscope
can resolve is a few hundred nanometers, which is 100 to 1000 times better than
previously possible. The newly unleashed power of the terahertz microscope is
being used by Professor Hartland and graduate and undergraduate students to
study materials that hold promise for more efficient solar cells and
nanomaterials that may one day be used in ultra-sensitive chemical detection
systems. It is anticipated that the new terahertz microscope will be adopted by
researchers who study biologicals, superconductors, and integrated circuit
devices, and ways to identify trace amounts of chemicals, such as residues from
explosives. Efforts go beyond training of students at the university level, with
a major focus being participation of high school students and teachers recruited
from the Elkhart Community Schools, a local school district with students who
come from highly diverse socioeconomic backgrounds. Sustained impact of the
Elkhart School collaboration is being achieved by the high school teachers
receiving graduate credits for their summer research activities. This program
leads to teacher participants being able to teach Indiana University dual-
enrollment courses, thereby broadening the educational opportunities provided by
the Elkhart Community Schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terahertz spectroscopy is
widely used to examine semiconductors and plastics; however, currently existing
terahertz microscopes have very low spatial resolution due to the diffraction
limit. In a traditional terahertz microscope, the minimum feature size that can
be resolved is determined by the wavelength of the impinging light divided by
two, which is approximately 50 micrometers in the terahertz region. The unique
approach taken by the Hartland group is based on a tightly focused visible probe
beam that monitors absorption of a terahertz pump beam through the photothermal
effect. The resolution in these experiments is dictated by the visible probe
beam, and, as a result, is several hundred nanometers rather than tens of
micrometers. The photothermal terahertz microscope is being used to examine
photo-conductivity and the terahertz spectroscopy of thin films and individual
nanostructures. These experiments are providing new information about the
spatial distribution and motion of photo-excited charge carriers in the
different structures, and the decay pathways for the charge carriers. This
information is important for developing materials for photo-voltaic solar cells.
Terahertz spectroscopy experiments are also being performed on the low frequency
resonances of nanomaterials, which is generating new information about how these
materials interact with their environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.