* 1902330
* CAREER: Mechanisms of Ion Transport in Ionomer-Free Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Iryna Zenyuk, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 470,986.00

PI: Zenyuk, Iryna V.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1652445&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Tufts University &lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Mechanisms of Ion Transport in
Ionomer-Free Electrodes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer electrolyte fuel cells
(PEFCs) hold great promise as a sustainable energy technology, and there is
significant cost motivation to develop new electrode designs with low platinum
(Pt) loading. However, recent reports on conventional, carbon-supported, reduced
Pt-loading PEFC electrodes have shown significant performance losses due to
oxygen transport resistance through a thin-film ionomer at high current-
densities. These findings have motivated a search for alternative electrode
designs that do not rely on ionomers for proton conduction. Nano-structured
thin-film electrodes and several other extended-surface area electrodes have
demonstrated promising power densities and durability, however underlying ion
transport mechanisms and associated reaction kinetic pathways are still ill
understood. The proposed project aims to determine the specific factors which
limit performance of PEFCs using thin-film electrodes and allow for work to
progress on overcoming these hurdles. The PI plans to integrate research
findings into teaching and develop a broad range of educational and outreach
activities to a diverse range of K-12 students, including underrepresented
minorities, to foster excitement about renewable-energy and STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has three main objectives:
(1) Elucidate the fundamental mechanisms of ion transport in water-filled Pt and
dispersed, carbon-supported Pt electrodes. (2) Establish the operational window
(current, temperature and relative humidity) for ion-conduction mechanisms under
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) currents. (3) Determine the participating ions
and mechanisms that occur in ORR in water-filled electrodes and create tailored
electrode designs to enhance the rate of ORR. The separation of competing ion
transport mechanisms will be accomplished through ex-situ four-point probe
experiments combined with in-operando electrochemical techniques and modeling
studies. The proposed work has the potential to advance the current
understanding of the mechanisms of ion transport in ionomer-free PEFC
electrodes.