* 1902457
* Expanding Career Pathways in Robotic Welding and Improving Regional Industrial Manufacturing Training
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Brett Camacho, Fresno City College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 294,702.00

Fresno City College (FCC) will develop a new curriculum in robotic welding and
industrial manufacturing education and training. Two new advanced robotic
welding classes and new certificate and degree programs will be designed. The
project is a response to a comprehensive needs assessment that identified the
importance of providing instruction for new robotics technology being used in
the fields of welding and industrial manufacturing. The new curriculum will be a
model for building a stronger and more competitive workforce for Fresno County,
California, and the U.S. economy. The project will develop original and
potentially transformative partnerships between FCC, industry partners, high
school dual enrollment manufacturing classes, and the Fresno Regional Workforce
Development Board's Youth Manufacturing Intern Program. The project will enhance
the infrastructure of technical education, provide professional development
opportunities for college faculty and secondary teachers, and improve student
access to advanced training facilities and equipment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, FCC will improve regional industrial
manufacturing training and increase the number of skilled robotic welders. FCC
students will be prepared for the industrial manufacturing workforce, and the
pipeline of qualified workers with essential, advanced technology skills in
robotic welding will grow. This will enable regional manufacturers to innovate
and contribute to a strong, manufacturing-led growth economy. The project will
strengthen the STEM pathway from high school to community college, and focus on
the recruitment of women and underrepresented students into manufacturing
pathways. Thus, the project will generate new knowledge in industrial robotics
to share with students, professionals, and the academic community. FCC is a
fully accredited California Community College and Hispanic Serving Institution
located in one of the largest agricultural producing counties in Central
California. The college serves 12 unified school districts and has a service
area of more than 5,743 square miles of urban and rural territory. This project
is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.