* 1902027
* Industrial Maintenance Automation Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Hayden Harbold, Weatherford College of Parker Co. Jr. College System
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,856.00

As the advanced manufacturing industry has become increasingly sophisticated,
its workforce needs have changed. Today, advanced manufacturing requires workers
who can perform complex maintenance and repair procedures on advanced equipment
and automation systems. Individuals with the necessary training to perform this
work are increasingly scarce. This project will help to address the need for
industrial maintenance automation technicians by developing a curriculum that
leads students to an Associates of Applied Science degree and industry-
recognized certifications. The project will form new industry partnerships that
are anticipated to lead to industry internships for students, professional
development for faculty, and equipment procurement for the institution.
Partnerships with the Florida Advanced Technological Education Center, local
industry employers, secondary faculty, and post-secondary technical educators
will inform the project and support the goal of educating highly skilled and
certified technicians that meet the workforce needs of the local industry. This
project also intends to serve as a catalyst for students to start earning
college credit in high school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across Texas, the projected
increase for skilled industrial automation maintenance technicians is 28.2%; the
projected increase in the North Central Texas region is 35.5%. This high job
growth outlook coupled with the limited supply of available education programs
is the driving force for this project. Towards that end, the project will expand
course offerings and develop a curriculum that leads to an AAS degree with
industry-recognized certifications, and prepares students for work by providing
industry internships. While pursuing an AAS degree, students will develop hands-
on technical skills and earn stackable, nationally recognized certifications.
From this base, students can enter the workforce directly or transfer to local
universities to earn additional post-secondary degrees in Engineering Technology
fields. The project's curriculum with multiple entry and exit points will also
open the door to training for incumbent industry technicians who want to upgrade
their skills. The project has the potential to produce a model for skilled
technical education that can be reproduced across multiple disciplines. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.