* 1902354
* Developing Educational Pathways to Credentials in Plastics Engineering Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Douglas Pauley, Central Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 01/31/2024
* USD 517,405.00

Industries in the United States that use plastic injection molding to make
products have a growing need for technicians who are well-skilled in the science
and engineering of plastics manufacturing. Nationwide, few technician education
programs offer specific credentials in plastics engineering technologies. To
prepare technicians with the desired knowledge and skills, Central Community
College will partner with industry to develop and deliver the first certificate
program in plastics engineering technology in Nebraska. The college will also
use the new coursework to enhance its associate degree program in advanced
manufacturing. The enhanced advanced manufacturing program will be designed to
include pathways to help existing workers, underrepresented minorities, and
veterans obtain the skills needed for jobs in plastics-related manufacturing.
The project will therefore help strengthen the manufacturing workforce in this
technology area for Nebraska and the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to increase the number of qualified technicians with skills in
plastics engineering technology to meet the increasing workforce demands. The
proposed curriculum in plastics engineering technology will emphasize the
operation of injection molding presses, knowledge about implementing molding
techniques, and improving the quality and productivity of molding processes. The
project will gather input from a Business and Industry Leadership Team to ensure
that the developed curriculum incorporates industry-relevant skills. The
identified skills will be used as the foundation in creating four new courses on
plastics engineering. These courses will be integrated into the existing
advanced manufacturing degree program, and also lead to a stand-alone
certificate in plastics engineering technology. A Plastics Technology Learning
Laboratory will also be established. This facility will incorporate state-of-
the-art equipment to promote student learning through authentic, hands-on
problems in a work-like setting. Alternative course scheduling options for the
curriculum, including short-term intensive workshops or courses, will be offered
to increase accessibility to students, including incumbent workers and veterans.
The project will also develop opportunities for existing workers or other
potential students to receive credit for their existing knowledge, skills, or
experience. This credit for prior learning could be applied toward the
certificate or the associate degree. The project evaluation will investigate the
influence of alternative scheduling and credit for prior learning within the
advanced manufacturing program as well as document the project's effect on
increasing the skills of technicians for the workplace. The curricular materials
will be available on the project website and linked to other resource libraries
for broad dissemination. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.