* 1902449
* Tools for Probing Conformational Dynamics of Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Nathaniel Traaseth, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 639,780.00

Motion in biological molecules, termed dynamics, is a requirement for many
biological functions including enzyme catalysis, molecular recognition, protein-
protein interactions, and substrate transport. While progress has been made to
determine structures of membrane proteins in discrete conformations using X-ray
crystallography, much less is known about the role of protein dynamics in
function. The overall goal of this project is to develop novel experimental
methods to sensitively measure functionally-relevant motions required of
membrane proteins. This project will involve high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students in research, which will further disseminate knowledge in the
interdisciplinary fields of biophysical chemistry, chemical biology,
biochemistry, and structural biology and develop STEM workforce for bio-industry
and -economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the development
and application of oriented sample nuclear magnetic resonance (OS-NMR)
experiments. These methods will be applied to three membrane protein
transporters of varying size and complexity to establish the feasibility of the
methods to reveal functionally important membrane protein dynamics. This project
will develop methods to overcome the major challenges in studying membrane
protein dynamics. Specifically, biophysical insight into conformational motions
of membrane proteins involved in substrate transport and spectroscopic
innovation in the development of solid-state NMR techniques to probe dynamics
will be developed. to improve undergraduate curricula and scientific training
across the 50+ member institutions. This project is supported by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.