* 1902262
* Digitization PEN:  Collaborative Research:  The Cretaceous World: Connecting the Cretaceous Seas of North America
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Samuel McLeod, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 228,148.00

An award is made to the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County's (NHMLA)
Invertebrate Paleontology collections to support their contribution to the
Cretaceous World Digitization Thematic Collections Network (CW-TCN) funded by
NSF's Advancing Digitization of Biodiversity Program. The primary goal of this
project, "Connecting the Cretaceous Seas" Partner to Existing Network (CSC-PEN),
is to digitize fossil marine invertebrates and vertebrates from the Western
Interior Seaway (central North America), California, and the northeastern
Pacific (Oregon-Alaska). These efforts will make thousands of new specimen
records digitally available online. Collectively, these data will compliment the
CW-TCN by filling gaps in the existing dataset, broadening its geographic and
taxonomic coverage, and making these otherwise difficult to access collections
significantly more visible to the interested public and research community. This
information will facilitate current research aiming to better understand an
interval of Earth's history during which warmer climates and marine flooding
prevailed across North America. Results of this project will be communicated to
the public through museum events, K-12 classroom programming, ongoing
partnerships with local avocational paleontologists, and Virtual Field
Experiences being coordinated by NHMLA on behalf of the CW-
TCN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits to be derived from this award include
digitization of more than 32,000 marine invertebrate specimens from
underrepresented areas of the Western Interior Seaway and Northeastern Pacific,
and an additional 2,700 marine vertebrate fossils from the Western Interior
Seaway and California. Notably, the addition of specimens from the Northeastern
Pacific will create a bridge between recently digitized NHMLA collections from
the Late Cretaceous of California with the existing focus of the CW-TCN in
central North America. Such an expansion will complement current CW-TCN
datasets, permitting the comparison of paleoecological niche modeling analyses
in various paleoceanographic settings and enabling biogeographic comparisons of
diversity change, ecosystem structure, and environmental change during a
critical interval of Earth's history. Digitization will also involve the
selective imaging of more than 2,000 specimens and georeferencing of over 750
localities. Notably, this project will digitally mobilize fossil data that have
never before been available to aggregators, and, in doing so, will expand the
NHMLA's capacity to share collections data through additional staff training.
Digitized data from this project will be shared with iDigBio (idigbio.org) and
made accessible via this resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.