* 1902488
* Continuous Flow Silyl Ether Exchange Methodologies to Achieve Site-Specific Functionalization of Polydroxylic Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Jacquelyn Gervay-Hague, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2023
* USD 511,111.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is funding the research of Professor Jacquelyn Gervay-Hague who is developing
efficient continuous flow methods to make site-specific changes of
polyhydroxylic natural products, such as sugars. Continuous flow chemistry is a
process in which reactants are mixed together into tubes allowing a chemical
reaction to occur under precisely controlled conditions where numerous reaction
conditions can be adjusted. This method is of increasing importance in the
chemical industry where it is used in multi-step processes leading to the
efficient production of pharmaceuticals and other value-added chemicals. With
the careful experimental control offered by this technology, the reaction
conditions such as temperature, pressure, and reaction time result in new
relationships between chemical structure and reactivity that are not observable
in traditional "one-pot" chemistry synthesis. Students involved in this research
are investigating complex chemical reactions providing them the opportunity to
express their own creative design of making natural products. The use of Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy as a major tool for predicting chemical
reactivity gives further insight into the nature of chemical bonds and their
inherent reactivity. This research provides a fertile learning platform for both
doctoral and masters graduate students to launch scientific careers that benefit
society through gainful employment in academic, entrepreneurial, and industrial
settings in advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the research focuses on transferring successful batch chemistries to
continuous flow reactions to increase selectivity, chemical diversity, and
productivity with improved safety metrics. Importantly, microscale segmented
flow techniques provide rapid assessment of product formation and enable
continuous flow optimization as a basis for future automation. The ability to
differentiate between seemingly equivalent hydroxyl groups in order to achieve
specific functionalization is a major challenge for chemical synthesis
development. Typically, several protection and deprotection steps are required,
which increases production time and decreases step economy. In addition, many of
the procedures require synthetic expertise, which limits accessibility to
scientists outside the chemical synthesis arena. Automated synthesis platforms
including peptide and nucleic acid synthesizers have been widely adopted by non-
experts and have transformed chemical biology research. Increasing access of
natural product analogs to biomedical researchers was proclaimed a top priority
in a recent National Academy of Sciences publication on the future of
glycosciences. This research developes continuous flow methodologies for site-
specific conversion of silyl ethers to alternative functionalities such as
esters, ethers, and alcohols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.