* 1902509
* Deprotonative carbonylation cross-couplings
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Patrick Walsh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Patrick J. Walsh at the University of
Pennsylvania. Professor Walsh is developing synthetic chemical methods to
prepare molecular compounds using carbon monoxide (CO) and other more complex
molecules as key reagents. The sequence of reactions employed prepares products
that contain a "ketone" functional group, which contains a carbon bearing a
double bond to an oxygen and single bonds to two other carbons. Ketones are
found in numerous natural products and biologically active compounds, making
them highly valuable intermediates and products. Ketones can be difficult to
prepare and thus, they are the targets of this study. In addition to a
streamlined method to synthesize ketones, the researchers are performing
experiments that help them understand how the reactions occur. Other researchers
can use these methods to design new reactions based on this fundamental
understanding. Through this award, university students are involved in
undergraduate research experiences in Professor Walsh's labs and will be co-
authors on refereed publications. Upon graduation, these skilled researchers
contribute to chemical industry, supporting the US economy. In addition,
Professor Walsh gives annual lectures to high school organic chemistry students
about his NSF supported research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal,
Professor Walsh is developing new catalysts, developing novel practical
reactions, and delineating their reaction mechanisms. Much of the research
involves the application of weakly acidic pro-nucleophiles in carbon-hydrogen
(C-H) functionalization/carbonylation reactions under basic conditions. This
approach avoids prefunctionalization and directing group strategies, enabling
the efficient construction of C-C bonds. The objectives of the investigations
include developing deprotonative carbonylation cross-coupling reactions (DCCC)
and mapping the scope of weakly acidic substrates for DCCC reactions. The
carbonylation of aryl halides is a powerful method to access esters, amides,
aldehydes and ketones. Despite progress in the synthesis of ketones via such
carbonylations, a significant gap in knowledge remains that prevents realization
of its full potential. Current methods rely on carbonylation of aryl halides in
the presence of preformed organometallic reagents. Drawbacks to this approach
include the need to prepare or purchase these organometallic reagents, which can
be toxic (organotins) or air/water sensitive (organoborons). The synthesis of
these reagents adds costs and generates additional waste. The Walsh group is
advancing practical approaches involving functionalization of pro-nucleophile
C-H bonds in the carbonylation (1 atm CO) of aryl halides. This reaction is
being performed based on mechanistic investigations and parameter screening. The
scope and limitations of the method are being explored. In addition to the
above-mentioned societal benefits, the methods developed herein are enabling
other researchers to solve important synthetic problems. Furthermore, the new
conceptual and synthetic methods may have a positive impact on the quality of
life when used in the preparation of intermediates, medications, agricultural
products, or materials in academics or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.