* 1903673
* I-Corps:  Connected digital health platform with integrated delivery model to improve patient adherence to health goals using insights from data science and behavioral science
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Ravi Radhakrishnan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to help pre-
diabetics use and adhere to diabetes prevention measures to avoid a full-blown
episode of diabetes.

86 million Americans are pre-diabetic with risk for developing type 2 diabetes
and a cost of $2.3T. Evidence-based research has resulted in a protocol called
diabetes prevention program (DPP), taught by diabetes coaches and covered by
insurance. But usage/adherence to DPP is low. 9 out of 10 patients are unaware.
Programs are underutilized, patients drop off and coaches are not paid by
insurance due to non-compliance.

The company?s technology solution will use data and behavioral science to
improve usage and adherence for DPP. This solution empowers doctors, diabetes
coaches and patients to collectively improve long term self-care. By identifying
risk of diabetes and connecting at-risk patients to programs, the company
improves usage. By helping patients adhere to programs, the company helps
programs comply and get paid. The company will collect software as a service
(SaaS) fee from programs by helping them with revenue generation. The company
will prove its value proposition in the diabetes prevention market with well-
defined goals set by CDC/Medicare and use this evidence to move to other markets
beyond diabetes.

This I-Corps project is a connected digital health platform with integrated
delivery to improve patient adherence to health goals using insights from data
science and behavioral science. It comprises of a web dashboard for health
providers and a synced mobile app for patients. By aggregating and learning from
decades of research in behavioral science, machine learning and medical
adherence and combining it with connected technologies and computational power
that have recently become available, the company is developing a better way to
help patients adhere to their long term health goals. With smartphone usage at
77% (Pew Research, 2018), it is now easier to collect data automatically and
continuously, intervene, support and track patients virtually.

The company is leveraging its team?s 75+ years of combined experience in
healthcare, technology, behavioral psychology and entrepreneurship to tackle
this challenge. The company will streamline data collection and management
through wearables and connected technologies. The company will use this patient
generated data to develop new predictive algorithms and visualize data to offer
insights to patients and healthcare providers. Additionally, the company will
implement behavioral science methodologies and tools such as gamification and
nudging to reinforce healthy behaviors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.