* 1903981
* Collaborative Research: Surface analytical investigation on stability of organometal trihalide perovskite
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Jinsong Huang, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,556.00

Solar cells can convert sunlight into electricity, providing a clean and
renewable energy source. This is of very high priority given the continually
diminishing resources and rising prices of fossil fuels and degrading global
environment from fossil fuel burning. The project addresses fundamental
understanding and improvement of the stability of perovskite solar cells, a
strong candidate important for a renewable and environmentally friendly energy
source. It can be expected that the research activities will result in new
device structures and performance enhancements of perovskite solar cells.
Efforts will be made to bring science and technology to real products that
impact the society. A major part of the program will be educating and training
graduate and undergraduate students through interdisciplinary research in
advanced materials and devices and in materials surface/interface
characterization. A strong focus of the program is on increasing participation
of scientific research by under-represented minorities as well as women at all
levels and providing early exposure of research to middle and high school
students through programs at University of Rochester and University of North
Carolina. Perovskite solar cell demonstration kits will be developed for high
school students, and presentations to the community at large to show the
usefulness of perovskite solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: There have
been unexpected breakthroughs and rapid evolution in organometal trihalide
perovskite materials for high-performance optoelectronic devices. Although the
power efficiency of hybrid perovskite solar cells has already reached over 23%
in the laboratory, the stability of the materials remains a critical issue. The
goal of the project is to study the stability of organometal trihalide
perovskites using surface analytical techniques, to resolve the fundamental
issues and challenges regarding the stability of these materials, and to improve
the stability through materials synthesis and interface engineering. The surface
analytical techniques include, but are not limited to, angle-resolved
photoelectron spectroscopy, ultraviolet and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy,
inverse photoemission spectroscopy, low energy electron diffraction, scanning
tunneling microscopy, atomic force microscopy, and scanning electron microscopy.
The scope and approaches of the research include: 1) the stability and
degradation mechanisms of different organometal trihalide perovskites, including
the effects of environmental factors, light illumination, and device operation;
2) the stability improvement of the interfaces, including minimizing interface
reaction, ion migration, and providing protection of the perovskites from
environmental detrimental factors; 3) the passivation and stabilization of grain
boundaries, including neutralizing charge trapping defects and minimizing
impurity migration along the grain boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.