* 1903726
* 2018 Hurricane Season: Social and Engineering Constructs for Uniquely Re-Energizing (SECURE) Hurricane-affected Grids: A Post-Hurricane Michael Effort on Designing Resilient Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Peter Young, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 05/31/2023
* USD 194,210.00

This project seeks solutions for re-energizing the electricity grid in
hurricane-affected regions by&lt;br/&gt;synergistically considering the
convergence of unique aspects of systems engineering, social science,
and&lt;br/&gt;field data. Specifically, it will include fragility
(vulnerability), sustainability, and survivability (resilience)&lt;br/&gt;as the
core principles of design and operation. The social science approach to this
work includes&lt;br/&gt;understanding the perceived barriers and benefits of
grid infrastructure that can increase resilience during&lt;br/&gt;extreme
weather events and routine storms. Field data, enabled by the participation of a
utility affected by&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Michael, will play a crucial role in
defining the solutions proposed using resilient microgrids.&lt;br/&gt;The
currently affected electric grid in the Florida panhandle, combined with the
heightened need for&lt;br/&gt;reliable access to electricity, provides a unique
opportunity to re-engineer this critical infrastructure using&lt;br/&gt;self-
reliant, local, and resilient concepts such as the microgrid. In that regard,
the team will use its&lt;br/&gt;extensive body of work in the field of electric
power microgrids, aimed at normal and disaster-recovery&lt;br/&gt;modes of
operation, to fulfill the requirements of a stable, reliable, and economical
source of electricity&lt;br/&gt;supply to communities. The work will consider
social factors by extensive engagement with the people on&lt;br/&gt;the ground
including the more vulnerable populations affected along with those most
involved in current&lt;br/&gt;efforts in providing relief. This information will
be used in a multi-criteria based prioritized design of&lt;br/&gt;microgrids for
minimizing fragility, including sustainability measures, and increasing
resilience. This idea&lt;br/&gt;of engineering the grid will create a template
for Smart electric infrastructures, especially in the Atlantic&lt;br/&gt;coast
and Gulf of Mexico regions, so that they can all become prepared for future
onslaughts from&lt;br/&gt;hurricanes. The team includes engineers and a
behavioral psychologist that are experts in electrical power&lt;br/&gt;systems
design and operation, resilient and sustainable systems engineering, and
surveys-based&lt;br/&gt;approaches to identification and quantification of
barriers and benefits. Collaborations with a municipal&lt;br/&gt;utility from
the FL panhandle, entities engaged in Hurricane Maria related rebuilding efforts
in Puerto&lt;br/&gt;Rico, a national lab, and an international academic
institution strengthen our team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significant and
transformative components of this RAPID proposal are: (a) engagement of
local&lt;br/&gt;communities and utility to assess electricity supply needs; (b)
engagement of relief/recovery providers in&lt;br/&gt;the area for coordinating
solutions; (c) design of specialized microgrids using multi-criteria
based&lt;br/&gt;priority-oriented approaches; (d) co-optimization of design
objectives including fragility, sustainability,&lt;br/&gt;and resilience of
microgrids; and, (e) creation of template for resilience plan for hurricane-
prone electric&lt;br/&gt;grids. We will achieve the goals of this RAPID proposal
by utilizing real data gathered from the ground,&lt;br/&gt;basing our design and
operation principles on sound mathematics and engineering, modeling
and&lt;br/&gt;simulating on realistic test systems, and proposing validation
techniques for future implementation in
the&lt;br/&gt;field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.