* 1903992
* Regional Professional Development for VITAL Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2019,09/30/2021
* Rebecca Hartzler, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2021
* USD 49,973.00

The Mathematical Association of America will build on two already successful
professional development programs to offer training to an important group of
mathematics faculty including visiting faculty, instructors, teaching
assistants, adjuncts, and lecturers (VITAL for short). Many, if not most
students in two- and four-year colleges are taught by faculty that fit into
these categories and it is imperative that these faculty are provided
opportunities to learn about the evidenced-based instructional strategies that
have been found to be most effective in undergraduate STEM Education. With this
award, the MAA will offer a two-day conference in Texas through the Dana Center
to help participants select and adapt methods from the variety of interactive
teaching methods known to be effective for mathematics teaching practice.
Because the conference is local and only two days, faculty in these VITAL
categories (who are often subject to time and resource constraints) will have
the opportunity to participate. The conference will be followed by an online
learning community to support the VITAL faculty as they implement the new
strategies and improve undergraduate STEM Education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the project is to bring professional development and effective follow-up
support to the participants, all of whom are from the geographical region of
Dallas-Fort Worth, fostering a desire within the participants to learn about
research-based teaching strategies and explore and implement active learning
strategies in their classrooms. During the conference, the professional
development leaders will provide research-based active learning strategies and
model active teaching strategies through interactive sessions. Additionally,
participation in the professional development workshop will promote the
formation of a supportive cohort by including some unstructured networking time
and housing all participants together for one night. Finally, after the
workshop, the leaders of the project will provide ongoing support as
participants encounter teaching challenges, by partnering with local
coordinators who will manage continuing communication among the participants.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.