* 1903724
* When the Earth Warms: Paleoceanography at the Southern Ice Margin in the Bering Sea during Three Glacial-Interglacial Transitions
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Beth Caissie, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 01/31/2021
* USD 500,433.00

The focus of this project is to document the past temporal and spatial
variability of Bering Sea paleoceanography through analyses of sediment cores.
The project builds on the PI?s prior work creating diatom-based, quantitative
and qualitative sea ice proxies in the Bering Sea and participating in large
syntheses of North Pacific SST and sea ice distribution since the Last Glacial
Maximum. The project will be led by a junior faculty member and will support a
female postdoctoral scholar. It will provide the basis for a PhD thesis and also
expose undergraduates to paleoclimate research in the lab. This work will be
communicated clearly and concisely to the general public in several ways, with
emphasis on engaging women and girls in
paleoceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four components: (1)
building a dynamic, web-based database of North Pacific paleoceanographic
records, (2) using this database to identify spatial and temporal gaps in Bering
Sea paleoceanography during three warm periods of Earth history in the past
500,000 years, (3) sampling archived cores to create new, multi-proxy records
that can be used for (a) reconstructing sea ice extent, (b) differentiating
between the presence of sea ice versus glacial ice, (c) reconstructing sea
surface temperatures, and (d) evaluating ventilation and ocean structure,
productivity at various ocean levels, changes in the oxygen content of water
masses, and the provenance of organic matter, and (4) synthesizing Bering Sea
paleoceanographic records to examine variability on glacial-interglacial and
millennial timescales. The goals of the project are: (1) to advance
understanding of the location of the winter sea ice edge in the North Pacific
over time, (2) to determine what aspects of the climate system control the
location of the winter sea ice edge: heat export, sea surface temperature, or
atmospheric circulation, and (3) to infer how primary productivity is affected
by decreasing sea ice extent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.