* 1903735
* Collaborative Research: Sea-level rise, coastal wetland expansion, and proglacial lake contributions to abrupt increases in northern atmospheric CH4 during the last deglaciation
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Katey Walter Anthony, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 440,263.00

This multidisciplinary research seeks to understand the timing, magnitude, and
overall contribution of newly flooded land areas in the northern hemisphere to
rapid increases in atmospheric methane concentrations during the last
deglaciation (18-8 ka). Polar ice core records reveal dynamic increases in
atmospheric methane concentrations during this period, but the source of this
methane remains the subject of much debate. This study will measure the isotopic
values of methane emissions from field samples to provide region-specific
estimates of methane emissions from coastal wetlands, peatlands, proglacial
lakes, and other lake types (e.g. thermokarst and post-glacial lakes) since the
last deglaciation for comparisons with ice core records. This research will
reconstruct the past methane emissions from flooded deglacial land areas
(potentially representing unknown northern sources of increased atmospheric
methane concentrations during these periods) and assess their role in
contributing to the abrupt methane increases observed in in polar ice core
records. Knowledge of past methane emissions from newly inundated land areas
flooded by sea level rise, wetland expansion, permafrost thaw, and associated
lake formation will provide an improved understanding of global climate
feedbacks that will likely accelerate in the region. This knowledge is critical
to answering larger societal questions about the role of northern systems in
global environmental change and our ability to understand the cascade of effects
from sea level rise and coastal flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
uses comprehensive paleoecological records of (a) northern continental shelf
areas and coastal wetlands inundated by rapid deglacial sea-level rise (SLR) and
(b) proglacial lake areas inundated by glacier and ice-sheet melt to document
their past contributions to abrupt increases in atmospheric methane
concentrations. The research goals are to: (1) synthesize new and existing
shelf, coastal wetland, regional SLR curves, and proglacial-lake initiation data
to reconstruct newly inundated areas poleward of 30? N; (2) estimate past
methane flux from inundated northern coastal regions as they evolved from
methane-consuming forest and grassland areas to higher emitting mudflats,
marshes, and freshwater wetlands by integrating new and existing methane fluxes
into an empirical model; (3) analyze new and existing methane fluxes from
proglacial lakes of different sizes, ages and geographies to build an empirical
model for reconstructing proglacial lake emissions from 18 ka to present (with
an emphasis on the deglacial period,18-8 ka); (4) use stable isotopes
(&amp;#8706;13C, &amp;#8706;D) of methane and 14C dating to constrain the
magnitude and timing of methane flux from these newly flooded land areas; and
(5) compare our reconstructions of past methane emissions and isotope fluxes
from inundated shelves, coastal wetlands, and proglacial lakes with global
atmospheric methane constraints based on recent, higher resolution data of
methane isotopes (&amp;#8706;13C, &amp;#8706;D, 14C) from Greenland and
Antarctic ice cores using atmospheric box modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.