* 1903983
* SusChEM: Direct functionalization of aldehydes enabled by aminocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Wei Wang, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 11/30/2019
* USD 84,691.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
research of Professor Wei Wang in the Department of Chemistry &amp; Chemical
Biology at the University of New Mexico. Professor Wang and his students develop
cost-effective and environmentally friendly technologies for organic synthesis
based on the concept of aminocatalysis. The goal of this research is to develop
and exploit new organocatalytic activation modes for organic transformations.
New chemistries are transformed into powerful synthetic methods for the facile
and atom-economic synthesis of versatile building blocks starting from simple
and readily available chemicals. The syntheses are also conducted under mild
reaction conditions. These "one-pot" cascade methods, used to make complex
molecular architectures, address critical challenges in modern organic
synthesis. The methods include the improvement of synthetic efficiency, the use
of sustainable and inexpensive chemicals, the avoidance of toxic agents, and the
reduction of waste and hazardous byproducts. As a consequence of operational
simplicity, mild reaction conditions and environmental friendliness, this
research is well suited for the education of scientists at all levels. Professor
Wang's group is well positioned to provide education and training for students
from groups that are underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project continues efforts aimed at expanding the scope of aminocatalysis beyond
the well-established activation modes of enamine and iminium catalysis.
Professor Wang and his team challenge mechanistic dogma by showing that amine
moieties in adducts which result from nucleophilic additions to iminum ions can
serve as leaving groups in ensuing nucleophilic substitution reactions. In situ
release of the intermediate amine addition products creates a new scenario for
aminocatalytic direct functionalization of aldehydes. This research demonstrates
that through careful manipulation of the electronic and steric properties of
catalysts and reactants, judicious design and selection of amine catalysts, and
optimization of reaction conditions, new and powerful catalytic cascade
reactions are developed. Given the ready accessibility, reactivity and broad
structural diversity of aldehydes, a wide array of new synthetic building blocks
and biologically-important complex molecular architectures are constructed in
efficient one-pot reactions. The educational plan continues a tradition to
recruit undergraduate students especially from underrepresented minority groups
over the summer to conduct research in Dr. Wang's laboratory. Dr. Wang also
integrates the research results and experiments from in his academic laboratory
into his undergraduate students' experiences.