* 1903414
* NSF-BSF: Investigation of Streaming Instabilities for Tailoring the Profile of High-Energy Laser-Generated Proton Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Siegfried Glenzer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 12/31/2022
* USD 465,711.00

Proton beam accelerators find wide applications in technology and research. The
most famous machine is the Large Hadron Collider at CERN on the Franco-Swiss
border in Europe with a circumference of 16.6 miles. Reducing the size of these
machines is a major goal in accelerator physics. A promising avenue utilizes
intense laser beams as a compact proton source. The laser-driven proton beams to
be generated in this project are expected to achieve relativistic speeds with
favorable properties to reduce the size and cost of future accelerator
facilities. For this purpose, a new Stanford jet target technology will be
combined with a high-power laser at the Tel-Aviv Intense Lasers and Ultrafast
Science facility in Israel, which has one of the fastest repetition rates in the
world, firing 10 times per second. At these high rates the group will use
machine learning algorithms for proton beam optimization to enable applications
with high pay-off for society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
perform high-repetition rate laser experiments that allow the application of
machine learning algorithms to manipulate the laser pulse shape and contrast to
optimize the proton beam properties. The goal is to achieve beams suitable for
injection into a radio-frequency powered accelerator that has the capability to
reach beam energies of 230 MeV + on a meter scale. This research will have far-
reaching impact beyond the fields of laser-plasma and accelerator physics. The
demonstration of the control of streaming instabilities and delivering protons
beams of energy &gt;20 MeV, &gt;1 nC charge, &lt;0.03 mm mrad emittance and
repetition rates of 10 Hz as proposed here are well suited for subsequent
acceleration to high proton energies for applications in research, medicine, and
manufacturing. Stanford, with expertise in lasers, high-repetition rate
experiments and accelerators, is in a unique position to deliver the components
needed for compact high-efficiency hybrid accelerators. This work will involve
collaboration between Stanford University, the SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory, and Tel-Aviv University in Israel, and will be performed under the
umbrella of the Memorandum of Understanding on Research Cooperation between NSF
and the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.