* 1903586
* Collaborative Research: Multi-century hydrologic and NAO variability in the tropical Western Atlantic - A Marine NAO Synthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Nathalie Goodkin, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 228,176.00

Understanding climate variability in the North Atlantic region is critical to
society in the Eastern United States, Western Europe and beyond. In particular,
the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), an atmospheric pressure system that alters
sea surface temperatures, influences land temperature, drought, and storm tracks
across the dense population centers of the US and Europe. While we can now
measure the NAO each year, little is known about its longer-term behavior, or
how its behavior may change in the future. This project will generate records of
past climate change using corals from the island of Tobago in the southern
Caribbean Sea, a region especially sensitive to the effects of the NAO. Drill
cores of giant brain corals will be taken using SCUBA, and chemical analysis of
the cores will be used to generate monthly histories of temperature, salinity
and rainfall that extend back over the past several centuries. These climate
records will provide insights into the temporal and spatial patterns of tropical
Atlantic climate variability, particularly the large-scale processes associated
with the NAO. This international collaboration will support a graduate student
from The University of Trinidad and Tobago to travel to AMNH and WHOI for
mentorship and training in coral x-ray and geochemical analysis. The project
also includes active participation in the educational and outreach programs at
both AMNH and WHOI, including the Hall of Planet Earth, among the top five halls
chosen by AMNH visitors and school groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will contribute directly to NSF's Paleo Perspectives on Climate Change (P2C2)
goals by generating high resolution (monthly), multi-century long records of the
hydrologic properties in the southern Caribbean Sea, including sea surface
temperature (SST), sea surface salinity (SSS) and local river runoff. The study
will result in collection of two multi-century coral drill cores from
northeastern Tobago, and subsequently the construction of paleoclimate records
that resolve the full seasonal cycle, critical for identifying signatures of
regional forcing such as the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). Strontium-calcium
(Sr/Ca) ratios will be used to reconstruct SST, and oxygen isotope (del18O)
ratios together with Sr/Ca will be used to reconstruct SSS. Finally, barium-
calcium (Ba/Ca) ratios will yield records of terrestrial input and river runoff.
This investigation will target Siderastrea and Colpophyllia coral species
previously shown to faithfully record climatic variables with skeletal
geochemical proxies. A winter-season SST reconstruction from this sensitive site
will capture long-term NAO variability, and comparison with existing records of
the NAO and SST from the Atlantic and Red Sea will allow investigation of
regional coherence and changes in the spatial stationarity of the marine NAO
signal over the past few centuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.