* 1903764
* Complex Dynamics and Moduli Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Curtis McMullen, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

From particle physics to finance, from evolution to climate change, the world is
full of dynamical systems. Simple algebraic transformations already exhibit many
of the features of these natural phenomena, such as phase transitions and
tipping points that signal the onset of new regimes. These universal patterns
may be revealed through the rigorous study of moduli spaces, their
compactifications and their stratifications by dynamical invariants. This
project appeals to a broad range of mathematical disciplines to both deepen our
understanding of dynamical systems and to sharpen our mathematical and
computational methods. Its methods have already led to the discover of new and
unexpected algebraic regimes, through a combination of theoretical tools that
narrow the domain of search, and experimental methods such as the simulation of
bouncing molecules in idealized chambers.&lt;br/&gt;A central issue in science,
from biology to mathematics, is the study and classification of the wide
variations that can take place in a single recognized species. The moduli spaces
constructed by Ahlfors, Bers and Mumford in the 1960s, give this kind of
classification for compact Riemann surfaces with a fixed genus g and number of
marked points n. Today the study of moduli spaces is the meeting ground for
disciplines ranging from arithmetic geometry to string theory. In dimension
three, Riemann surfaces are replaced by hyperbolic 3-manifolds. This project
aims to expand the frontiers of our understanding of both moduli spaces and
hyerbolic 3-manifolds from the perspective of dynamical systems, unified by the
action of SL2(R) in both regimes. It draws on methods ranging from complex
analysis to low--dimensional topology and renormalization. The concerted study
of specific examples, assisted by computer visualization and algebraic
manipulation, also plays a central role of in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his coworkers have recently
discovered new totally geodesic curves and surfaces in the moduli spaces for
(g,n) = (4,0), (1,3), (1,4) and (2,1). Their methods also reproduce most
previously known examples of these rare and beautiful objects. A central goal of
this project is to put forth a unified construction of all known examples, and
investigate the prospects for obtaining a complete classification. The project
will also address problems concerning totally geodesic planes in open hyperbolic
3-manifolds, the complexity of closed loops on surfaces, the arithmetic
underlying billiards in polygons, moduli spaces of rational maps, and connection
between twisted 1-forms and 3-manifolds that fiber over the circle. The training
of graduate students to become active and independent researchers forms a
central part of this project. The field of complex dynamics and moduli spaces is
one where concrete problems and examples abound, and yet some of the deepest
insights and methods of modern mathematics can be brought to bear. It invites
the participation of experts from a broad range of fields. This project will
continue to foster the growth of an open, diverse and active research
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.