* 1903968
* CRII:   NeTS:  Optimizing Emerging Web Protocols for a Faster World Wide Web
* CSE,CNS
* 08/27/2018,05/31/2019
* Feng Qian, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2019
* USD 52,303.00

This project seeks to optimize emerging web protocols for a faster world wide
web (WWW). As the key protocol that supports WWW, the Hypertext Transfer
Protocol (HTTP) has been very successful. It accounts for more than half of the
overall Internet traffic. Currently, the most widely deployed HTTP version is
HTTP/1.1 standardized 16 years ago. Nonetheless, several new web protocols
("NWP") such as HTTP/2, SPDY, and QUIC have been proposed recently to overcome
limitations of HTTP/1.1. In particular, HTTP/2, the next version of HTTP, has
been standardized in 2015 and started replacing HTTP/1.1. NWP will become
prevalent in the foreseeable future. Given the importance of these web
protocols, the objective of this project is to understand them, and to propose
effective solutions for improving web performance by leveraging their common new
features. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project identifies key
dimensions of NWP that were not explored before, and includes the following
research tasks. (1) The principal investigator (PI) will conduct a comprehensive
user study by collecting web traffic from voluntary participants, to understand
NWP's performance "in the wild". The measurement results not only shed light on
improving the performance, energy efficiency, and mobile-friendliness of current
NWP, but also provide benchmarks for evaluating future NWP. (2) The PI will
investigate how to strategically leverage Server Push, a new feature of many
NWP, to improve web performance. Server push allows a server to preemptively
send (push) resources to the client, thus overcoming many limitations of the
conventional "request-response" resource fetching paradigm. (3) The PI will
study how to optimize NWP performance by simultaneously leveraging multiple
interfaces (e.g., Wi-Fi and cellular on mobile devices). A new framework
promises to allow multipath to be adaptively utilized only when necessary, in
order to reduce the energy consumption and cellular data usage for mobile
devices. (4) The PI also explores mechanisms for improving the interaction
between NWP and the underlying transport layer such as the Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Successful completion of
this research will benefit the society, due to the importance of web protocols
in our everyday computing. It is known that Internet users are very sensitive to
web page load time. The proposed solutions will improve web users' experience,
and they can be deployed on browser and server applications to yield immediate
benefits. Note the proposed solutions do not rely on a specific web protocol,
and can therefore yield long-term benefits. Dissemination of the research
results will be done through academic publications, code/data distribution,
industrial collaborations, and standardization. The PI has included HTTP/2 in
the course he taught, and will incorporate more NWP materials into the
undergraduate and graduate curriculum.