* 1903010
* Rapid: Impact of Hurricane Florence on Drinking Water Safety in Eastern and Central North Carolina: Rapid Assessment and Recommendations for Recovery and Resilience
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Mark Sobsey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2022
* USD 179,791.00

Hurricanes and resulting flooding can negatively impact drinking water supplies
and services. These impacts include everything from service disruptions to
contamination by microbial and chemical pollutants. Hurricane Florence resulted
in extensive flooding in areas of North Carolina with high densities of hog and
poultry farms, resulting in the release of human and animal excreta and
associated pathogens to the environment. These releases have the potential to
contaminate nearby community drinking water systems and private wells, but the
extent and duration of these impacts are not well understood. The objective of
this project is to assess the extent of pathogen releases resulting from
Hurricane Florence in areas of North Carolina with high densities of farms and
septic systems. The broader goals of this research are to engage local residents
in the monitoring water systems in impacted areas through a citizen science
approach, and produce recommendations to identify and address vulnerabilities of
water systems and animal agricultural operations to help improve infrastructure
decision-making for extreme weather events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Hurricanes and other extreme weather events can impair the safety and
continuity of drinking water services, with associated adverse health outcomes.
Hurricane Florence severely impacted North Carolina counties with high densities
of hog and poultry farms, as well as of private wells and septic systems,
resulting in the release of human and animal excreta (and associated pathogens)
to the environment, with the potential to infiltrate and contaminate nearby
community drinking water systems and private wells. Increased occurrence of
drinking water contamination and disease outbreaks has been observed following
previous hurricanes, but the extent, duration, and determinants of such
contamination and outbreak events are not well understood. We propose to assess
the extent and persistence of multiple pathogens of health concern in different
types of water supplies in impacted areas. This work will elucidate impacts of
extreme weather events on occurrence and persistence of bacteria focusing on
pathogens and antibiotic resistant bacteria or (ARBs), viruses, and protozoa in
water supply networks and private wells near combined animal feeding operations
(CAFOs), septic and sewage systems, and other fecal waste sources. These results
will be used to produce preliminary recommendations to address identified
vulnerabilities, to improve water quality and associated health outcomes for
populations in disaster-prone areas to improve infrastructure and decision-
making in a variety of US settings vulnerable to extreme weather events. The
broader impacts of this work will also include engaging local residents in
monitoring water systems in impacted areas through a citizen science approach,
informing community members of risks associated with impacted public and private
water systems through communication of the results of this work, and
contributing recommendations for enhancing the resilience of public and private
water systems to community members, utilities, health departments and
agribusinesses in impacted areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.