* 1903911
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Emissions Trading
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Benjamin Leffel, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 7,107.00

This project directly tests if and to what extent emissions trading results in
the reduction it is designed to achieve. Specifically, this will help determine
if emissions trading is associated with such reduction at both the city-level
and at the firm-level on a global scale. The results will contribute relevant
insight for addressing time-sensitive matters for formulation and implementation
at national, state, and city levels. This includes but is not limited to the
efficacy of emissions trading participation and whether alternative options such
as a tax are more viable than a market approach. Results will contribute to
greater efficacy in emissions reduction, which in turn is likely to yield long-
term public health and national security dividends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses original data on city-level emissions change for 269 cities from
between 2000 and 2013 to be treated as a dependent variable in linear regression
modeling. Controlling for many socio-economic and situational factors, two
independent variables of interest will be tested for association with urban
emissions change, derived from two sources: (1) a database comprising full firm-
level transaction data for eight national emissions trading systems, and (2) a
corporate emissions database, which comprises the emissions from 403 of the
largest 500 companies in the world by market capitalization. First, emissions
trading transactions will be collated from the firm-level to the city-level and
tested for association with city-level emissions reduction. Second, corporate
emissions change will be (a) tested as an independent variable against city-
level emissions change to determine if corporate change influences the emissions
change of the cities in which they reside; and then (b) tested as a dependent
variable against emissions trading system participation as an independent
variable, to determine whether participation in emissions trading influences
corporate emissions reduction. Last, a qualitative analysis of cases both within
and outside emissions trading systems will be performed, assessing on-the-ground
processes associated with success and failure of emissions reduction by cities
and firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.