* 1903500
* RUI: Coronal Plasma Observed at Eclipses and Otherwise Simultaneously
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Jay Pasachoff, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 321,298.00

Solar eclipses are of widespread public interest in the countries from which
they are visible, and they therefore provide an important opportunity for public
education about astronomy as well as for efforts on spreading information
domestically on safe solar observing. The PI was Chair of the International
Astronomical Union's Working Group on Eclipses and liaison to the American
Astronomical Society's Eclipse Task Force for the 2017 Great American Eclipse,
and for the upcoming 2024 eclipse. Studies of the solar corona at eclipses have
been a major part of the success of the Williams College department in
attracting and training students. Undergraduate students, increasingly including
members of underrepresented groups through Williams's need-blind admissions
policy, have been intimately connected with the eclipse expeditions and the
associated data reduction and analysis; this project enables the active
involvement and training of students to continue. Specifically, this proposal is
to perform high resolution optical observations, rapid imaging of the corona,
and radio and spectroscopic measurements. The project will include comparisons
with other space and ground based observations as well as comparisons with state
of the art computer models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This particular project is to
take advantage of the data from the 2017 total solar eclipse and to observe the
2019 and 2020 total eclipses. The focus of the project is on observing the
white-light corona and working with highly processed images that bring out
detail and extreme contrast. This will allow improved measurements of dynamics
of coronal plumes and other coronal features, especially coronal mass ejections.
Additionally, filtergrams and spectra of the green-line (Fe XIV) and red-line
(Fe X) coronas will be used to examine the contrast of regions of different
temperatures. The proposed observations include exquisitely high-resolution
observations with Lyot/Halle filters. The team will also complete the analysis
of high-frequency (&gt;1 Hz) power spectra of coronal loops to compare
mechanisms of coronal heating and carry out similar observations at the 2020
eclipse. Spectrographic observations are important as the spectral-line ratios
continue to change over the solar-activity cycle, which now past a low maximum
and passing through minimum. The team will also complete 2017 eclipse analysis
with data from radio telescopes, including the Jansky Very Large Array, which is
providing the best-ever mapping of active regions to pinpoint the different
locations of radio and EUV eruption origins, and use an Argentian radiotelescope
in 2019 and 2020.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.