* 1903593
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Controlling Arylene Ethynylene Structure and Function
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Eric Bosch, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 57,429.00

Scientists can impart desirable properties, such as flexibility or the ability
to conduct electricity, into materials through strategic design of the chemical
components that make up the materials. One of the most important considerations
in this endeavor is how the chemical components within a material interact with
each other. The Bowling and Speetzen research groups at the University of
Wisconsin-Stevens Point (UWSP) collaborate with the Bosch group at the Missouri
State University to study new organic compounds designed that increase
understanding of important chemical interactions in materials. Their research
also explores new strategies for achieving desirable properties. Calculations
from the Speetzen research group not only help with interpretation of
experimental results but also inform the design of new chemical structures. The
strategies developed in these studies provide a foundation for creating
materials that have enhanced electron transport capabilities, potentially
leading to improved next-generation devices, such as thin-film transistors or
light-emitting diodes. The undergraduate students responsible for this research
gain expertise synthesizing, purifying, and characterizing novel chemical
structures. They also gain insight into how fundamental chemical forces can be
used to develop commercially useful materials. This combination of hands-on
skills and chemical perspective prepares them well for careers in chemical
industry or further studies in graduate school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
molecules targeted in this collaborative study are classified as arylene
ethynylenes (AEs) as they have alternating alkynes and aromatic rings
throughout. AEs are attractive not only for their conjugation and rigidity, but
also because the relatively free rotation around the single bonds linking
alkynes and aromatic rings provides access to an array of unique intramolecular
attractions or supramolecular structures. Molecules designed in the Bowling
group laboratories utilize the tendency of rigid AE structures to stack in
predictable arrangements in order to study charge transfer (CT) between
electron-rich and electron-poor aromatic rings. Similar CT behavior is studied
by installing electron-rich and electron-poor units within a single AE compound.
Rotation of the AE backbone offers access to both CT-favorable and CT-
unfavorable conformations, which provides insight into using CT as an
organizational driving force and an opportunity for development of molecular
switches. This project also seeks to realize the potential for AEs to function
in supramolecular structures through the transition metal coordination of a
hexagonal AE ligand and by using pnictogen bonding to assemble supramolecular
pyramids or bipyramids that have the potential to serve as cages for specific
guest molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.