* 1903304
* IUSE: EHR: Improving Undergraduate Algorithms Instructions with Online Feedback
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* George Heineman, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,059.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by leveraging artificial intelligence (AI) techniques to
improve student learning and instructor productivity in computing courses. An
important aspect of an instructor's job is to provide feedback on student work.
Research in cognitive science demonstrates that students more effectively learn
concepts if they explain answers to cognitively demanding questions. Learning is
further improved when instructor feedback is provided. In large classes, it is
difficult for instructors provide all students with the feedback and help they
need. This project will develop a tool that uses machine learning to
automatically generate feedback on student solutions. The tool is designed to
reduce the grading burden of the instructor while ensuring that students receive
frequent and worthwhile feedback. The project aims to generate knowledge about
how AI can help to engage students without requiring significant instructor
time. This tool will impact thousands of students as it is incorporated into
ASSISTments, which is used by 50,000 students and is a free service of Worcester
Polytechnic Institute (WPI). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to implement and study a tool that uses state-of-the-art machine learning
techniques and natural language processing methods to automate instructor
feedback. In the first phase of the project, students in the Algorithms course
at WPI will be assigned open-ended questions to complete prior to each lecture.
Teaching staff for the course will manually grade student responses. The data
set generated in this phase will be used to develop and train the algorithms for
the automated tool. The tool will apply methods of varying complexities
including regression and tree-based modeling methods, and deep learning methods
including long short-term memory (LSTM). It will analyze student responses and
suggest feedback and a grade. Instructors may choose to accept the tool's
suggestions or override the suggestions to provide different feedback. A
randomized control trial will assign students to receive manual feedback or
feedback generated with the help of the tool. The usability of the tool will be
evaluated through interviews with the instructors. Data on how often the tool's
suggestions are overridden and how long it takes the instructor to grade each
solution will also be collected. Student experience with the tool will be
evaluated through online surveys. Student learning will be evaluated through
posttests given each week. The project is expected to improve student learning
and instructor productivity in the WPI Algorithms course. It is also has
potential to contribute to the broader fields of machine learning, natural
language processing, and education through the study, generation, and deployment
of effective feedback. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.