* 1903834
* Connecting the dots: Tracking hydrogen as it moves from large-scale atomic HI in the circumgalactic medium to cloud-scale molecular gas in star forming regions
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Amy Sardone, Sardone, Amy
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Amy Sardone is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship
to conduct a program of research and education at the Ohio State University.
Sardone will study how large-scale atomic hydrogen gas around galaxies is
converted into molecular hydrogen and fuels star formation in small-scale
molecular gas clouds within galaxies. Alongside this research, Sardone will
implement a science research mentoring program for high school students from
groups that are traditionally underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Sardone will measure
the inflow of atomic hydrogen, identify star-forming regions, and study the
relationship between the atomic hydrogen gas and molecular hydrogen gas in a
large sample of nearby galaxies. This will allow astronomers to understand the
transition between the atomic and molecular gas, and its role in controlling
star formation in galaxies. For the educational component of her work, Sardone
will conduct a research mentoring program aimed at improving the recruitment,
retention, and success of low-income and underrepresented minority students in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.