* 1903002
* Collaborative Research: Educating the Workforce in Cyber &amp; Smart Manufacturing for Industry 4.0
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* DeDe Griffith, NORTHWEST LOUISIANA TECHNICAL COLLEGE
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 290,000.00

The fourth industrial revolution, or Industry 4.0, refers to the changes in the
advanced manufacturing industry that result from application of information
technologies and automation. The result is continuing growth and development of
"smart manufacturing," which uses tools such as big data, advanced robotics, and
virtual reality. Workers in smart manufacturing industries need new skills to
keep up with the changing landscape of manufacturing operations. To help meet
the needs of the skilled technician workforce in smart manufacturing, this
project will develop integrated courses and hands-on labs, create a smart
manufacturing certificate, and develop career maps and pathways for students to
advanced manufacturing careers. Faculty will also receive training to help them
stay current with the latest technologies. The project will help educate
technicians who have the skills needed in the next-generation workforce and help
fill the growing needs of this fourth industrial
revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project, Texas A&amp;M University will
partner with Northwest Louisiana Technical College. The goals will be to: 1)
create a workforce capable of merging the manufacturing information technologies
and operation technologies of cyber-enabled smart manufacturing; 2) train
students in the interdisciplinary environment of Industry 4.0; 3) create
pathways and career maps to assist students in completion of their education and
preparation for future careers; and 4) facilitate a continuous improvement
culture for faculty through professional development. This approach to
technician training includes cyber-enabled, smart manufacturing processes,
monitoring and control, data science, cyber-physical systems, and cloud
computing to drive manufacturing operations. New courses will be developed and
add-on modules will be introduced into existing curricula. These changes will
enable students to expand their knowledge of communication protocols, integrated
diagnostics, and analysis of scalable data. They will also enable students to
work on interdisciplinary course projects that lead to a Smart Manufacturing
Certificate. Industry internships and undergraduate research experiences will be
incorporated into the curriculum. In addition, faculty development workshops and
visiting-faculty appointments in industry will be included to enhance the
ability of faculty to teach current smart manufacturing technologies and
practices. Project materials, best practices, and results will be shared through
the project website, professional conferences, and national organizations. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.