* 1903174
* Adaptive Information Refinement Modeling of Nonlinear Shear Wave Propagation in Biological Tissue
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Sorin Mitran, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 559,998.00

This project will combine high-resolution experiments with recent advances in
mathematical information theory to describe the propagation of shear waves in
human tissue and simulants, laying the foundation for development of novel
medical diagnostic equipment and a better understanding of injuries such as
concussion. Wave propagation through biological tissue is a fundamental physical
process upon which numerous diagnostic and therapeutic techniques are based.
Well-established diagnostic techniques include ultrasound imaging based upon
high-frequency sound waves or magnetic resonance imaging based upon radio waves.
A new window to investigate biological tissue is the use of mechanical shear
waves that travel faster through stiff tissue and slower through soft tissue. By
use of shear waves it is possible to effectively carry out palpation of internal
organs otherwise accessible only by surgery. However, the propagation of shear
waves in biological tissue is not well understood due to the large variability
in wave velocity through different tissue types, much larger than that of sound
waves. This can lead to counterintuitive effects such as formation of a
concussion far from the immediate area of a head blow due to focusing of shear
waves reflected by the cranium. Conversely, the large variability in shear wave
velocity can be leveraged to carry out detailed investigations of biological
tissue outside the capabilities of other diagnostic techniques. To enable such
diagnostics there is a need to obtain a fundamental understanding of the
relationship between tissue structure and shear wave propagation, as
investigated in this project. Project activities include mentoring of graduate
student and postdoctoral participants, integration of research results into
data-driven modeling courses for undergraduates, as well as presentation of
information theory to the general public through outreach activities at the
Morehead Planetarium and University of North Carolina Science
Days.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strain-stiffening, probably due to microscopic
reorganization of filamentary structures in cells and the extracellular matrix,
leads to the formation of shear shock waves induced by excitation amplitudes as
low as 1% strain. The subsequent wavefront steepening can readily surpass 7%
strain leading to tissue injury. The shear modulus can vary by five orders of
magnitude in different tissue types and is close to zero in liquid-filled
interstitia that exhibit random placement in organs such as the brain. Bulk-
homogenized viscoelastic models with a discrete spectrum are inapplicable
outside their calibration domain and are not linked by physical principles to
the specific tissue. This study pursues a combined experimental-theoretical
approach to development of scale-dependent homogenized models of shear wave
propagation in highly heterogeneous biological tissue. High-resolution, 1024
channel measurements at 10 kHz and 1 micrometer resolution are used to construct
detailed images of shear wave propagation through biological tissue and
phantoms. A multiple-scale computational model is constructed that uses
information-theoretic concepts such as mutual information to link the different
simulation levels, offering a new perspective on and development of traditional
adaptive mesh and model refinement. Results from this investigation will be
generally applicable to nonlinear, multiscale stochastic systems that do not
exhibit scale separation. Both experimental results and computational code will
be available through literate programming and reproducible research
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.