* 1903346
* Collaborative Research: Gravity Wave-Airglow Interactions in Multiple Emission Layers
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Tai-Yin Huang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 01/31/2024
* USD 492,483.00

Perturbations in the neutral density in the Earth's middle and upper atmosphere
known as gravity waves (GWs) are thought to be an important driver of physical
and chemical processes in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT)
atmospheric region. GWs influence tidal and planetary wave dynamics as well as
general circulation and transport processes across many atmospheric layers. The
goal of this project is to investigate the interaction of GWs and airglow, faint
optical emission emitted by atoms and molecules in MLT during the night. Through
this, a better understanding of the impact of GWs on chemical species in the MLT
region will be achieved. This project will conduct observations in multiple
airglow layers with a chain of airglow imagers near the Andes Lidar Observatory
(ALO) in Chile, a well-known GW "hotspot". This will be complemented by
observations with the collocated lidar and meteor radar, satellites, and results
from time-dependent, nonlinear atmospheric models. This project will promote
education by supporting a graduate student and an undergraduate student and
contribute to broadening participation by supporting the team that includes
members from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will involve
characterization of GW activity near ALO based on the imaging airglow data and
comparison of simulation results of GW-airglow interactions with imaging
observations. Recent modeling results using a 2D, nonlinear, time-dependent OH
Chemistry-Dynamics (OHCD) model and a Multiple-Airglow Chemistry-Dynamics (MACD)
models have shown that a transient dissipating GW packet can induce significant
variations in the concentrations of the minor species, in the airglow intensity,
and in exothermal heating. The variations appear to be aperiodic but are often
mistaken for long-period waves. These are secular variations which are a result
of a net cycle-averaged transport of chemically-active minor species. The
project will simulate secular variations in airglow causes by GWs by using a
model of GW propagation together with airglow chemistry models, OHCD and MACD,
in conjunction with optical, lidar, and meteor radar observations at ALO
complemented by spacecraft data from SABER and
SCIAMACHY.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.