* 1903716
* INFEWS:US-China - Modeling and Determination of Photosynthetic Water Needs and Development of a Smart Irrigation System to Minimize Water and Energy Use in Food Crop Production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Felix Fritschi, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project was awarded through the "National Science Foundation (NSF) /
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Joint Research on
Environmental Sustainability Challenges" opportunity. Irrigated food crop
production is a major contributor to water shortages in many parts of the US and
the world, but a plant-based drought measure for optimized irrigation has been
elusive. However, this challenge provides an opportunity to develop new
technology to measure plant stress and advance the science of photosynthesis.
This research will analyze sun-catalyzed chemical reactions in plants and
develop a quantifiable measure of plant stress related to water needs for
photosynthesis. Based on these measurements researchers at the University of
Missouri-Columbia, in collaboration with researchers at Jiangnan University in
China, will develop a smart irrigation system to minimize water and energy use
in food crop production. This project will include a technology demonstration in
a commercial-scale production facility. Taking advantage of a unique combination
of strengths in plant research and intelligent computing offered by this
international collaborative research team, this project will result in a useful
technology that will reduce the water stress associated with crop production. In
addition, the proposed water-stress measurement is a visual tool that provides
an entry point of interest for both school children and adults that will allow
for an effective demonstration of how plants are affected by irrigation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to derive a
photosynthetically-based measure of water deficiency in plants and then to use
this measurement to develop a smart irrigation methodology to minimize water and
energy use in food crop production. Researchers at the University of Missouri -
Columbia, in collaboration with researchers at Jiangnan University in China,
will use light to probe the plant photosynthesis, a process which relies on
water as the source of electrons to harvest photoenergy. By studying the
photochemical reactions involved, the research team will determine when water is
deficient for photosynthesis-driven plant growth. Using mathematical tools, an
analysis of the chlorophyll fluorescence emitted from plants will be performed
to derive a signature indicative of water deficiency. The signature, which is
not obvious without a fundamental analysis of the underlying photochemical
reactions, provides a drought stress measure which will be used as the feedback
signal to control irrigation. A computer vision system will be devised to
measure fluorescence from plant foliage or canopy to permit field use of the
technology. Demonstration that the drought measure is correlated with plant
growth rate will be accomplished through plant experiments in a controlled
greenhouse. Using deep-learning tools to incorporate other factors and
information, such as plant type and climate, the research team will augment the
applicability and performance of the irrigation control system. Finally, at a
commercial production facility, the team will perform a demonstration of this
water- and energy-saving technology. This research will generate new knowledge
on how the photochemical reactions interactively take place in plants to
transport photoelectrons and how a lack of water is manifested in, and thus, can
be determined from, the behavior of chlorophyll fluorescence. This will lead to
a currently elusive plant-need-based drought stress measure. As a significant
step beyond laboratory research, the project will develop and integrate modern
technologies in computer vision, sensing, deep learning, and the internet of
things in a smart irrigation system. In the course of the project, students and
postdoctoral fellows will be trained to fill an important need for researchers
versed in engineering analysis of plant processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.