* 1903986
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Relational Pragmatics and Institution Work in Transitioning Industry
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Alexander Kinney, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2022
* USD 12,977.00

This project will address how industries involving agricultural products evolve
within the context of differing levels of regulation. There are many studies of
existing industries, but few regarding how industries for new products evolve.
In addition, these new industries are often subject to varying regulations
across the contexts in which they are located, including conflict between
federal and state regulations governing production, marketing and sales. This
conflict creates uncertainty for entrepreneurs and for the general public. This
project will analyze how different political, cultural, and economic processes
are shaping the ways that new industries are structured, and analyze the effects
of these forces and uncertainties on entrepreneurs. More specifically, this
study will address two questions. First, when new industries evolve, who
develops the capacity to change institutions? Second, how does the resulting
structure from these institutional changes affect the experiences, frameworks,
and practices of entrepreneurs more broadly? The project moves beyond questions
about which social contexts are more and less likely to be associated with
changes in institutions such as laws and customs of business because it also
explores who is developing the capacity to influence these processes in real
time. This research will provide insights into evolving industries that may be
useful to state and national policymakers tasked with developing regulations to
control industry operations. It will also provide insights to support
entrepreneurship, thus contributing to higher levels of business creation and
employment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a mixed-methods research
design that includes analysis of three different states, each of which takes a
different approach to regulating new agricultural products. The project will
include 70 semi-structured in-depth interviews with participants across the
states, which will be analyzed using MAXQDA 2018 Analytics Pro software in order
to identify patterns in the data that will be used in developing theoretical
propositions. These propositions will be tested with a subsequent cross-
sectional survey of selected entrepreneurs across many states with a target
response rate of 408 participants. These two approaches are combined to
determine which institutions will persist over time and which ones will fail to
persist. Findings from this project will inform organizational theories of
institutions focusing on the supply-side, sociology of culture theories of
practice, and theories of social control in an effort to develop an integrated
framework to explain how micro-level industry activities can produce macro-level
social change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.