* 1903741
* Frustration and Spin Fluctuations in Itinerant Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Emilia Morosan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 580,571.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Condensed Matter
Physics program of the Division of the Materials Research, presents a systematic
way to design and discover magnetic materials belonging to a rare class of
compounds, those formed with non-magnetic constituents: itinerant magnets.
Magnetic materials are ubiquitous in our modern world and they are at the heart
of many technologies including memory storage, magnetic resonance imaging (MRIs)
etc. While the applications of magnetic materials are clear, our fundamental
understanding of their properties remains largely unknown, especially for those
magnetic systems formed without known magnetic elements (like iron or rare
earths). The understanding of the purely itinerant magnetism limit is inhibited
by the scarcity of relevant compounds, which this project seeks to design and
synthesize. An added novelty of this approach is the study of effects in
itinerant magnets, related to the crystal structure. This proposal supports the
training of undergraduate and graduate student researchers in the areas of
crystal growth and materials characterization. The PI continues her ongoing
outreach initiatives, which include open houses and science demonstrations at
local public schools in addition to developing a new "science a la carte"
program, aimed at complex science concepts accessible to young
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This NSF proposal
emphasizes experimental investigations of itinerant magnetic systems to explore
the role of spin fluctuations and magnetic frustration in compounds without
magnetic elements. New discoveries of two itinerant antiferromagnets, together
with the only two known ferromagnets without magnetic elements, offer a platform
for two main research thrusts: the study of correlations between the
dimensionality and spin fluctuations of itinerant magnets, particularly in the
quantum critical regime; the development of a new paradigm for frustration in
itinerant magnetic systems. This project addresses issues currently at the
forefront of condensed matter physics, such as quantum criticality and attendant
non-Fermi liquid effects, and also frustration as a new dimension in a
generalized phase diagram for quantum criticality. Our program aligns with the
imperious societal need for design and discovery of new materials, while
training the new generation of crystal growers. The PI continues her program
providing hands-on science experience through the lab "open houses" for the
public, training high school students and teachers through internships, and by
implementing a "science a la carte" program for schools in the Houston area.
This program provides science kits in line with the school science curriculum,
together with demonstrations by the PI and her students, and handouts, aimed at
fostering learning beyond the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.