* 1903980
* Nanoscale Polarization Control for Single Molecule Detection: Circular and Trochoidal Dichroism
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Stephan Link, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 05/31/2024
* USD 550,341.00

An object is chiral when it cannot be superimposed on its mirror image. Our left
and right hands are non-superimposable and are therefore chiral objects.
Chirality exists throughout nature. The twist of a DNA helix gives it a specific
handedness, determined by the twist direction. Light waves can be made to spiral
as they travel through space. This special form of light -- called circularly
polarized light -- has a specific handedness depending on whether the twist is
clock-wise or counter clock-wise. Circularly polarized light interacts more
favorably with chiral objects when their handedness match. Chiral molecules
therefore either absorb more left-handed or right-handed circularly polarized
light. The difference is known as circular dichroism, which gives important
insights into the handedness and geometry of molecules. However, the circular
dichroism signal is usually weak. With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry and Chemical Measurement and Imaging programs
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Stephan Link from Rice University is
studying individual proteins placed in the gap between two metal nanoparticles,
which concentrate the light and amplify the circular dichroism signal. Working
with his students, Professor Link is applying advanced assembly methods to
control the protein placement and using sophisticated spectroscopies to study
the underlying enhancement mechanism, which is still poorly understood. Their
discoveries could have far-reaching applicability to understanding
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. In addition,
the project incorporates concepts from multiple disciplines forming an
attractive training platform for post-doctoral researchers, graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To exploit
defined nanoscale assembly and electric field manipulation for the detection of
single chiral molecules and their structural dynamics, the Link lab is applying
DNA origami methods for precise control over nanoscale geometry in combination
with unique spectroscopic capabilities developed for determining the circular
dichroism signals of single molecular-plasmonic complexes. Electromagnetic
simulations and electron microscopy aid in the distinction between optical
activity arising from the plasmonic nanostructure itself vs. the chiral molecule
of interest. These studies are advancing the mechanistic understanding about
plasmon-coupled circular dichroism and allow one to create substrates for
sensing molecular structure of a single protein using circular dichroism. The
project is also studying trochoidal dichroism using surface confined waves
created by total internal reflection. Trochoidal fields have electric components
along the propagation direction of light and only exist at an interface. The
Link lab is exploring which nanostructure and molecular geometries are sensitive
specifically to trochoidal fields when the handedness of the cartwheeling motion
of such fields is switched. Professor Link is also participating in Rice
University's Civic Scientist Program, allowing him to educate K-12 students
about nanotechnology and inspire them to pursue scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.