* 1903151
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Plasma-Liquid Interactions Through Controlled Plasma-Microdroplet Experiments and Modeling
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Peter Bruggeman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This collaborative research project between University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
and University of Michigan-Ann Arbor will study the interaction of a water
droplet with an atmospheric pressure plasma - a reactive gas of neutral atoms
and molecules, charged radicals and ions, and electrons. Chemically reactive
liquids are used throughout society, from cleaning fluids in the home to
customized solutions for pharmaceutical manufacturing; and now increasingly in
biomedical applications. Customizing the reactivity of these liquids is a
challenge, particularly when the active species have short lifetimes.
Atmospheric pressure plasmas are an ideal medium to produce chemical reactivity;
and plasma-liquid interactions leverage the ability to generate chemically
reactive species in plasmas to produce unique chemical reactivity in the liquid.
This project will also develop and support an annual one-week US Low Temperature
Plasma School aimed to provide opportunities for graduate students from across
the country to be immersed in low temperature plasma science and learn from
leading researchers in their field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research
project, the interaction of a single water droplet with a controlled diffuse
cold atmospheric pressure plasma will be investigated with the goal of
quantifying the reaction of plasma produced species with liquids. The reaction
kinetics occurring near the boundary between the gas plasma and liquid,
resulting in interfacial transport, becomes increasingly complex when transport
and reactivity are highly coupled. This is often the case when transport
includes short-lived highly reactive species as in both the plasma and liquid
phases, and species transfer is transport limited. Plasma activation of aerosols
and small liquid droplets interspersed in the gas plasma provides opportunities
to reduce transport limits to a minimum. The experimental apparatus at
University of Minnesota will uniquely enable the investigation of plasma
interactions with a single droplet of known initial and final composition,
passing through a well-characterized plasma. Multi-phase plasma modeling at
University of Michigan will comprehensively address this complex system. The
anticipated results will, in particular, elucidate droplet charging, plasma
induced droplet evaporation, transport mechanisms of short-lived species and
convective transport effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.