* 1903572
* INFEWS: U.S.-China: Coupled FEWS Modeling for Sustainability of the Global Crop Supply Chain with a Focus on China - US Interactions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Mingzhou Jin, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The greatest challenges for global food systems are the spatial and temporal
mismatches of their supply and demand. The crop supply chain helps to relieve
these mismatches through transportation, trade, and storage. However, long-
distance shipping consumes a great deal of energy. Water, as a critical resource
for crop production, is unevenly distributed across regions and throughout the
seasons. The interaction, as a Food, Energy, and Water System (FEWS), and
spatial and temporal heterogeneity require a systematic and coupled method to
study the global crop supply chain, which includes production, storage,
transportation, distribution, and consumption. Teaming with the crop research
group at Nanjing Agriculture University, this project will develop a scalable
framework that models decision-making in the global crop supply chain as
embedded in the water resources and energy, socioeconomic, and policy
environments and as affected by prices and climate factors. The integrated
systems modeling framework for the global crop supply chain will enable the
connection of global challenges and the local concerns of individual
stakeholders along the supply chain through multi-scale resolutions and dynamic
interactions. The research results will make local shareholders more aware of
the FEWS sustainability challenges faced by the global food system, which should
help them make better decisions and encourage their engagement in collective
efforts to achieve fairer and more sustainable global crop systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The twofold objective of this proposal is 1) to advance
FEWS systems modeling methodologies and improve understanding of the
interactions of the global crop supply chains by developing a framework to
integrate climatic, economic, governmental, societal, and technological changes,
and 2) use the supply chain formed by China and the US to identify technical,
societal, and policy solutions to improve the sustainability and resilience of
the global crop supply chain. This research deliberately chooses the US-China
wheat and soybean supply chain as a testbed for the framework, with emphasis on
its interaction with the rest of the world, because their large trade volume has
a critical impact on the global sustainability of food, energy, and water. The
rest of the world will be represented by the modified Global Change Assessment
Model (GCAM). The lessons learned from this particular US-China supply chain can
be applied to other global crop supply chains. This study will address multiple
limitations of the current agricultural systems and integrated assessment models
(e.g., GCAM) by 1) coupling climatic, policy, socioeconomic, and technological
changes with global crop supply, demand, and prices in a dynamic way; 2)
measuring the global crop supply chain sustainability from both global and local
viewpoints, considering spatio-temporal distribution for all supply chain
players and including energy consumption, water stress, profit, fairness, and
resiliency; 3) developing decision making tools for spatially distributed
individual crop players with consideration of global issues such as pricing and
international trade; 4) integrating models that come from different disciplines
and operate with heterogonous data requirements and spatio-temporal resolutions;
and 5) studying the resilience of global crop SCs under extreme
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.