* 1903709
* Intense Laser-Plasma Interactions with Structured Ultrafast Laser Pulses
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Charles Durfee, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 460,470.00

Plasma is a gas-like state of matter with properties determined by collective
interactions between free-roaming electrons and ions. In this project, ultra-
intense lasers will be used to create, control and study plasmas. Pulses of
laser light from modern lasers can be made so focused as to allow the laser
fields to push on electrons like a snowplow. In this project, the laser pulses
are shaped so that they travel with a tilt, much as a tilted snowplow blade
scoops up the snow and pushes it to the side. With careful laser control, the
electrons can be separated from the ions and be formed by such a tilted snowplow
into a beam. If the range of electron beam angles and energies can be made as
small as the calculations predict, and the beam energy as high as the
calculations predict, the electron beam can be used to study materials, or be
boosted to even higher energies with additional particle acceleration
techniques. The project will support and train one PhD student and two
undergraduate students at the Colorado School of Mines.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project exploits the structuring of the spatial and temporal
shape of intense, ultrafast laser pulses to control electron dynamics in
plasmas. One type of structuring that will be used is where the spectral
components of the laser pulse are overlapped at the focus with an incident angle
that is linearly dependent on the frequency. This results in a pulse that sweeps
across the focal plane with a speed that can be much lower than the speed of
light. This reduced speed allows the light pressure on the electrons to capture
and accelerate them to the side. With careful shaping of the transverse
intensity profile, theory predicts electrons can be accelerated with a narrow
energy and angular spread, making them useful for ultrafast electron diffraction
and injection into other laser-based electron accelerators. In this project, the
physics of this acceleration mechanism will be experimentally and
computationally explored. At higher density, the fast current pulse created by
this mechanism is predicted to produce terahertz radiation that will be
characterized with novel single pixel imaging techniques. Another method of
structuring the laser light involves converting the polarization state of the
laser beam to transverse electric. When this azimuthally polarized beam is
focused tightly, the magnetic field develops a longitudinal component on axis
that can be over 10 kTesla, orders of magnitude higher than the strongest
magnets. A short wavelength probe beam propagating along this field will be used
to probe how waves are altered by this strong magnetic
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.