* 1903640
* The Tropical Pacific Mean State, Annual Cycle and ENSO in Holocene Corals: a Multi-proxy Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Alyssa Atwood, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 707,826.00

The El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is the dominant mode of year-to-year
climate variability on a global scale, affecting precipitation and temperature
patterns across the globe every few years. As a growing number of people around
the world are vulnerable to natural disasters under a changing climate, there is
an urgent need for improved understanding of how ENSO is likely to change in the
future. While the last decade has seen three of the largest El Nino events on
record, there is substantial uncertainty regarding how ENSO will change in a
warmer world, despite extensive research efforts. Observations are limited,
while state-of-the-art climate models suffer from persistent errors.
Paleoclimate reconstructions, which extend the short observational record,
suggest that ENSO variability around 3,000-5,000 years ago was about half as
large as it is today, but the reason for this reduction is unknown. ENSO is
closely tied to the long-term state of tropical Pacific climate, and thus its
evolution represents an important piece of the puzzle in understanding this
period of Earth history. However, changes in the tropical Pacific background
state are poorly constrained from the paleoclimate record during this time. This
project aims to reconstruct the evolution of temperature and rainfall from the
center of the equatorial Pacific on timescales ranging from seasons to millennia
over the past 5,000 years. In doing so, the project will provide a way to test
predictions from climate models. The project will promote the progress of
science, advance science education, and facilitate public engagement in the
sciences by supporting a graduate student and several undergraduate students
through independent laboratory-based research projects, by supporting an early
career scientist in her first role as lead PI, and by supporting two PIs who are
actively engaged in science education, climate literacy, and disseminating their
research results to the general public and policymakers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the project will quantitatively
reconstruct central equatorial Pacific sea surface temperature and seawater d18O
variability during the past 5,000 years using paired d18O and trace element
measurements in Kiritimati fossil coral. Trace element measurements will be
paired with an extensive collection of Kiritimati coral d18O records to generate
a set of highly- replicated and quantitative reconstructions of the seasonal
cycle, ENSO extremes and long-term evolution of central equatorial Pacific
climate. Through the project, these coral-based reconstructions will be compared
to comprehensive climate model simulations forced with changes in Earth's
precessional cycle, utilizing a forward-modeling approach to quantitatively
compare the coral data to model output and contextualize the changes observed at
Kiritimati to changes across the tropical Pacific and beyond. These
reconstructions will yield important insight into the linkages between the
background tropical Pacific climate and ENSO that will inform projections of
future change. In association with these reconstructions, a coral diagenesis
rating tool will be developed to promote a community-wide standard for
assessment and reporting of diagenesis in fossil
corals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.