* 1903498
* Charting the Course:  Career Advancement Strategies &amp; Planning for Two-Year Technical Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Geraldine Richmond, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 06/30/2022
* USD 99,893.00

It is often assumed that a technologically trained workforce requires a four-
year degree. However, the workforce has a significant need for skilled
technicians educated at two-year colleges. Recent employee surveys and
government reports have noted concerns that the U.S. faces an increasing
shortage for the technically trained workers needed to maintain the country's
competitiveness and economic growth objectives. For these jobs, education and
training programs at community and technical colleges have proven to be
effective and efficient in producing right-skilled graduates who are ready for
the workforce. The ideal faculty members to educate such students are those who
have more than just the appropriate technical skills. They also need additional
knowledge, skills, and connections. Examples include knowledge about how to
update course content to match emerging trends, contacts with industries that
will employ their students, knowledge about and capabilities for obtaining
funding for course and career advancement, and access to professional networks
with like-minded educators. The goal of this project is to empower faculty at
two-year community and technical colleges to acquire such additional knowledge,
skills, and connections. To that end, this project will develop and deliver two
workshops that will assist faculty in Advanced Technical Education fields to
become better educators, to increase their awareness of new career growth
opportunities, and to develop career-building skills. This project aims to
advance the professional growth of two-year college faculty by enhancing their
ability to train, mentor, and prepare students for current and emerging
workforce needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and deliver two
workshops that, together, will engage ~60 ATE faculty. The workshops will assist
the faculty with developing and implementing career advancement plans that
increase career progress, diversify interests, provide further job satisfaction,
and boost the quality of their teaching and educational efforts. This effort is
a collaborative project between current ATE Principal Investigators who have
extensive experience in mentoring and guiding two-year college technical
faculty, and the COACh program at the University of Oregon that has extensive
experience in developing and providing career building workshops to thousands of
scientists and engineers at all levels of academia. The workshops also have the
potential to draw new faculty and new institutions into the ATE community. The
workshops will provide information about the opportunities for faculty to remain
current in their disciplines. Examples of topics will include industry
interaction and involvement, American National Standards Institute
Certification, certification development, professional society leadership
opportunities, board of director opportunities, travel through faculty study
exploration, collaborative grant writing, and obtaining funds to attend
professional meetings. Workshops will also help faculty develop develop a plan
for further professional development, including skills to take advantage of and
succeed in new leadership opportunities. Evaluation data collected from the
workshops will be used to inform future career development offerings and related
efforts to meet the needs of the ATE community. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.