* 1903995
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Political Incorporation of Asian Americans
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Joseph Galaskiewicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 01/31/2020
* USD 14,137.00

Asian Americans constitute the United States' fastest growing immigrant
population relative to its preexisting size. As this population expands, we need
to understand more about how these new immigrants become politically integrated
into United States society. We know that social groups that succeed in terms of
educational attainment and earnings typically have high levels of political
participation. What is most perplexing about Asian Americans is that, despite
their relative economic and educational success, they lag behind other racial
groups in voter turnout. The most recent studies of this question have not
produced adequate answers. This project will investigate the causes for lower
Asian American voter turnout as well as provide a more detailed understanding of
how Asian Americans understand and define participation in the public sphere.
This latter aspect is important given that much of the potential for greater
civic inclusion lies in the recognition of the diverse but often overlooked
extra-institutional forms of political engagement more common among recent
immigrants. This project will provide political parties and our society
generally with information useful in promoting greater participation in the
political process by facilitating greater engagement of civically-minded
citizens, thus strengthening our democracy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed-methods project will combine
quantitative analysis of existing data sets with in-depth interviews. The
project will use The Current Population Survey between 2000 and 2014 to verify
prior research concerning patterns of voter turnout among Asian Americans. The
project will also analyze the 2016 National Asian American Survey to test
hypotheses regarding the mechanisms behind recent voter patterns, including
forms of political participation other than actual voting. Finally, the project
will conduct 90 interviews in a large city with subgroups of Asian Americans to
capture these groups' perspectives on their political engagement and experiences
in the public sphere. After the interviews are transcribed, qualitative coding
will produce common themes and concepts. Atlas.ti will be used to organize,
manage and analyze the data. Findings from the project will show both overall
patterns and subgroup differences in the motivations for political participation
among Asian Americans, and test hypotheses regarding the mechanisms behind these
patterns. Findings will inform theories in both sociology and political science
related to political participation, especially the role of resources in
motivating such participation. Findings will also speak to sociological theories
regarding ethnic group assimilation to better understand why Asian Americans
assimilate readily socio-economically, but less readily politically. The
findings will also speak to sociological theories regarding the role of culture
in patterning public sphere behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.