* 1903270
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Multicellular Self-Organization in Myxococcus Xanthus
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Ilya Timofeyev, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 12/31/2023
* USD 274,998.00

This project engages a collaborating team of experimental microbiologists,
computational biologists, and mathematicians to understand the mechanisms by
which soil bacterium Myxococcus xanthus aggregates into multicellular mounds in
response to starvation. Using mathematical and biological approaches, the team
will uncover interactions that control different stages of developmental self-
organization: (1) pre-aggregation cell alignment and formation of cellular
streams; (2) formation and growth of initial aggregates; and (3) aggregate
coarsening, dispersal, and pulsing. This project is expected to elucidate some
of the general mechanisms behind the collective behavior of motile cells in
other organisms and to develop widely applicable mathematical approaches.
Transition from single cells to multicellularity is fundamentally important to
increase understanding of many pathogenic bacteria and to elucidate self-
organization in more complex systems. Even though individual bacterial cells are
considered to function independently and to be autonomous, many bacterial
populations will act collectively, communicating, moving and self-organizing
into multicellular structures. M. xanthus is a great model system for studying
biological self-organization: its cells function fine alone, but cooperate to
form variety of distinct, dynamic patterns depending on environmental
conditions. However, the mechanisms of these behaviors are currently not fully
understood. Broader impacts of the project will be further enhanced by training
opportunities for participating students. Solving complex biological problems
requires a new generation of life scientists with cross-disciplinary training in
both experimental and computational methods. This research will provide those
training opportunities for all participants, facilitated by close interactions
such as joint meetings and trainee collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on solving one of the fundamental problems of modern
developmental biology: how individual cells self-organize into multicellular
structures. In particular, the goal of the research is to uncover mechanisms
controlling the developmental program of a biofilm formed by M. xanthus. This
soil bacterium is tractable and has a relatively simple genome and as such is an
excellent model system to develop novel mathematical models and experimentally
test their predictions. Under starvation, M. xanthus cells coordinate their
movement in space and time, bringing tens of thousands of cells together into
multicellular aggregates to differentiate into spores. This model of prokaryotic
development is experimentally tractable and shares many of the complexities that
are ubiquitous in developmental systems. With a combination of mathematical
modeling approaches and quantitative experiments, this project will uncover the
interactions and signaling mechanisms that control three distinct stages of
developmental self-organization. To this end, the research builds on the
previously fruitful methodology to connect these interactions with the observed
population phenotypes. The emphasis of the mathematical component of this
research is on the advancement of agent-based and kinetic models that go beyond
the existing, oversimplified models of the phenomena that postulate and analyze
a single mechanism for self-organization. The resulting predictions will be
tested experimentally using genetic or environmental perturbations. Broader
impacts include developing novel and widely applicable methodology to understand
multicellular patterns, cross-disciplinary training for participating students,
and educational and outreach activities based on the research results and
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.