* 1903909
* An Inclusive Workshop to Develop Best Practices and Guidelines for Fairness, Ethics, Accountability, and Transparency in Computer and Information Science and Engineering
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Jason Borenstein, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 02/28/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Modern societies rely extensively on computing technology, and there is a need
to identify and/or develop strategies for addressing fairness, ethics,
accountability, and transparency (FEAT) in computing-based research, practice,
and educational efforts. This workshop will bring together diverse researchers
with FEAT-related expertise to explore best practices and integrate disparate
approaches. The computing community will benefit from the identification of
systematic methods and effective approaches to incorporate FEAT considerations
into the design and implementation of computing artifacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will convene diverse experts with
research and practice experience addressing fairness, ethics, accountability,
and transparency in computing. These experts will form a working group during a
2-day workshop. The working group will include different disciplines,
demographics, and institutional types, including large research-intensive
universities, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Hispanic-Serving
Institutions, teaching institutions, and liberal arts colleges. The workshop
will bring academics and members of industry together along with government
representatives, which is vitally important given the role and impact that each
sector can have on the future of computing. Relevant insights will also be
gained from bringing together policy scholars, lawyers, statisticians,
sociologists, and philosophers along with the more traditional sources of
expertise in the computing realm (such as computer scientists and engineers).
The group will examine best practices and seek to articulate strategies for
addressing FEAT in computing-based research and education. This includes
identifying methodological approaches that researchers could employ to
facilitate FEAT, instituting guidelines on what problem definition practices
work best, and highlighting best-practices for data access and data inclusion.
Results from this workshop will be used to compile a detailed report with
supporting materials, a set of guidelines and best practices for addressing FEAT
in computing-based research and educational efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.