* 1903888
* Discovery and study of spin-orbit-coupled quantum materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Gang Cao, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 590,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Condensed matter research has produced many
novel materials with fundamental properties that underpin a remarkable number of
cutting-edge technologies. It is now generally accepted that novel materials are
necessary for critical advances in technologies and whoever discovers novel
materials generally controls the science and technology of the future. The 4d-
and 5d- transition metal elements constitute two thirds of the d-transition
metal elements listed in the Periodic Table. However, these materials have
remained largely unexplored. This project presents a systematic effort to
discover, investigate and control novel quantum states in 4d/5d materials. A
delicate balance between spin-orbit and other competing interactions inherent in
these materials offers a unique range of opportunities to uncover and control
exotic states and physical properties. This project also provides rigorous
training to all students involved, focusing on synthesis and characterization
techniques covering a broad spectrum of materials and experimental probes
available in the principal investigator's laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Physics driven by spin-
orbit interactions is among the most important topics in contemporary condensed
matter physics. This project is driven by Two Interconnected Thrusts - Discovery
of New Quantum Materials and Control of Novel Quantum States. Thrust One: The PI
targets three Subgroups of 4d/5d materials for single-crystal synthesis and
study: 1. Oxides, 2. S- and Se-based chalcogenides and 3. Tellurides. The
underlying behavior of these subgroups is expected to systematically evolve from
more correlated, insulating states (oxides) to more spin-orbit-coupled, metallic
states (tellurides) via a crossover regime dictated by complex structures (S or
Se chalcogenides). This key trend provides unique circumstances to effectively
tune the relative strength of correlations and spin-orbit interactions (SOI) in
order to uncover/control exotic states in an unprecedented fashion. Thrust Two:
The SOI exhibits particularly strong and surprising influence on the physical
properties of the 4d/5d materials, in which a key characteristic is that the SOI
can rigidly lock magnetic moments to the lattice, leading to novel behavior. The
PI investigates lattice-control physical properties of spin-orbit-coupled
materials via application of electrical current, hydrostatic pressure, or
chemical doping. Electrical-current control of structural and physical
properties is a long-sought, but elusive goal of contemporary science and
technology. The PI's recent discovery demonstrates that a combination of strong
SOI and a canted antiferromagnetic Mott state is sufficient to attain this
important goal. The Nation is committed to a quantum revolution but is poorly
supported by the lack of scientists who are experienced in quantum materials
discovery and synthesis. This project is well-timed to address this problem via
rigorous graduate training emphasizing materials discovery and synthesis and
providing high-quality crystals of novel materials for extensive collaborations,
which is necessary to advance our collective understanding of the novel
phenomena under study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.