* 1903922
* GOALI: Elucidating the synergistic role of anammox bacteria with flanking bacterial community members in anammox bioreactors under different environmental conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Haydee De Clippeleir, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 361,018.00

Excessive nitrogen (N) releases from wastewater treatment plants can lead to
ecosystem harm through eutrophication. Eutrophication is the excessive growth of
algae stimulated by N. In extreme cases, eutrophication can lead to widespread
loss of oxygen and fish kills when the algae die. N in wastewater is typically
removed by oxidation to nitrate in a process called nitrification and subsequent
reduction to gaseous nitrogen in a process called denitrification. Nitrification
and denitrification have been used for N removal in wastewater treatment plants
for decades. However, this process is highly energy intensive. More recently
treatment plants have sought to utilize ANaerobic AMMonia OXidation (ANAMMOX) to
remove N with less energy. ANAMMOX has been adopted internationally, with
several full-scale plants currently operational. In contrast, the acceptance of
ANAMMOX in the United States has been relatively limited. This is due in part to
concerns about process inhibition due to external perturbations. In this
project, researchers will study the effect of external perturbations by nitrite,
sulfide and recalcitrant carbon on ANAMMOX process stability. This will be
achieved by studying the response of the microbial community to these
perturbations in laboratory scale reactors. The research team will collaborate
with the wastewater treatment utility DC Water. Graduate, undergraduate, and
K-12 students will obtain industrial and entrepreneurial experiences though this
collaboration. This project will significantly enhance our understanding of the
ANAMMOX process, potentially leading to successful full-scale applications in
the United States. The project focus on managing the N cycle directly addresses
one the "14 Grand Challenges of the 21st Century" identified by the National
Academy of Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite
over three decades of extensive research, several factors still prevent
widespread implementation of the ANAMMOX process for wastewater treatment.
Currently, there are no studies that have focused on understanding the response
of ANAMMOX reactors to external perturbations at the proteomic and molecular
levels, and very few studies have examined the role of other bacteria (i.e.
flanking community) in ANAMMOX enrichments. This project will address these
knowledge gaps by generating fundamental information on ANAMMOX communities
using metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and proteomics. These results will
enable more robust engineering control and adoption of this innovative nitrogen
cycling technology to address managing the nitrogen cycle as one of the National
Academy of Engineering "14 Engineering Grand Challenges of the 21st Century".
This project will be carried out by a collaboration between researchers at the
University of Utah and the wastewater treatment utility DC Water. Utah
researchers will provide expertise in fundamental science of reactor operation,
bacterial community analysis, bacterial biokinetic and toxicity analysis, while
DC Water will provide student training and internship opportunities for the
translation of the work into full scale application. The goal of this project is
to elucidate the complete functional gene network under different perturbations
in the ANAMMOX process. Successful development of this network will help
engineers and scientists to understand process upsets and facilitate the design
and wider adoption of efficient and resilient ANAMMOX
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.