* 1903548
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Quantifying Holocene Climate Variations through Data Assimilation using Proxies and General Circulation Models (GCMs) Output
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nicholas McKay, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 441,947.00

This project aims to develop a proxy-model assimilation framework for the
Holocene period by combining proxy data and model simulations. The developed
framework will allow to address critical questions about the temperature trends
during the Holocene which show a discrepancy between observations and models. In
addition, the climate dynamics underlying major hydrological changes-Drying- in
western North America and Northern Africa will be investigated. To improve the
model-data comparison, the researchers will use a proxy-system modeling approach
in order to improve the interpretation of the climate signal recorded in the
Holocene proxy-records, including seasonality of temperature and
precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include a
greater understanding of the Holocene climate dynamics, investigating the
mismatch between model simulations and observation of temperature trends during
the Holocene; and major hydroclimate shifts in northwestern US and North Africa.
A Holocene multi-variable reconstruction at annual resolution and a curated
Holocene proxy-record database will be developed and made available for the
broader climate community. Two workshops on paleoclimate data assimilation will
be organized for graduate students and early career scientists to train the next
generation of paleoclimate scientists. The project will support three early
career scientists and a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Holocene
multi-variables reconstruction and proxy-network will be useful products that
will benefit the paleoclimate community at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.