* 1903259
* Understanding Ion Solvation Structure and Transport in Multicomponent Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Burcu Gurkan, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 517,360.00

Ionic liquids are liquid salt mixtures that have favorable physical properties
such as thermal and electrochemical stability, non-flammability, and low
volatility, which render them as ideal solvents, catalysts, and electrolytes in
various chemical synthesis and energy storage applications. A current research
need to enable wider adoption of electric cars, is high performance batteries
with sufficient durability while retaining safe operations. This fundamental
research project aims to introduce a control knob for the design of ionic
liquids' properties as electrolytes for lithium ion and lithium metal batteries.
This rational design approach may lead to the realization of safer batteries
with nonflammable electrolytes operable at temperatures beyond the range of
traditional electrolytes and within extremely reductive or oxidative
environments where all other electrolytes fail. This project will advance the
next generation of energy storage devices. As part of this project, the
integrated education program 'STEAM for Energy' will enhance students' science
and engineering training by teaching fundamental physical phenomena through a
visual arts lens. The visual arts module will be integrated into the Case
Western Reserve University curriculum through the investigators ongoing
collaborations with the Cleveland Institute of Art. The expected outcomes from
the educational and outreach activities are increased interest and broadened
participation in STEM, and enhanced creativity and scientific communication
skills for engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to understand the solvation structure and transport mechanism of
solute ions in multicomponent ionic liquids, where ions of three or more are
present. The research will utilize a theory-guided experimental approach that
combines quantum calculations with Raman spectroscopy to interpret the ion
coordination and solvation structure in the complex electrolytes. How the
structure impacts transport properties and ultimately the system level
performances will be investigated by lithium ion transference measurements and
rate-capability tests. The new knowledge gained will answer important
fundamental questions including the relationship among the solute ion
concentration, ion coordination within the solvation structure, and the ion
conductivity in multicomponent ionic liquid mixtures and the characterization
and mechanism of the role of induced, polar-nonpolar, nanoscale heterogeneity of
ionic liquids in determining the macroscopic conductivity and the solute ion
transference. This research will produce new electrolytes and the underpinnings
of the transport properties that are relevant to next generation electrochemical
energy storage systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.