* 1903342
* Developing Sulfur Cathode Materials for Electrochemical Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Victor Batista, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2022
* USD 522,396.00

There is a critical need for improved energy storage technologies for electric
vehicles and large-scale integration of renewable electricity grid storage to
improve domestic energy security. Currently, state-of-the-art energy storage
technologies such as lithium ion batteries are insufficient in providing the
performance requirements needed such as cost and energy density to enable broad
use. Battery chemistries using high energy density electrodes could provide an
avenue towards gains in energy density and durability for these applications.
This project addresses the use of lithium-sulfur batteries as a potential high
energy density and lower cost option. The major constraint of lithium-sulfur
batteries is their poor cycling stability, namely the energy decay upon repeated
use. One cause for this decay is reaction intermediates called lithium
polysulfides, which dissolve and migrate in the battery electrolyte causing loss
in active material. This project addresses the issue with a combined
experimental and theoretical approach to develop new materials that can not only
confine lithium polysulfides, but also accelerate their conversion to store or
release energy. These materials have the potential to extend the life time of
lithium-sulfur batteries without compromising their energy density. The project
also conducts outreach through the Yale University Pathways to Science Program
involving pre-college students in middle school and high school. The
investigators will enable a new outreach activity under this program for a
summer workshop involving battery topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
fundamental engineering project that addresses the cycle life challenge facing
lithium-sulfur batteries by rationally designing high-performance sulfur
electrodes based on molecular-level understanding of the chemical interactions
and enabling electrocatalysis at the electrode/polysulfide interface. The
chemical binding mechanisms as well as the electrochemical redox behaviors of
lithium polysulfides are studied both experimentally and computationally with
distinct model material systems comprising inorganic nanoparticles and metal
complexes with well-controlled and systematically-varied structures. Suitable
sites that can effectively bind lithium polysulfides and catalyze their
electrochemical conversion reactions will be identified. Reaction pathways,
energy barriers and rate-limiting steps will be calculated and experimentally
examined. Based on the new knowledge, ternary-structured materials and ultrathin
protection layers will be designed and synthesized to enable high-capacity and
long-cycle sulfur electrodes operating under application-relevant
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.