* 1903649
* Collaborative Research: Probing Reconfigurable Nanoparticle Biointerfaces using Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Marc Knecht, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2023
* USD 311,343.00

Professor Marc Knecht of the University of Miami and Professor Anatoly I.
Frenkel of SUNY at Stony Brook are supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Division of Chemistry to
develop biomolecule-bonded nanoparticles for unique applications in catalysis.
Nanoparticles are incredibly small-sized materials that are 1000 times smaller
than the width of one strand of human hair. To prevent these particles from
uncontrollably aggregating to larger structures, small molecules are chemically
bound to the particle surface. These molecules, also called ligands, keep the
nanoparticles stably suspended in solution, allowing for studies of the material
properties for wide ranging applications from harvesting solar energy to
chemical catalysis. While these ligands are incredibly important, they are
typically locked in a single conformation, thus limiting the properties of a
nanoparticle. In this project, Professors Knecht and Frenkel are using
biological inspiration and molecular design to develop biological ligands that
can change their structure when irradiated with light of a certain wavelength or
color. When these biomolecules are used to stabilize metal nanoparticles, they
can change their arrangement when bound to the material, thus accessing two
different conformations and enhancing the potential properties of a single
material. These conformation differences and the changes to the material
properties are being studied using catalysis and advanced spectroscopy methods,
providing great detail to aid in material design. Professors Knecht and Frenkel
are also engaging undergraduate students with the integration of this research
with education at the entry level to encourage students into science related
studies and careers. In addition, plans are implemented to realign the Freshman
and Sophomore general and organic courses and laboratories to improve the
chemistry undergraduate students' retention ratio.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal metal nanoparticles are typically
constructed using surface passivating ligands that are rigidly bound to the
inorganic surface, locking them into a single configuration. By having the
ability to remotely actuate the interfacial structure on the particle surface to
adopt different conformations, the properties of the materials could be tuned on
demand. Professors Knecht and Frenkel hypothesize that peptide-based
nanoparticle passivants can be remotely and reversibly reconfigured via external
stimuli to adopt two different configurations for on demand material property
control. Such capabilities are achievable through the integration of a
photoswitch into the peptide structure. Changes in the photoswitch isomerization
state can be propagated through the peptide conformation due to the binding
between the biomolecule and the nanoparticle surface. This capability is being
examined using catalysis as a surface probe of the ligand structural
conformation, where differences in reaction rates are observable. These
differences are being exploited to achieve on/off catalytic reactivity, which
could be important for multistep reactions. Furthermore, as part of this study,
advanced, in situ and operando X-ray spectroscopic analysis of the nanoparticles
are being used to identify changes in particle surface structure as a function
of ligand conformation before, during, and after photoswitching and catalysis.
Finally, the effects of the nanoparticle composition, size, and shape are being
studied to modulate the level of photoswitch-based peptide structural
differences for enhanced control over the particle catalytic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.