* 1903690
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Reconstructing Atmospheric 14C across the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone Using Tropical Tree Rings from South America and Central Africa
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Guaciara dos Santos, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 286,219.00

This project aims to develop an observational record of atmospheric radiocarbon
(14C) data post-1950 by using calendrically dated tree rings across the
intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ). The tree-ring sites are located in South
America (Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil) and central Africa (Cameroon) across
the ITCZ band. These new 14C data will be used to constrain the spatial pattern
of atmospheric 14C in the southern hemisphere, which currently relies on samples
collected mostly in the eastern part of the southern hemisphere. The researchers
will additionally measure the ring width and the stable isotope compositions of
Oxygen and Carbon from the tree rings to investigate factors that can cause
spatial and temporal variations of 14C variations. These include the seasonality
of tree growth and the source of rainwater which reflects atmospheric
circulation dynamics. The combined proxies aim to improve: 1) regional and local
features of ITCZ circulation and inter-hemispheric exchange; 2) prediction of
the ITCZ shifts in response to anthropogenic forcings; 3) the 14C calibration
curve for the equatorial southern hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
Broader Impacts include a better definition of the intra-hemispheric 14C zonal
division at lower latitudes, and the 14C timescale in Southern hemisphere which
will benefit the paleoclimate community for chronology constraints (accuracy of
the radiocarbon method) of the Holocene and climate dynamics of the ITCZ.
Results of this project will benefit other fields including: radiocarbon
calibration, astrophysics, ecology, biogeochemical and Earth science and
archeology. The project will provide training for two undergraduate students and
one PhD student. A radiocarbon short course will be organized at University of
California Irvine where researchers, students and international collaborators
will participate. The data of these project will be integrated in the
International intercalibration curve of atmospheric
radiocarbon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.