* 1903855
* RUI: Chemical Investigations into the Bioactivity of the DNA Lesion 8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michelle Hamm, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

DNA is under constant attack by various environmental factors, many of which can
cause DNA damage. Oxidative damage arises from reactions between DNA and
reactive oxygen species that are produced by radiation, chemical carcinogens, or
even as part of food consumption. Oxidative damage is one of the most common
types of DNA damage in mammalian cells and can also cause mutations (a change in
the information stored in DNA), potentially leading to ageing and various
diseases, including cancer. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Michelle Hamm from the
University of Richmond, a primarily undergraduate institution, to investigate
the chemical basis of mutations caused by oxidatively damaged DNA. The new
knowledge generated by the research provides insight into the link between DNA
damage and the biological problems that it causes. The research also allows
undergraduate students and a post-baccalaureate student to learn chemical and/or
biochemical laboratory techniques, as well as other skills that will be useful
to them as they pursue graduate or professional school or join the 21st century
STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the DNA lesion
8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (OdG) and uses structural analogues of OdG or
2'-deoxyguanosine (dG) to probe the steric and/or electronic properties that
affect the bioactivity of OdG or its 5'-triphosphate analogue, OdGTP. One set of
aims focuses on the interaction between OdG or OdGTP and four human translesion
polymerases. By comparing polymerase reaction efficiencies of the synthesized
analogues to dG/dGTP, OdG/OdGTP, and each other, the exact atomic factors that
influence the mutagenic potential of OdG and OdGTP can be isolated. The other
main aim of the project includes the use of bacterial incubation and next
generation sequencing to better understand OdG mutagenesis and repair in vivo.
By comparing the mutation rates of OdG to that of its analogues in various
bacterial cell strains, including those that are OdG repair deficient, the
important properties and positions within the OdG base that lead to its
bacterial mutation rate can be identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.