* 1903967
* Membrane and Monolith Enzyme Reactors for Proteolysis After Capillary Electrophoresis to Enhance Detection of Proteoforms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Merlin Bruening, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2023
* USD 375,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Merlin Bruening and his group at the University of Notre
Dame are working to develop a new method to characterize small changes in the
composition of proteins - key elements in the chemistry of life. Subtle
differences in composition can have large impacts on protein function (or
malfunction) in cells and organisms, even when the protein variants are "coded"
by the same gene. A standard approach to this important problem is to digest
proteins (break them into smaller, characteristic constituents known as
peptides) and then identify them by separation and analysis of the resulting
peptides. This can lead to misidentifications (false positives and false
negatives), especially when the structural differences are minor and/or the
protein sample is complex. The Bruening approach seeks to reduce these
misidentifications by preceding digestion with a high-resolution separation of
the intact proteins, thereby presenting for simultaneous analysis all the
peptides associated with a given protein. The approach requires thorough but
rapid digestion - a key challenge and opportunity. In the long run, the insights
derived should enhance understanding of phenomena like the development of drug
resistance by organisms such as the malaria parasite. Dr. Bruening and his
students are sharing insights about this effort at the interface between
chemistry and biology through hosting high school students from underrepresented
groups in their lab, and through outreach to school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bottom-up proteomics is a powerful technique for
identifying proteins via proteolysis, peptide separation, tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS), and comparison of mass spectra to the predictions derived
from a protein database. However, because this strategy often gives low protein
sequence coverage, proteoform identification, which may depend on detecting a
specific peptide, is challenging. To address this problem, the Bruening group is
developing in-line digestion of proteins separated using capillary zone
electrophoresis (CZE). Capillaries containing terminal enzyme-modified membranes
or monoliths are being designed to enable digestion just prior to electrospray
ionization MS/MS analysis. Thus, the MS/MS spectra of all the proteolytic
peptides from a given protein will appear in a narrow time window. Creation of a
time-bin criterion will help to decrease both false-positive and false-negative
peptide identifications, particularly for proteoforms. Test applications include
detection of proteoforms in model systems such as protein mixtures and histone
variants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.