* 1903071
* Dependence of Sn whisker nucleation and growth on stress: real-time experiments and development of a predictive model
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Eric Chason, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2023
* USD 477,058.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of its toxicity, the element
lead (Pb) is being eliminated from electronics manufacturing. However, this
produces a harmful side-effect in tin (Sn) coatings that are widely used to
protect the conductive parts of electronic components. Removing the lead that
was previously used in these coatings promotes the growth of tin whiskers. These
whiskers are thin filaments that grow spontaneously out of the coating to
lengths of millimeters and have caused failures in many critical systems
including satellites, missiles and nuclear power plants. The goal of this
project is to understand the causes and the mechanisms behind whisker growth in
order to develop effective and reliable strategies to prevent them. The work
focuses on the effect of stress as a driving force, much like squeezing a
toothpaste tube makes the paste come out. However, the mechanisms in the solid
tin layer leading to whisker growth are much more complicated than this. Well-
controlled experiments are performed to quantify the relationship between the
applied stress and resulting whisker formation rates. The experimental results
are then used to develop mathematical models that can explain how whiskers grow
and predict their formation under different conditions. Publications and
presentations let these results be shared with the manufacturing community and
collaborations let these approaches be applied to the development of new
coatings to prevent whiskering. An outreach component of the project pairs
undergraduate engineering students with local high schools in a weekly after-
school program to promote skill-building and participation in technical fields.
The research of Ph.D. and undergraduate students is supported with active
recruitment of participants from under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sn
whiskers are thin filaments that grow spontaneously from Pb-free Sn coatings on
electronic components and can lead to failures in critical systems. Stress is
proposed to be the driving force, but the relationship is complex and the
mechanisms are not yet understood. To determine the fundamental materials
processes underlying whisker formation, experiments are performed that control
the stress in the layer while measuring the whiskers. In one set of projects,
heating Sn layers on different substrates is used to create thermal expansion
mismatch and the resulting stress is determined from the curvature in the
substrate. The corresponding nucleation and growth kinetics are measured in
real-time in the scanning electron microscope during heating. In other
experiments, the stress is induced by applying pressure using a unique,
miniaturized system that can be monitored in real-time inside the scanning
electron microscope. These approaches are used to study the effect of stress on
whisker kinetics in conjunction with the ambient environment (humidity and
corrosive elements) and different alloy compositions (pure Sn, Sn-Ag-Cu, Sn-In,
Sn-Bi, etc.). The data obtained from these experiments are used to develop and
refine models of the whisker growth and nucleation process. A 2D finite element
analysis model includes processes of power-law creep and stress-induced
diffusion to the whisker base. Extending the model to 3-D enables the effects of
grain boundary diffusion and polycrystallinity to be included. Kinetic
parameters obtained from the modeling can be used to predict whiskering under
different conditions. Understanding how conditions and materials change the
whisker growth process guides the development of whisker-free
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.