* 1903197
* P2C2: Impact of Coupled Climate-Ice Sheet Processes on Past and Future Sea Level Trajectories
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Fabian Schloesser, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 548,773.00

This project by an early career scientist aims to study the coupled climate-
Antarctic and Northern Hemisphere ice sheet response to external forcing (e.g.
orbital) by utilizing an earth modeling system (climate ice sheet modeling,
CLIMS). The numerical simulations will be used to investigate how variations in
greenhouse gas forcing and orbital configurations explain climate and ice sheet
variability on orbital time scales over the last four glacial cycles (800, 000
years). Model results will be compared with ice core climate reconstructions to
help provide a deeper insight into: 1) the underlying processes and the
sensitivity of the Northern Hemisphere/Antarctic ice sheet/climate system to
external forcings; and 2) the mechanisms that couple climate and ice sheets in
both hemispheres. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include a
greater understanding of the processes underlying the coupling between climate
and ice sheets, comprising ice sheet retreat and sea level variations at global
and regional scales (e.g. Hawaii, the US mainland). The project will generate
3-dimensional coupled climate/ice sheet simulations and a paleo-data/model
comparison for the last 800,000 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the
potential to elucidate processes governing the stability of the Antarctic and
Northern Hemispheric ice sheets and their contributions to sea-level and climate
variability during the Late Quaternary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.