* 1903432
* An Effective Potential Approach to the Modeling of Concentrated Dusty Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Ranganathan Gopalakrishnan, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,673.00

Dusty plasmas are comprised of electrons, ions and charged micro/nanometer-sized
grains interacting with each other predominantly through electrostatic forces.
This computational research project will focus on the impact of the space charge
effect -- the distortion of grain-ion forces due to other charges being present
in the vicinity -- on individual grains and on the drag force exerted by ions on
grains. The broader implications of this research will fortify the prediction
capabilities of researchers working on plasma-based semiconductor manufacturing
processes where dust formation is a serious contamination issue, the
understanding of astrophysical processes such as asteroid and planet formation
where highly charged grains coalesce and grow, and modeling of thermonuclear
fusion reactors where wall material ablation may interfere with the sustenance
of the fusion core. The educational and outreach activities of this project will
result in interactive software tools designed for high school and undergraduate
students to develop an intuitive sense about dusty plasmas. As part of an
outreach program called "Girls Experiencing Engineering" to increase the
participation of female students in science and engineering, the project team
will conduct a week-long event that will provide opportunities of programming,
lab demos and scholarly presentations.

A modeling investigation will be carried out to study the effect of a high
concentration of space charge (grains, ions and electrons) and the plasma
electric field on the charging of and the ion drag on an individual grain
immersed in a dusty plasma. The central hypothesis to this effort is that the
complex multi-body electrostatic interaction between grains and ions/electrons
can be captured by an effective potential that is derived by averaging over all
possible configurations of space charge around an individual grain. The
effective potential will be used in a Langevin framework to capture the
interplay of electrostatic interactions (effective potential), neutral drag and
Brownian diffusion. Grain charging and ion drag models will be developed by
analyzing the grain-ion collision time distribution and grain-ion impact force
distribution inferred from Langevin Dynamics simulations. The developed models
will be tested against published experiments and data obtained from PK-4
measurement campaigns of grain charging and ion drag. The project is expected to
unravel basic aspects of correlated grain motion of relevance to dense granular
systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.