* 1903130
* WoU-MMA: Gravitational Wave Coupling with Inhomogeneous Plasma and Asymptotic Theory of Polarization Effects in Curved Spacetime
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* ILYA DODIN, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Scientists have long predicted that disturbances in the fabric of spacetime,
called gravitational waves (GWs), can be generated by binary stars and propagate
across the Universe with speeds close to the speed of light. Recently, these
waves have been detected, resulting in the 2017 Nobel Prize in Physics. This
discovery opens new opportunities to study fascinating astronomical processes
which so far have only been hypothesized, and may help us to better understand
the Universe. Some GWs have been detected in parallel with bursts of
electromagnetic radiation, and correlations between gravitational and
electromagnetic signals can tell us even more than gravitational signals alone.
To infer information from these correlations, we need to understand how GWs and
electromagnetic radiation are coupled in plasmas surrounding GW sources. This
project is aimed towards developing the first comprehensive theory to address
this complicated correlation problem. The project is directly aligned with the
goals of NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics" Big Idea, because understanding of how GW waves affect a plasma is
necessary for astrophysicists to interpret the origin of electromagnetic
radiation from GW sources. The project bridges plasma physics and gravitational
physics and a graduate student will be trained in the new multidisciplinary area
at the intersection of these two fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
allow a rigorous derivation of the plasma susceptibilities with respect to a
combination of metric and electromagnetic oscillations. Using a variational
approach, geometrical-optics equations for linear plasma waves coupled with
metric oscillations will be formulated. In doing so, nonlinear (ponderomotive)
forces produced by gravitational radiation will also be studied. The usual
assumption of transverse polarization for the metric oscillations is not
invoked, so it is expected that the estimates for the GW-plasma coupling
coefficients will be significantly improved. After exploring the resulting
dispersion relations, both analytically and by using particle-in-cell
simulations, the energy transfer from metric oscillations to plasma will be
estimated. As a spinoff, the deviation of electromagnetic rays from null
geodesics in prescribed spacetime (the "spin Hall effect of light") will be
rigorously calculated for a general metric for the first
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.