* 1903645
* Collaborative Research: Multilayer Co-extrusion Processing of Thermally Conductive Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Deyu Li, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 01/31/2024
* USD 271,216.00

Polymer composites are materials systems with two or more components where the
resulting properties can be tailored by the choice and placement of the
individual materials during processing. Polymers are normally poor thermal
conductors, but when combined with thermally conductive nanofillers, can result
in a polymer composite with desirable conductivity for applications such as
microelectronic packaging, substrates for LED-lighting, and solar panel seals.
Multilayer co-extrusion, a novel manufacturing technology, provides a promising
route to fabricate polymer composites of desirable architecture and properties.
Through rational materials design, advanced manufacturing, and structure-
property measurements, this award identifies key factors that affect heat
conduction in polymer composites and establishes a polymer processing approach
to manufacture thermally conductive nanocomposites for applications with
significant socio-economic impact. This highly interdisciplinary research
provides rich education and training opportunities for students of diverse
backgrounds from high-school to graduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multilayer
co-extrusion processing, when combined with proper design of the precursor
materials, could produce nanocomposites with desired microstructure - forming a
nanofiller percolation network to enable efficient heat conduction. However,
several scientific questions remain to be answered, such as optimal nanofiller
characteristics, the most effective way to form percolation networks at a low
filler loading, and the desired thermal contact morphology. This project aims to
fill the knowledge gap through systematic studies covering the entire research
loop of designing materials based on fundamental understanding of multiscale
thermal transport mechanisms, tuning the manufacturing processes to achieve
desired microstructures, and characterizing the thermal conductivity of the
resulting composites to obtain new design insights. The collaborative study
tests the central hypothesis that well-controlled multilayer co-extrusion
processing can produce thermally conductive polymer composites with true
percolation networks formed by direct contacts between anisotropic nanofillers
and an optimal network morphology with low contact thermal resistance. This
research project is a collaboration between a team that explores co-extrusion of
multilayer nanocomposites to generate the desired microstructures and a team
that characterizes thermal transport properties to provide insights into
materials design and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.