* 1903412
* WoU-MMA Collaborative research: Turbulence and Reconnection in Magnetically-Dominated Astrophysical Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Lorenzo Sironi, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 320,511.00

In many astrophysical objects -- like bubbles of magnetic fields and high-energy
particles powered by rapidly spinning neutron stars called pulsar wind nebulae
-- magnetic fields control the overall dynamics of the hot gas of charged
particles, the relativistic astrophysical plasma surrounding the object. In such
astrophysical objects dissipation of magnetic energy via magnetic reconnection
-- a process where magnetic field lines annihilate, releasing their energy to
the particles -- may power the observed high-energy electromagnetic and particle
emission. A number of recent observations such as the Crab Nebula gamma-ray
flares detected by Fermi and AGILE satellites have emphasized the critical role
of magnetic reconnection for the acceleration of the emitting particles in
astrophysical high-energy sources. This work will include projects for
undergraduate students, and the results will be disseminated to high-school
students through dedicated workshops. A new program, "Astro-soup," will be
implemented, where serving food to homeless people in New York City will be
accompanied by discussion on astrophysical topics of relevance for this work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to explain the
puzzling phenomenology of non-thermal emission in the Crab Nebula, the prototype
of pulsar wind nebulae and the most famous source in high-energy astrophysics.
Its flaring and quiescent signatures will be modeled, from radio to high-energy
gamma-rays, in a single physically-grounded scenario based on relativistic
magnetic reconnection. Every stage of the research will combine analytical
approaches with large-scale first-principles particle-in-cell simulations. The
reconnection model of astrophysical high-energy sources will be placed on solid
footing by studying from first principles how reconnection layers are self-
consistently generated by large-scale flows occurring in the Crab Nebula and how
the interplay of reconnection and fluid motions can naturally lead to efficient
particle acceleration. The results will also be relevant for other flaring
sources, like jets from supermassive black holes, where gamma-ray flares have
recently been detected together with neutrino counterparts, thus addressing the
goals of NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics" Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.