* 1903933
* EAGER: Understanding Nano-Cardio Interactions Using 3D Bioprinted Human Heart Tissue
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Vicki Grassian, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

While nanotechnology is revolutionizing many industry sectors and having
significant impact to our daily lives, investigating the potential negative
impacts of nanomaterials becomes ever more important. Most studies that focus on
understanding potential health effects are carried out with cells cultured in a
petri-dish. While such studies have provided a wealth of information about the
importance of nanomaterial's physical, mechanical, and chemical properties in
toxicity to cells, they inform less about the interactions of the nanoparticles
with human tissues and organs. This project aims to create an engineered
3-dimensional human heart tissue model generated by a novel bioprinting
technique, and to use this model to study the impact of nanoparticles on the
heart. Success of this this project will eliminate the need for expensive animal
model systems in studies of tissue and organ toxicity to nanomaterials. The
highly interdisciplinary nature of the project will involve training students
across the traditional boundaries, offering exciting topics including
bioprinting, tissue engineering, nanotechnology, and biological interactions of
nanoparticles. Also, the project will facilitate training broadly across
multiple stages of professional and academic development by including graduate
students, undergraduate students, and high school students of diverse
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, this project will be the first
attempt in the field to investigate how nanoparticles interact with
3-dimensional human heart tissues, created by 3-dimensional bioprinting. The
first research task aims to establish the bioprinted microscale human heart
tissue model and evaluate cell alignment, morphology, gene expression, and
cardiac function. The second research task will focus on the synthesis of a
suite of monodispersed nanoparticles with varying compositions and surface
coatings. Assessment of nano-cardio interactions will be carried out to
investigate the effects of these nanoparticles on cell viability, morphology,
gene expression, and cardiac force output. From this project, the feasibility of
using these engineered human tissue models for nanotoxicity studies will be
established. The project is of high-risk. But if successful, the outcomes of the
project will lead to high reward since it will provide significant insights into
the biocompatibility of nanoparticles to 3-dimensional human tissues. Using
human induced pluripotent stem cells derived cardiomyocytes, the project will
further reveal individual effects of these nanoparticles. The investigators are
well situated and uniquely positioned to tackle these issues. The principal
investigator is a pioneer in 3-dimensional bioprinting with an excellent track
record for cutting-edge research in biomaterials, bioprinting, and tissue
engineering. The co-principal investigator is a leading expert in studying the
environmental and health implications of nanomaterials. Such a unique
collaboration will lead to transformative results. The highly interdisciplinary
nature of the project will enable student training across the traditional
boundaries, offering exciting topics including biomanufacturing, nanotechnology
and biological interactions of nanoparticles. Also, the project will facilitate
training graduate students, undergraduate students, and high school students of
diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.