* 1903357
* Replication of G-quadruplex DNA by translesion polymerases
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Robert Eoff, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,195,811.00

DNA replication is a complex and perilous undertaking for cells because the risk
of damage is greatest when the double helix is unwound for copying. Adding to
this complexity is the fact that some DNA sequences tend to be more difficult to
replicate accurately than others. Notable among these natural barriers to
faithful replication are sequence motifs that adopt non-canonical structures
such as G-quadruplex (G4) DNA. Failure to maintain evolutionarily conserved G4
motifs leads to genetic and epigenetic instability that is associated with
chromosomal damage, cellular dysfunction, neurological diseases, and cancer.
While it is known that special processing is required to maintain G4 integrity,
the precise molecular mechanisms and cellular responses involved remain
important areas of research. This project will investigate the role of a
polymerase called Rev1 in copying and repairing G4 DNA. Successful completion of
the project will provide new knowledge on the bypass of such replication
barriers, a fundamental requirement for all living systems. The project will
also support graduate student training at the University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences (UAMS), undergraduate trainees at Hendrix College, and mentoring of
high-school students in Arkansas through outreach programs housed at UAMS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of the project is to test the hypothesis
that Rev1, an enzyme with an unusual mechanism of action, functions to disrupt
G4 structures, recruit other enzymes to sites of G4-induced replication stress,
and maintain genetic/epigenetic integrity during replication of G4 motifs. The
research will employ biophysical and biochemical approaches, including transient
kinetics and proteomics, as well as cell-based assays to study key aspects of
Rev1 activity that likely facilitate G4 replication and maintenance of the
surrounding chromatin landscape. The outcomes will improve models of DNA
replication and provide mechanistic insights into DNA processing pathways that
have evolved to maintain important structural features of eukaryotic
genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences Division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.