* 1903681
* Deciphering Changes in Atmospheric Nitrous Oxide Concentration During the Last Ice Age Using the Intramolecular Site-Preference of Nitrogen Isotopes
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 399,998.00

The objective of this project is to understand why the nitrous oxide (N2O)
content of the atmosphere was lower during the last ice age (about
20,000-100,000 years ago) than in the subsequent warm period (10,000 years ago
to present) and why it fluctuated during climate changes within the ice age.
Nitrous oxide is a greenhouse gas that contributes to modern global warming. It
is thought that modern warming will in turn cause increases in natural sources
of nitrous oxide from bacteria in soils and the ocean, creating a "positive
feedback." However, the amount these sources will increase is uncertain because
the different ways that nitrous oxide are produced, and how sensitive they are
to warmer climate, are not well known. This project will measure a unique
property of the nitrous oxide molecule in very large ancient air samples from a
glacier in Antarctica. This method can distinguish between different microbial
processes that produce nitrous oxide but it has not been applied yet to the time
periods in question. The data will provide information about how natural climate
changes affect nitrous oxide production. This, in turn, will be useful for
predicting future changes and for understanding why the Earth's climate shifts
from ice ages to warm periods and back again. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Ice-core
records of greenhouse gas isotopic composition are useful for determining past
changes in natural source and sink strengths and for understanding how natural
emissions are linked to climate change. This project will develop two records of
the intramolecular site preference of Nitrogen-15 in N2O. One record spans the
last deglaciation (10,000-21,000 years ago) when atmospheric N2O concentration
rose by 30 percent, and the other record spans millennial-scale climate changes
during the last ice age when N2O varied by smaller amounts (Heinrich Stadial 4
and Dansgaard Oeschger 8, 35,000-41,000 years ago). The records will be used to
understand what changes in the nitrogen cycle caused atmospheric N2O
concentration to vary and what mechanisms link the N2O emissions to climate
change. Ideally, studying the two different time periods will isolate the
millennial climate responses entangled with the full deglacial sequence,
creating a clearer picture of how N2O biogeochemistry responds to climate
change. This work will also allow exploration of an isotopic tracer for in situ
production of N2O that contaminates the atmospheric signal in particularly dusty
ice. The project will use a unique, well-dated suite of ice samples from Taylor
Glacier, Antarctica and continuous flow isotope ratio mass spectrometry on a
custom gas extraction line operated in the Oregon State University
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.