* 1903704
* Fabrication of Gold Nanoparticle-loaded Contact Lenses for Treating Ocular Cystinosis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Anuj Chauhan, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 338,315.00

This grant supports research that advances the fabrication of contact lenses
using nanoparticle-loaded hydrogels with a specific focus on treating ocular
cystinosis. Incorporation of nanoparticles in hydrogels through polymerization
is a scalable approach to controlling physical properties of the polymer, for
example, elasticity, color, refractive index, conductivity and transport
properties such as rates of drug release. This project involves incorporation of
gold nanoparticles into contact lenses, which are made from either hydrogels or
silicone hydrogels. Ocular cystinosis is a disease in which the cornea gets
filled with crystals of cystine, which is the oxidized form of amino acid
cysteine. The crystal formation eventually leads to many ocular complications
including blindness. Typically, the disease is treated by hourly instillation of
cysteamine eye drops. The drug reacts with cystine to dissolve the crystals.
This grant is based on data that show that gold nanoparticles can bind
significant amounts of cystine, thus, if a contact lens containing gold
particles is placed on the eye, cystine diffuses from the cornea towards the
contact lens, leading to crystal dissolution. The availability of nanostructured
contact lenses loaded with gold nanoparticles advances treatment of ocular
cystinosis and, thus, impacts the nation's health and welfare, benefiting
society. The resulting 'GoldInLens' device could lead to drug-less cystinosis
therapy. This research is inter-disciplinary and involves nanomanufacturing,
materials science, transport behavior and pharmacy. The multi-disciplinary
approach allows for broad training of the undergraduate and graduate students,
and broaden participation of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
gold particles are incorporated into the contact lens either by addition to the
monomer mixture followed by polymerization, or by loading the polymerized lens
with chloroauric acid and reduction by sodium citrate to form gold particles in
situ. Fundamental studies explore the microstructure evolution during
polymerization when nanoparticles are added to the monomer mixture, and the
structure of gold aggregates that form in situ. Additionally, the impact of the
particle incorporation on critical contact lens properties such as transparency,
oxygen permeability and elastic modulus are investigated. Synergistic strategies
are explored to maximize cystine capacity including developing contact lens
materials with high capacity for cystine, and then increasing that capacity by
incorporation of gold nanoparticles. The results from this research potentially
have life-changing impact on patients with cystinosis by replacing hourly eye
drop therapy with a contact lens worn for just a few hours each day.
Additionally, the research unveils interesting fundamentals related to
microstructure evolution during polymerization of nano-suspensions and structure
of gold nano-aggregates than can form by using a small pore size hydrogel as a
scaffold. The project advances several technological areas in nanomanufacturing,
nanoscale devices, and particulate dispersions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.