* 1903220
* Collaborative Research: P2C2: Reconstructing Holocene Climate Change in the Southern Hemisphere from Southern Alps Mountain Glaciers and Tree Rings
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* George Denton, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 418,803.00

A major objective of climate science is to evaluate ongoing planetary warming
within the context of past natural variations of the climate system, such as the
well-known Little Ice Age and Dark Ages cold periods, and Medieval and Roman
warm periods, as well as warmer-than-present conditions in some regions
registered during the early Holocene, about 8,000 to 10,000 years ago. These
past climatic anomalies are best documented from the Northern Hemisphere; thus,
it is not clear whether they constituted global fluctuations in the atmospheric
heat budget or if they were regional in nature. This question has fundamental
implications for understanding the underlying drivers of natural climate
variability, and for determining whether industrial-age warming has yet exceeded
the envelope of climate variability registered over the past 10,000 years. This
project establishes the record of Holocene climate variations, based on glaciers
and temperature-sensitive trees, in the Southern Alps of New Zealand - on the
opposite side of the planet from the North Atlantic region. Mountain glaciers
are among Earth's most sensitive climate recorders on timescales of decades and
longer. Worldwide recession of mountain glaciers is an iconic illustration of
global warming. Glacial landforms afford physical evidence of past glacier
extent, and this effort will employ state-of-the-art cosmogenic dating
techniques on those landforms to establish precise and accurate chronologies of
glacier changes during and prior to the period of recorded observations. This
work incorporates tree-ring chronologies of temperature-sensitive South Island
species that afford continuous records of climatic fluctuations on annual
timescales. Altogether, chronologies of glacier extent and tree growth will be
used to develop a comprehensive record of past temperature variation in the
Southern Alps for comparison to equivalent records in the Northern Hemisphere.
The resultant temperature reconstruction will also provide a key metric for
evaluating a suite of global climate and earth-system models developed by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory, some of which are now being used for weather forecasting by the
National Weather Service. This effort will afford field-based educational
experiences for the next generation of scientists and science journalists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal of paleoclimate research is to understand patterns
and drivers of natural climate variations during the Holocene. Documentation of
natural climate variability on orbital, centennial, and shorter frequencies
provides a contextual framework for modeling ongoing and future warming due to
the effects of increasing atmospheric CO2. The most recent major natural
climatic variations in the North Atlantic regime prior to the ongoing warming
were those of the Roman Warm Period (~250 B.C. to ~A.D. 400), Dark Ages Cold
Period (~A.D. 450 to ~A.D. 950), Medieval Warm Period (~A.D. 950 to ~A.D. 1150)
and the Little Ice Age (~A.D. 1150 to ~A.D. 1850). These late-Holocene
temperature variations are documented by highly resolved records of glacier-
length variation in the European Alps, as well as independent, annually resolved
tree-ring-based regional summer temperature reconstructions. In addition,
European glaciers monitored a period of reduced ice extent during the early
Holocene at the same time as tree-line altitudes were higher. Both observations
signify summers that were warmer than those of today. But it is not yet clear
whether these climate signatures were global or regional in scope; thus, the
underlying mechanisms remain uncertain. This work will address this problem by
developing a precise 10Be surface-exposure chronology of moraines constructed by
glaciers during the Holocene in the Southern Alps of New Zealand - on the
opposite side of the planet from the European Alps. The researchers will also
develop chronology of Holocene ice retraction by 14C dating recently deglaciated
organic remains. Investigators employ a well-calibrated glaciological model to
convert these moraine chronologies into a glacier-derived record of temperature
over the past two millennia. The proposed glacier chronology will be synthesized
with an independent and complementary record of regional summer temperatures for
the past 2000 years derived from South Island silver pine ring widths. The
glacier and tree-ring records will be used as benchmarks to investigate results
from the GFDL ESM2M preindustrial climate simulations. On the basis of this
glacier, dendro, and modeling approach, the goal of this work is to determine
whether Holocene climate variations were global or not, and therefore improve
understanding of underlying drivers and the scope of natural climate variability
in light of ongoing planetary warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.