* 1903723
* Collaborative Research: Vertical gradients in Southern Ocean Radiocarbon across the major climate transitions of the last 30,000 years
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Christopher Charles, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,934.00

The Southern Ocean holds disproportionate influence in setting atmospheric CO2
variability and carbon storage in the deep ocean because it is a region
featuring both upwelling and deep-water formation. Consequently, considerable
effort has been devoted to understanding the Southern Ocean conditions and
processes that ultimately led to lower atmospheric CO2 during the last ice age.
Radiocarbon is in principle the most diagnostic tracer for ocean/atmosphere
carbon cycling over this time period. However, the existing body of radiocarbon
data for the Southern Ocean is still limited temporally and spatially, while
also suffering from some essential uncertainties that preclude firm conclusions
about carbon cycling during the last ice age. This project involves a
coordinated program of radiocarbon measurements in three distinct archives of
Southern Ocean oceanographic change that span the last 30,000 years. These
archives, including both marine sediment sequences and deep-sea coral samples,
are located so as to capture the surface, intermediate and deep-water carbon
cycle response to climate forcing. The objective of this program is to extend
existing radiocarbon measurements while also directly resolving some of the
principal uncertainties that currently limit the application of existing
radiocarbon observations. The program will serve as a natural platform for
engagement of underrepresented students to STEM disciplines and will include
undergraduate and masters-level students recruited from local community colleges
and state universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the project
includes i.) planktonic-benthic foraminiferal radiocarbon age measurements in a
newly acquired sediment sequence off Mozambique (IODP Site U1477) that features
exceptionally high resolution; the bottom water at this location is recently
ventilated water subducted just south of the Subtropical Convergence, and,
therefore, the benthic foraminiferal radiocarbon variability monitors that of
the sub-Antarctic surface ocean; ii.) U-series/radiocarbon age pairs in a set of
deep-sea coral samples collected from intermediate water depths off Tasmania;
the radiocarbon variability expressed in this series of samples is intended as a
direct comparison to that of the Mozambique foraminiferal sequence; iii.)
extension of existing (but not yet definitive) planktonic-benthic foraminiferal
age depth pairs in abyssal South Atlantic sedimentary sequences; the benthic
foraminiferal radiocarbon variability at these sites should reflect the deep
branch of the Meridional Overturning Circulation (MOC). The intention is to
provide new observations that, both on their own and by unlocking the potential
of existing measurements, will serve as direct tests of models of the
relationship between climate forcing and carbon
cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.