* 1903308
* Connecting Bond-breaking and Healing Kinetics to the Deformation and Fracture of Tough Hydrogels
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Chung-Yuen Hui, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2024
* USD 637,817.00

A hydrogel is a soft material that is mostly water. One can think of a hydrogel
as a three dimensional "fishnet" consisting of gelatin molecular chains
(network) swollen by water drawn into the net. Hydrogels have many current
applications such as contact lenses and as scaffolding materials for tissue
engineering. Potential future applications may include artificial cartilage and
"muscles" for soft robots. A shortcoming of simple hydrogels is that they are
easy to fail; this severely limits their practical use in load bearing
components. In recent years, chemists have invented hydrogels that are highly
resistant to fracture. The network of this new class of hydrogels consists of
molecular chains linked to each other by different types of connectors (bonds).
These connectors can be permanent or temporary. Temporary connectors can break
and reform. This process dissipates energy which contributes to resistance to
fracture and they also allow the gel to heal. Currently, engineers do not have
the predictive tools to determine how components made of these hydrogels change
shape under load and when they break. This project will develop such predictive
tools. The end product will be a quantitative method and a computer code which
allows engineers to design and analyze components made of these hydrogels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two long standing problems in the time dependent mechanics
of deformation and fracture of soft materials are: (1) three dimensional large
deformation nonlinear viscoelasticity and (2) efficient integration of these
three dimensional nonlinear viscoelastic equations. A new idea to be explored by
this research is that nonlinear viscoelasticity shields the crack from high
stresses and thus enhances toughness. This project will address these issues by:
(a) performing experiments on a tough Polyampholyte hydrogel, (b) developing
quantitative models relating nonlinear viscoelastic behavior to bond breaking
and reformation kinetics, (c) developing experimental methods to discover and to
quantify crack shielding and (d) developing efficient time integration schemes
to solve the nonlinear viscoelastic equations. The project will advance the
field of mechanics by building a framework for development of time dependent
constitutive and fracture models that are linked directly to the microstructure
and that can be used in practical finite element
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.