* 1903168
* Advancing US Participation in the International Synoptic Arctic Survey
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Carin Ashjian, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 73,472.00

This project supports an international workshop to be held at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, USA in May 2019 to
continue planning the international Synoptic Arctic Survey (SAS) program.
Through a series of coordinated international research cruises anticipated for
the summers of 2020 and 2021, in different regions of the Arctic Ocean, SAS will
provide important baseline information about the Arctic ocean ecosystem, carbon
system, and physical environment necessary to understand and predict the impacts
of ongoing environmental change on the Arctic. This workshop will plan
coordinated field sampling, international data sharing, education including
graduate student participation, post field-season data synthesis, public
outreach, and involvement of indigenous communities. The workshop will sponsor
the participation of a group of early career scientists. US scientists are key
participants in the planning of the SAS and will lead this workshop, promoting
US leadership in Arctic science. The SAS will engage the general public in
Arctic research, increase science literacy and will include multiple audiences
(early career, educators, under-represented groups) in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) research and careers. The outcomes of the SAS field
effort will provide baseline understanding of the Arctic system that can be used
by national and international policy makers to effectively plan and manage human
activities in the Arctic, such as transportation, resource development, and,
potentially, commercial fishing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of the
Arctic Ocean ecosystem and carbon system, their dependencies on physical
drivers, and their interactions with neighboring shelves and ocean regions
remains inadequate to project how environmental change may modify these systems
on a Pan-Arctic scale. The Synoptic Arctic Survey (SAS) is an international
program envisioned to mount a coordinated, multi-nation, field-based effort on a
Pan Arctic scale quasi-synoptically over one-two summers to achieve the baseline
understanding of the fundamental structure and function of the linked carbon-
ecosystem-physical systems that will permit detection of ongoing and future
changes. The SAS is focused on a single overarching question, "What are the
present state and major ongoing transformations of the Arctic marine system?".
The field effort would provide the parameters needed to project future
trajectories of change both conceptually and through coupled physical-chemical-
biological modeling. It is envisioned that the effort, or parts of the effort,
would be continued on decadal scales to detect change. This grant provides
resources to host an international, open-to-all 2-day planning workshop and a
follow on 1-day planning and writing workshop for the US SAS Scientific Steering
Committee to be held in Woods Hole, MA in May 2019. The overall goals of the
workshop include promoting interest and participation in the SAS from US and
international scientists (especially early career scientists), designing a
concrete international implementation that expands on the present international
Science and Implementation Plan, discuss the planned years of deployment, and
engage interested US and international program managers. For the US only,
further goals include codifying and writing a US Implementation Plan and
identifying a strategy for activities and proposals that would lead to US
participation in the SAS. The planned outcomes and products of the workshop
include a workshop report, a draft management plan, a blueprint/plan for
nurturing the next generation of scientists, and a US implementation plan.
Funding to support the participation of early career scientists would be
provided both by this grant and by grants from International Arctic Science
Committee Working Groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.