* 1903302
* NSF Student Support for the Doctoral Consortium at the 12th Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM 2019)
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Carsten Eickhoff, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 10/31/2019
* USD 18,450.00

This award supports 8 U.S.-based graduate students to participate in Doctoral
Consortium held in conjunction with the 12th Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM) International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM 2019), held
in Melbourne, Australia, February 11-15, 2019. The consortium allows doctoral
students to interact with established researchers and with other students,
through presentations, question-answer sessions, panel discussions, and invited
presentations. Each participant will give a short presentation on their research
and will receive feedback from at least one faculty mentor as well as from
fellow students. The consortium will further include activities led by the
faculty ? such as a panel discussion ? to give students more information about
the transition into the job market after graduation. Seasoned researchers will
share lessons of research and life in academia and industry. WSDM conference
seeks to support a diverse body of students and foster development on a new
generation of researchers and practitioners in the important areas of web search
and data mining.

WSDM is a highly selective conference that includes invited talks, refereed full
papers and poster sessions. WSDM publishes original, high-quality papers related
to search and data mining on the Web and the Social Web, with an emphasis on
practical yet principled novel models of search and data mining, algorithm
design and analysis, economic implications, and in-depth experimental analysis
of accuracy and performance. Recent WSDM conferences have been attracting
approximately 600 participants with equal numbers coming from academic and
industrial research labs from the IR, NLP, data mining and ML communities. WSDM
proceedings are available via the ACM Digital Library.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.