* 1903601
* P2C2: New Analyses of Paleo-Seasonality and Climate Variability Using Fossil Wood
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Brian Schubert, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2023
* USD 292,358.00

This project aims to leverage existing fossil wood specimens and a newly
developed model to generate new data on seasonality and climate variability
across three field sites: 1) Banks Island, Arctic Canada (early Eocene); 2)
Nanning Basin, China (late Oligocene); and 3) Finish Stream, Siberia (late
Miocene). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 100 fossil specimens are available
from previous collections at these sites. Preliminary data show sufficient
cellulose preserved in these fossils is suitable for high-resolution oxygen
isotope analysis. These new data, combined with published carbon isotope
records, allow for new quantitative estimates of a full suite of seasonal
climate parameters (summer precipitation, winter precipitation, cold month mean
temperature, warm month mean temperature) at annual resolution. &lt;br/&gt;Such
data will allow for changes in seasonality to be assessed across multiple levels
of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations for both Arctic and monsoon
climates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers plan to generate new high-
resolution stable isotope datasets to test: 1) inter-annual variability in the
East Asian Monsoon during the late Oligocene, when atmospheric CO2
concentrations were similar to projected late 21st century levels, and 2) how
winter versus summer temperatures change with increases in mean annual
temperature, across both subtropical and Arctic environments. Recent modeling
work predicts changes in precipitation timing and intensity occur under warmer
mean annual temperatures, and greater wintertime versus summertime warming,
which is amplified in Arctic environments; however, proxies generally lack
suitable resolution to test these hypotheses in the fossil
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include new
paleoclimate records at sub-annual resolution during the Eocene, Oligocene and
Miocene. These high-resolution proxies are rare and will provide new information
about inter-annual climate variability and seasonality at high and low latitudes
during time intervals with different atmospheric CO2 concentration. Such data
will benefit proxy and modeling paleoclimate communities. The project will
support one PhD and one undergraduate student as well as researchers at various
career-stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.