* 1903796
* Conference: Royal Society of London Meeting on Molluscan Genomics to be held September 16-17, 2019 in Milton Keynes, UK
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2019
* Maurine Neiman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2019
* USD 14,119.00

This award will support attendance by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers at the Royal Society of London Meeting on Molluscan Genomics, to be
held September 16-17, 2019 at Chicheley Hall in Milton Keynes, UK. This meeting,
entitled "Pearls of wisdom: Synergizing leadership and expertise in molluscan
genomics", is organized as one of the Royal Society's Theo Murphy meetings and
is designed to bring together scientists from around the world to present and
discuss new research on diverse topics that promise to reveal important links
between genomics and the biology of mollusks. The format of the meeting is a
combination of talks and posters, which will promote scientific exchange in both
formal and informal settings. Early-career participants will benefit from
engagement as speakers and discussion leaders in general sessions and as
presenters in a special poster session featuring the work of junior scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific focus of the meeting will be on four
themes: diversity of molluscan life, technological advances in molluscan
genomics, challenges in molluscan genome assembly, and advances, insights and
problems addressable with molluscan genomics. These topics were chosen to
catalyze new, significant advances in understanding the biology of mollusks,
which have high importance from ecological, economic, and medical perspectives.
Concerted efforts to include participants who are relatively young scientists in
the field will help ensure that the conference meets one of its goals, e.g., to
develop a new cadre of researchers prepared to move the science forward. The
meeting will provide an excellent venue for graduate student and postdoctoral
participants, including those from underrepresented groups, to share their
latest results with researchers from the U.S. and abroad and to receive feedback
on their work from experts in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.