* 1903828
* Discovering the First Exoplanets Around White Dwarf Stars with the Zwicky Transient Facility
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Keaton Bell, Bell, Keaton John
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 298,702.00

Keaton Bell is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship
to conduct a program of research and education at the University of Washington.
He will use data from the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) to attempt to make the
first discoveries of extrasolar planets (exoplanets) orbiting white dwarf (WD)
stars --- collapsed stars, which are no longer producing energy from nuclear
fusion like normal stars, but are glowing faintly from residual heat. Bell will
determine what fraction of WDs host exoplanets, and study the populations of WD
exoplanets, which will lead him to a better understanding of how planetary
systems survive the collapse of their star. In conjunction with his research, he
will mentor college freshman students from groups underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, and he will help train
astronomy graduate students in methods of data science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed scientific program seeks to characterize the
properties of individual WD planetary systems and investigate the physical
mechanisms that affect planets during post-main-sequence evolution. Bell
proposes to identify candidate planet transits by searching the ZTF data set for
statistically significant dips in measured flux. Strong candidates will be
confirmed and characterized with follow-up photometric and spectroscopic
observations. The educational component of his work will help promote a more
capable and diverse STEM workforce by providing students with valuable skills in
preparation for possible careers in science or
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.