* 1903362
* Control of Volumetric Ignition and Thermal-Chemical Instability in Weakly Ionized Plasma for High Pressure Ultra-lean Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Yiguang Ju, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Advanced fuel-lean combustion engine technologies can increase the energy
efficiency and reduce the carbon emissions. However, the development of this
technology is hindered by the ignition failure in fuel-lean mixtures. To achieve
successful ignition in fuel-lean mixtures, understanding of the mechanism of
plasma reaction and propagation in engines is critical. However, the coupling
between fuel chemistry and plasma-associated reactions in a combustible mixture
has not been studied in detail. In this investigation, a collaborative team will
develop new theoretical, computational, and experimental models to understand
the fundamental mechanism of thermal-chemical processes occurring in combustible
mixtures. If successful, the proposed investigation will provide a new well-
validated theoretical model to simulate plasma-driven reactions in an engine,
especially under ultra-lean fueling conditions with reduced carbon and pollutant
emissions. The plasma model developed can also contribute to advancing other
research topics, such as fuel reforming and materials synthesis. The research
will also provide career development opportunity for graduate and undergraduate
students in plasma sciences, combustion, sustainable energy, and laser imaging,
and augment the Sustainable Energy certificate program for Princeton
undergraduate students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will develop: (1)
a new thermal-chemical instability model to understand the mechanism of kinetic
coupling between plasma and n-pentane combustion chemistry in plasma
contraction, (2) advanced laser diagnostic methods to characterize the dynamics
and chemical process of plasma instability in a combustible mixture at elevated
pressure, (3) a validated three-dimensional computational model to simulate
thermal-chemical instability of weakly ionized plasma in a combustion mixture,
and (4) a novel volumetric ignition technique by controlling plasma instability
using an energy cascading discharge array for ultra-lean ignition. The resulting
new thermal-chemical instability model will significantly advance the
understanding of the kinetic impact of plasma-combustion chemistry on plasma
instability in engines. The experimental data of electron temperature, number
density, and electric field will provide critical validation targets for the
theory and numerical models. The novel volumetric ignition technique by using an
instability controlled energy cascading discharge array will provide an
innovative method for efficient ignition at fuel lean
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.