* 1903457
* CMMI-EPSRC: Response to CO2 Exposure of Concrete with Natural Supplementary Cementitious Materials (RENACEM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Lynn Katz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2023
* USD 483,000.00

This award is supported under the NSF 18-067, NSF Engineering-UKRI Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council, funding opportunity. Concrete is the
most versatile building material in the United States, used to construct and
repair buildings, transportation systems, and energy infrastructure. The
development, maintenance, and repair of concrete infrastructure is vital to
national growth, prosperity, citizen safety, and welfare. Concrete is a complex,
composite material, made of a mixture of mineral aggregates, water, portland
cement, and additives that enhance its properties in the initial fluid generated
upon mixing and in its final hardened state. Most modern concrete mixtures
contain supplementary cementitious materials (SCMs) that partially replace
portland cement to improve concrete long-term durability, lower costs, and
reduce CO2 emissions associated with concrete production. The most commonly used
SCMs are waste-derived, especially residual ashes from coal-fired power plants.
However, changes in industrial processes and increasing demand for SCMs are
leading to a shortage of high quality, waste-derived SCMs. Natural SCMs, such as
calcined clays and volcanic minerals, are a promising alternative to waste-
derived SCMs, and their use is rising. Advantages of natural SCMs stem in large
part from their chemistry and mineralogy; they are more homogeneous than waste-
derived materials, which aids in quality control. Moreover, they also provide
economic, environmental, and performance benefits. The use of SCMs, however,
also has a downside, i.e., the propensity to increase chemical carbonation
reactions between the concrete and atmospheric CO2, which can result in
corrosion of steel reinforcement, loss of strength, and cracking. Therefore, it
is important to develop a better understanding of the carbonation processes in
concrete containing natural SCMs in order to identify materials and mixtures
that that impart benefits without sacrificing performance. By combining research
expertise and resources between institutions in the United States and the United
Kingdom, this project will investigate interactions between concrete containing
new and promising sources of natural SCMs and CO2, new methods of testing and
damage detection, and new strategies to minimize the impact of the degradation.
This research can lead to the production of higher quality, lower environmental-
impact concrete. As such, this research can have a broad impact on the lifespan
and sustainability of concrete infrastructure, which is critical for
infrastructure globally, sustainability, and workforce development. National
prosperity depends on a global, sustainable approach to resource utilization and
protection. Students working on this project will gain valuable international
research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considering that the construction
field is increasing its use of natural SCMs in concrete, understanding the
contribution of natural SCMs toward carbonation degradation will be critical for
the viability of this technology. Furthermore, manipulating the composition of
the systems to reduce or prevent carbonation is possible, but has not previously
been explored. This Response to CO2 Exposure of Concrete with Natural
Supplementary Cementitious Materials (RENACEM) project is a joint United States-
United Kingdom collaboration among researchers at the University of Texas at
Austin, University of Leeds, and University of Sheffield to elucidate the
fundamental science controlling the long-term performance of concrete produced
with natural SCMs. This project will investigate the chemical interactions
between concrete and atmospheric CO2 and its transport to identify meaningful
methodologies for their assessment. This will underpin the adoption of new
methods for testing carbonation of concrete with natural SCMs and new predictive
models. RENACEM comprises five work packages (WPs). WP1 will focus on advanced
characterization of natural SCMs and the development of materials with reduced
carbonation susceptibility. WP2 will establish the physicochemical mechanisms
governing carbonation of natural SCM-based materials, interlinking their
mineralogy, phase assemblages, and microstructure with their response to natural
and accelerated carbonation. WP3 will investigate in situ monitoring of pH and
relative humidity changes upon CO2 exposure of natural SCM-based concrete using
advanced fiber optic sensing networks. WP4 will move beyond the state of the art
in modeling of carbonation to bring new predictive capabilities for both
carbonation rate and extent, including the total extent of CO2 uptake by
concrete in service. Finally, WP5 will focus on project management, including
risk and progress assessment, and implementation of planned impact
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.