* 1903416
* Solar Chromospheric Plasma Turbulence and Heating Driven by Neutral-Plasma Coupling
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Yakov Dimant, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 404,531.00

Most of the light reaching Earth originates at the "surface" of the sun, a
region called the photosphere. The regions immediately above this surface, the
solar chromosphere and corona, create most of the dangerous Ultraviolet (UV) and
X-ray radiation. These regions also generate the solar wind, a stream of charged
particles, a plasma, that reach the Earth at speeds in excess of 400km/s. Both
the rapidly changing radiation and the solar wind create space weather that
results in hazards for spacecraft, astronauts, and also have a number of
important impacts on Earth by inducing current surges and disrupting
communication. A long-standing mystery has prevented scientists from
understanding and accurately modeling the solar atmosphere: a short distance
above the photosphere, the chromosphere's temperature jumps up by almost a
factor of two, providing some of the energy that creates the even hotter corona
and solar wind. This project will investigate previously unexplored physical
processes in the solar chromosphere and develop a more complete physics-based
explanation of the origin of the heating. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will examine whether neutral solar fluid flows, emerging from the photosphere,
can transfer sufficient energy into plasma turbulence to heat the chromosphere
in order to account for the observed UV spectra. This requires five linked
research tasks: (1) solving for plasma drifts and fields when a convecting
neutral gas pushes it across magnetic field lines; (2) analyzing the theory of
streaming instabilities applicable to the collisional plasma found there; (3)
performing a series of kinetic simulations to explore the nonlinear and thermal
properties of the resulting turbulence; (4) incorporating the resulting electron
heating into a radiative transport code in order to evaluate its impact on
chromospheric radiance; and (5) comparing the resulting predictions with
observations. This grant will provide opportunities to recruit and train student
researchers in plasma and solar physics, simulations, and modeling. This
research, the sophisticated simulators, and these students will have an impact
far beyond the duration of this grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.