* 1903144
* Novel Methods for Radical and Electrophilic Amination
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Justin Lopchuk, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute Hospital Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 449,102.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports a project led
by Professor Justin Lopchuk at the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center. He is
developing new methods for organic synthesis. This project focuses on the
formation carbon-nitrogen bonds. Many important chemicals, especially
pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, and materials, have carbon-nitrogen bonds. The
new methods emphasize reagents that have been overlooked in previous work. Of
particular interest is the use nitrogen-containing precursors with unusual
electron counts. Another class of reagents features small rings containing one
or two nitrogen atoms. In addition to the laboratory research, Professor Lopchuk
is leading several efforts to broaden the impact of his work. He is organizing
workshops to facilitate collaborations and educating nonchemists about the value
of organic and medicinal chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen-containing
compounds are ubiquitous in nature and comprise the majority of small molecule
pharmaceuticals as well many of those in development. Supported by the Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Justin Lopchuk at the H.
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center is leading a program to invent new routes to carbon-
nitrogen (C-N) bonds. Despite the considerable recent advances, both
electrophilic amination and radical amination remain challenging, especially in
the context of intermolecular reactions. The goal of this project is the design
and synthesis of a series of strained bench-stable reagents for the required
electrophilic or radical aminations. These reagents are used in a diverse array
of reactions and give versatile intermediates. The goal is the rapid preparation
of a wide range of high value nitrogen-containing compounds including amines,
hydrazines, and heterocycles. These components are relevant to medicinal
chemistry, chemical biology, agrochemistry and materials science. The broader
impacts of this work starts with the creation of a novel compound screening
library for drug discovery. An interactive workshop on synthetic organic
chemistry is being developed to facilitate communication among staff throughout
the Moffitt Cancer Center and the University of South
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.