* 1903206
* International Conference on Effective Methods in Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Anton Leykin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

The international conference "Effective Methods in Algebraic Geometry" (MEGA)
2019 will be held at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain, during June
17-21 2019. It is a biennial international conference series focused on
computational algebraic geometry. The conference website is at
https://eventos.ucm.es/12097/detail/mega-2019.html. MEGA 2019 is a registered
satellite meeting of ICIAM 2019, The International Congress on Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, to be held at Valencia (Spain), during July 15?19, 2019.
Moreover, directly after MEGA 2019, the workshop MEGAR (Effective Methods in
Real Algebraic Geometry, June 21-22) will take place at the same
venue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is focused on research, with the
intent to bring the world experts on computational algebraic geometry together
with students and researchers from related areas, including commutative algebra,
differential algebra and algebraic differential equations, real algebraic
geometry, algebraic number theory, differential geometry, group theory, Lie
algebras, representation theory, differential topology and applications in these
fields. Every two years, the community meets to outlay a comprehensive picture
of the most recent developments in computational algebraic geometry, to foster
interactions between algebraic geometry and other areas, and to provide ample
mentoring opportunities for early career mathematicians interested in these
topics. Early career researchers can submit their work through the open
submission process, for an opportunity for a presentation as a talk or a poster.
To disseminate the results presented in this meeting we plan to post all
accepted submissions as well as slides from presentations on the conference's
website. The website will also have a link to posters. Finally, and following
the tradition of MEGA, we will publish conference proceedings as a special issue
of the Journal of Symbolic Computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.