* 1903654
* North American High Order Methods Conference (NAHOMCon)
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Gustaaf Jacobs, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 25,000.00

This award provides participant support to the North American High Order Methods
Conference (NAHOMCon), to be held June 2-5, 2019 at the San Diego State
University. The conference will serve as a forum for computational scientists,
mathematicians, scientists and engineers to share ideas and techniques on and
further the state of the art of advanced high order methods used to solve a
broad range of scientific and engineering problems. American competitiveness
depends heavily on technological advances.Yet American research on high order
methods has been at a disadvantage compared to that in European or other nations
due to the lack of conferences devoted to the subject. This conference will have
broad impacts by providing a forum for researchers on high order numerical
methods for the solution of scientific and engineering problems of strategic
importance. It also recognizes the need for younger researchers, women and
minorities to have a forum in the US. More details about the conference can be
found at https://www.nahomcon19.sdsu.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High order
approximations to PDEs, be they finite difference, finite element or spectral,
have needed advantages over lower order methods. Of course, they have lower
errors for a given number of degrees of freedom. But also they are usually
designed to have lower dissipation and dispersion errors. Their high resolution
makes them more suitable for intrinsic multiscale problems such as turbulence
computations, chemically reacting flows and nuclear fusion reaction. The NSF
currently supports numerous research projects on high order methods, but no
nationwide conferences are in place that are focused on their study. The
proposed conference topics are based on the general thrusts of these projects
and are the forefront of high order method development. They include provably
stable schemes, fast solvers for high order methods, methods for complex
geometries, efficient and parallel implementations. Applications are considered
in a range of fields including geoscience, fluid mechanics, combustion, solid
mechanics, electromagnetics, biomedical, and image
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.