* 1903312
* Unsteady Aerodynamics of Flapping Wings in Gusty Environments: Gust-mitigation Performance, Flow Physics, and Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Bo Cheng, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2023
* USD 429,919.00

Micro Air Vehicles (MAVs) have a growing role in a broad range of civil and
military operations. However, it is still challenging for them to fly robustly
in natural or human-constructed environments, where they routinely encounter
various forms of unsteady ambient flow or wind gusts. Flying animals such as
insects and birds can attenuate the adverse effects of unsteady ambient flow
with much greater success, due to the inherent aerodynamic capability of their
flapping wings. Therefore, this project aims to establish the fundamental
science underlying the fluid dynamics of flapping wings interacting with
unsteady flow structures. This project will quantify the flow patterns and force
production of flapping wings in interaction with various wind gusts to
understand the best behavior for flapping wings to overcome the ambient flow
disturbances. The results of this research will provide a foundation of
scientific knowledge rather than mere intuition to develop better MAVs that can
quickly recover from atmospheric gusts. Because of the cross-disciplinary and
collaborative efforts in experimental fluid dynamics and robotics, this award
will also expose undergraduate students to graduate-level research, thereby
inspiring them to pursue advanced degrees or careers in STEM majors. Moreover,
through K-12 education and outreach activities, this project will increase the
public awareness and underrepresented groups engagements in science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate
the performance and the flow physics of flapping wings in interactions with
unsteady ambient flow structures. This will be enabled by 1) parsing the complex
wing-gust interaction problem into the interactions between four canonical types
of gust structures and flapping wings in four kinematic configurations; and 2)
coalescing tools in experimental and theoretical fluid dynamics with
reinforcement learning methods. This research will first use parametric
experimental studies to provide a comprehensive quantification of the gust-
mitigation performance of flapping wings. Then, it will develop fundamental
understandings of the flow physics pertinent to the interactions between wing-
generated and ambient flow structures, in terms of vortex shedding pattern,
vorticity transport dynamics, and aerodynamic force production. Effects of
three-dimensionality and stability of the leading edge vortex (LEV) on gust-
mitigation and vorticity dynamics will be studied. Finally, this research will
use reinforcement learning methods and hardware-in-the-loop optimization to
optimize the gust-mitigation performance of bioinspired robotic flapping
wings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.