* 1903972
* An Adaptive System Identification Approach Using Mobile Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Jason Rife, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2023
* USD 527,846.00

This project will benefit national interests by conducting research that
provides a transformative approach to enable the identification of large
dynamical systems with a small number of sensors. The results will be useful for
applications like the damage diagnosis and performance assessment of bridges,
pipelines, buildings, wind turbine towers, and other structures. In particular,
the iterative approach to sensor placement will provide an unprecedented
capability for system identification and localization of damage, feeding into a
decision support framework to guide effective structural repair. This capability
has the potential to speed current inspection processes for civil infrastructure
and reduce costs by hundreds of millions of dollars annually. An integral part
of this project is the inspiration and education of undergraduate and graduate
students in the areas of system identification, feedback control, robotics, and
structural engineering. This project will also reach K-12 students through
Tufts' Student Teacher Outreach Mentorship Program. Participation of students
from minorities is a priority and will be promoted by working directly with
established programs at Tufts University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this
project a novel system identification framework will be developed, where
identification is implemented using sequential data processing, and where mobile
sensors are redeployed iteratively to enhance the accuracy of the identified
system model. For system identification with mobile sensors, Bayesian inference-
based identification and reinforcement learning techniques will be employed to
find the future locations of sensors based on the feedback obtained from the
current sensor placement. The methodology in this project will also include a
path-planning component and a data-fusion component. The path-planning component
balances modeling accuracy with energy and time constraints to determine the
best candidate locations for data acquisition at each iterative step, while the
data-fusion component will determine how to combine prior models with new data
as efficiently as possible, considering resource constraints on communication
and computation at the mobile sensors. The capabilities of the project's
approach will finally be evaluated on a case study for the envisioned structural
diagnosis application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.