* 1903749
* International Continental Scientific Drilling Program (ICDP) - FY2019-2023
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Ulrich Harms, HELMHOLTZ-ZENTRUM POTSDAM - DEUTSCHES GEOFORSCHUNGSZENTRUM GFZ
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 11/30/2023
* USD 5,000,000.00

Scientific drilling is an indispensable tool of modern Earth Science research
because it provides the only means of obtaining direct information about on-
going processes below the surface of the Earth. Large international teams and
multi-source funding are necessary to conduct drilling projects of this scale.
This award will support the United States' involvement in international
continental scientific drilling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-national efforts in
continental scientific drilling have been coordinated by the International
Continental Scientific Drilling Program (ICDP) since 1996. The concept for this
program was developed in response to the international geosciences community's
need for scientific drilling as an essential tool to achieve a better
understanding of fundamental Earth processes and structure. ICDP fosters
proposals through international workshops that assist researchers in the
development of a full drilling proposal. To date, 86 such workshops have been
funded and have resulted in a total of 37 ICDP-supported and successfully
executed drilling projects. Thematically, the activities have covered various
geoscientific key challenges focused on paleoclimate investigations, earthquake
and volcano research, impact events, geodynamics, and potential energy
resources. Under the umbrella of the science program, ICDP addresses key
societal challenges in hazards, resources, and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.