* 1903478
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Indian Ocean El Nino Hypothesis
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Pedro Di Nezio, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 09/30/2020
* USD 398,911.00

This research will explore whether the Indian Ocean could sustain climate
variability resembling El Nino under continued greenhouse warming. Testing this
hypothesis is important because the activation of such a mode could drive large
changes in year-to-year variability and hydrological extremes over the densely
populated Indian Ocean rim. This mode of climate variability has not been
observed in historical data, and therefore paleoclimate reconstructions are
required to study conditions that favor its emergence, its spatial
characteristics, and the ability of climate models to simulate it realistically.
According to climate simulations, the activation of this mode depends on the
state of the Indian Ocean, which currently does not exhibit upwelling nor has a
shallow thermocline (the zone of the ocean water-column where temperatures
rapidly decrease with depth) -- features needed to support strong, large-scale
interactions between the ocean and atmosphere. Paleoclimate records indicate
that these features could have existed in the geological past, particularly
during the Last Glacial Maximum, roughly 19,000-21,000 years before present,
albeit with cooler average conditions. Accordingly, simulations indicate greater
cooling in the eastern Indian Ocean concurrent with strong upwelling and a
shallow thermocline, which is reflected in the paleo-data as an altered basin-
wide (east-west) temperature gradient. Preliminary data also reveal greatly
increased seasonal and year-to-year temperature variations in this region,
consistent with a state favoring stronger air-sea interactions. Climate
simulations of this interval show that this increase in variability could have
been caused by the activa- tion of the hypothesized "Indian Ocean El Nino".
Throughout this project, the researchers will further test this hypothesis by
generating new datasets of seasonal and year-to-year climate variability as well
as investigating new model simulations that will help determine whether, and
when, this mode will emerge in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
builds on preliminary model-data investigations that indicate dramatically
intensified seasonal and interannual climate variability in the eastern Indian
Ocean during the Last Glacial Maximum. These data suggest that changes in
oceanic conditions similar to those predicted for the future could cause the
emergence of a presently unobserved mode of climate variability in the Indian
Ocean that resembles modern El Nino in the Pacific. In order to test this
hypothesis, the researchers will develop new paleoclimate datasets and model
analyses to explore climate variability in the Indian Ocean under altered
conditions. The proposed new paleodata will isolate seasonality and thermocline
depth signatures and thus more rigorously test the "Indian Ocean El Nino"
hypothesis. Advanced model-proxy comparison techniques using existing and new
model simulations from the Paleoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project (PMIP)
will be developed to perform additional tests. Historical observations and model
simulations will be analyzed to determine whether this mode is distinct from
present-day climate variability, and address questions related to its precursors
and background conditions under which it can become active. These questions will
also be explored using existing and new climate model simulations from the
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP). These simulations will be used to
assess uncertainties regarding the potential activation of the "Indian Ocean El
Nino" in the near future. Constraints from the model-proxy comparison will be
used to determine whether these uncertainties could be reduced. Further broader
impacts include student and postdoc training, and support for a new faculty
member at the University of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.