* 1903803
* Collaborative Research - GOALI: Dynamic Nuclear Spin Hyperpolarization via Color Centers in Diamond
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Jeffrey Reimer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,678.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, Professors
Carlos A. Meriles (City College of New York) and Jeffrey A. Reimer (University
of California at Berkeley), in collaboration with Delaware Diamond Knives, are
working to enhance the sensitivity of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), an
important chemical analysis tool used for wide-ranging applications that include
determination of protein structure and folding dynamics; medical imaging (MRI);
and probing porous rocks in search of oil. For all such applications, the
limited sensitivity of NMR imposes restrictions on the minimum amount of sample
that can be detected, and can result in long measurement times and limited
access to expensive instrumentation. The Meriles/Reimer team is studying and
utilizing interactions between light and engineered diamond crystals to enhance
the sensitivity of NMR by several orders of magnitude under ambient conditions.
Their multi-pronged approach - combining both fundamental and applied science -
is enabling a wider range of applications and development of new contrast agents
for multi-modal in-vivo imaging. This multi-institutional project is providing
training opportunities targeting a diverse STEM workforce, including a number of
educational opportunities at the undergraduate and high-school
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Meriles and Reimer groups are pursuing a novel
route to generating augmented nuclear spin polarization by leveraging the
singular properties of nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers, a paramagnetic defect in
diamond that can be completely polarized via optical excitation under ambient
conditions. Specific aims include (i) defect engineering in diamond and
systematic characterization of nuclear polarization buildup; (ii) development of
novel, enhanced spin polarization transfer schemes tailored to both single-
crystal and powdered diamond; and (iii) proof-of-principle demonstrations of
polarization transfer from diamond to solid and fluid targets. The approach
employs low magnetic fields (~10 mT), ambient (or near-ambient) temperature, and
mild optical excitation, circumventing the need for complex, expensive hardware
while offering regimes of spin polarization dynamics not explored in the past.
The partnership with Delaware Diamond Knives is providing access to a broad set
of diamond samples, whose characteristics (nitrogen content, 13C enrichment,
surface termination, single crystal or variable-particle-size powder, etc.) are
specifically tailored to attain optimal polarization transfer. The work aims to
enable studies of molecular moieties in trace concentrations (typical in
biochemistry), investigation of mass-limited systems (often found in synthetic
chemistry), and high-throughput characterization of molecular libraries (as
required in the pharmaceutical industry).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.