* 1903132
* P2C2: Paleoclimatology of Cuba based on Stalagmite Oxygen Isotope Records--Hydrological Sensitivity and Causes of Variability in the Caribbean Region
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2019,01/31/2021
* Martin Medina-Elizalde, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2021
* USD 271,988.00

This project aims to reconstruct precipitation changes in the Caribbean and Golf
of Mexico regions during the Holocene. The precipitation reconstruction will be
based on stable isotopic composition of Oxygen and trace elements
(Magnesium/Calcium and Strontium/Calcium ratios) measured from stalagmites
collected in Western Cuba. In addition, climate model simulations over the last
millennium will be used to investigate the large-scale climate dynamics
associated with extreme events revealed by the stalagmite oxygen isotope
records. These new data together with the data-model synthesis have the
potential to improve the understanding of the hydroclimate variability drivers
in the Caribbean and Golf of Mexico regions, including the role of tropical
cyclones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include: 1) a
continuous and highly resolved paleorainfall record from western Cuba spanning
the last 16.000 years; 2) a greater understanding of the hydroclimate
variability in the Caribbean and Golf of Mexico regions and the underlying
mechanism of extreme events; and 3) estimates of hydrological cycle sensitivity
to external (e.g. orbital forcing) and internal (e.g. El Nino Southern
Oscillation) processes of the climate system. This project will support graduate
students to receive analytical and theoretical training in paleoclimate research
from tropical speleothem records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.