* 1903420
* Multiscale computational methods in kinetic theory and optimal transport
* MPS,DMS
* 10/12/2018,06/30/2020
* Li Wang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 83,789.00

Kinetic equations with multiple scales arise in diverse applications such as
rarefied gas dynamics, plasma physics, semiconductors, and biology; they often
introduce severe numerical challenges due to the stiffness that comes from the
small scales. Optimal transport plays a fundamental role in image registration,
video restoration, urban transport, kinetic theory and many others. However,
numerical methods for it have not reached their full capacity to meet the most
demanding practical applications. This project aims at both advancing the
multiscale computational methods - particularly the asymptotic preserving (AP)
schemes - in new prospects for kinetic equations including multi-stage and
fractional asymptotic limit, and developing fast parallelizable algorithms for
optimal transport via advanced optimization technique.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the following topics will be investigated in
this project: (1) theoretically study the AP schemes for semiconductor Boltzmann
equation with two-scale collisions at a deeper depth and generalize them to
implicit/high order schemes and to capture the hierarchy of macroscopic models;
(2) extend the AP scheme for kinetic equation with fractional diffusion limit to
a broader scope including anisotropic scattering, degenerate collision, and
Levy-Fokker-Planck interaction (applications to nonclassical photon transport in
clouds will be addressed); (3) develop efficient algorithms for optimal
transport problems and conduct convergence analysis and apply it to practical
problems especially for human crowd dynamics in panic situations. With
increasing interest in multiscale kinetic equations and optimal transport, the
computational methods developed here will impact beyond the particular
applications in this proposal. The dynamics of electron transport in
semiconductor devices are one of the main concerns in physics and engineering;
the developed methods from this proposal will be equally applicable in a broader
context such as gas discharges and multi-group radiative transfer. Nonclassical
transport that leads to a fractional diffusion has attracted much attention in
plasma physics and economy; it has now been applied in climate science to model
the photon transport in clouds as well as in criminology to model the hotspots
in residential burglaries. Optimal transport has become a useful tool in image
processing, urban transport, computer vision and etc; the development of fast
parallelizable algorithms will substantially advance these areas and the
application in modeling human crowds is crucial for better preparation of safe
mass events.