* 1903108
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Joint seismic-geodynamic constraints on deep Earth structure - Implications for mantle convection and Earth rotation
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Alessandro Forte, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 05/31/2024
* USD 326,167.00

The Earth's gravity field, which is precisely mapped by orbiting satellites, has
'bumps and valleys' where the field is stronger and weaker. The variation of
this field on the very longest wavelengths describes the elliptical shape of the
Earth. This elliptical figure is important because it determines the location of
the axis of rotation that passes through the Earth's center and also controls
changes in inclination of the Earth relative to the sun, owing to the
gravitational 'pull' from the moon, the sun, and other planets. The Earth, in
effect, behaves as a spinning top that can oscillate and wobble in complex ways.
These changes in axial rotation and inclination affect how much solar energy
('insolation') is received at different latitudes on Earth, especially in the
polar regions, and therefore has a major impact on climate and how it changes
over long time intervals. A major problem in geophysics is to determine how the
elliptical form of the Earth is generated by forces deep inside our planet.
These forces also drive the horizontal motions of Earth's tectonic plates and
the geological 'drift' of continents, as well as vertically pushing and pulling
the continents and oceans up and down over time. Despite more than thirty years
of progress by geophysicists who map lateral changes in Earth structure deep
inside our planet using seismic waves, and similar progress by computational
geophysicists who use these maps to model the internal forces needed to explain
the motions of tectonic plates and the 'bumps' in Earth's gravity field, there
remains a difficulty in properly accounting for the flattening of the elliptical
figure of the Earth that is seen by satellites. The principal investigators
(PIs) in this proposal will directly tackle this outstanding challenge by using
both earthquake and gravity data, and data describing the topography of the
Earth and the movements of tectonic plates, to obtain new maps of Earth's
internal structure and new determinations of the forces that can explain all
these data simultaneously. The outcome of this work will allow the PIs to
specifically tackle the current challenge of accounting for Earth's long-term
elliptical figure, how it changes with time, and how it influences high-latitude
insolation and hence climate over long times. Powerful computer resources will
be deployed to carry out this study over the next three years, employing a
collaborative team of researchers from the Universities of Texas and Florida.
This work will provide opportunities for training new graduate students who will
learn state-of-the-art techniques in computer modelling and will develop
advanced expertise in the geophysical sciences. The results of this work will be
shared with a broad community of scientists, students and the general public
with web-based platforms, communications in conferences and workshop, and in
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key questions regarding the large-
scale structure and dynamics of the mantle remain outstanding, despite three
decades of progress in global seismic imaging of Earth's interior. There are
longstanding difficulties in satisfactorily accounting for the very longest
wavelength anomalies in Earth's gravity field, which are related to Earth's
elliptical figure, with significant implications for Earth's time-dependent
rotational dynamics. Questions concerning heterogeneity in the transition zone
and the nature of "large low shear velocity provinces" (LLSVP) in the lower
mantle, also continue to be elusive. These uncertainties regarding anomalous
mantle structures directly impact our understanding of the global-scale dynamics
of the Earth. To address the questions, the principal investigators propose a
multidisciplinary effort to derive a new generation of tomography models that
match a wide suite of surface data related to present-day structure and
convective flow in the mantle, and can also constrain the time-dependent
evolution of the mantle throughout the Cenozoic. To pursue these objectives the
PIs will: (i) jointly invert global seismic and convection-related data with
greatly improved coverage of 3-D mantle structure, incorporating geodynamic
responses to lateral viscosity variations and topography on the discontinuities
at the top and bottom of the transition zone; (ii) apply data assimilation
methods to the new joint tomography models to reconstruct the Cenozoic evolution
of 3-D mantle structure; (iii) calculate corresponding changes of Earth's moment
of inertia, to be used in reconstructions of true polar wander and Milankovitch
orbital cycles that are implicated in long-term climate variations. It is
anticipated these new joint tomography models will provide improved constraints
on the impact of transition-zone heterogeneity on convective mass and heat
transport across this key region and on the spatial distribution of anomalous
density structures within the LLSVP. This work will also contribute to resolving
a longstanding difficulty concerning the origin of Earth's anomalous elliptical
figure and the implications for the phase and amplitude of Milankovitch climate
cycles in the geological past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.