* 1903612
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: PacketLab: A Universal Measurement Endpoint Interface
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kirill Levchenko, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 919,207.00

PacketLab is a universal internet traffic measurement abstraction that lowers
barriers faced by both experimenters and operators of internet measurement
infrastructures. Internet measurement has had a major impact on science and
society broadly, from helping us in identifying network threats like botnets, to
providing a factual foundation for discussing internet policy issues. This work
aims to serve the needs of the entire network measurement community by
developing a universal interface that simplifies network measurement and
facilitates resource sharing between research groups. PacketLab will make it
easier to share measurement resources, and this will broaden access to these
resources by institutions that would normally not have the resources to develop
and maintain their own measurement platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to answer several fundamental questions in network measurement including 1)
how to express measurement experiments using a small number of measurement
primitives; 2) whether experiment logic can be effectively moved off the
endpoint conducting the measurement; and 3) how measurement platform operators
can ensure conformance to their platform policies while encouraging resource
sharing. &lt;br/&gt;PacketLab is built on two key ideas. First, it moves
measurement logic away from the measurement endpoint to a separate experiment
control server, making each endpoint a lightweight packet source or sink.
Second, it provides a way to delegate access to measurement endpoints while
retaining fine-grained control over how endpoints are used by experimenters,
allowing research groups to share measurement infrastructure with each other
with little overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.