* 1903785
* Collaborative Research: Unravelling many-body correlations in two-dimensional hybrid semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Eric Bittner, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 398,310.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the properties of a
promising kind of semiconductor material, called hybrid organic-inorganic
perovskites, upon interaction with light, in the context of a variety of
envisioned technologies such as solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and lasers.
The atoms that constitute these materials produce substantially "shaky" crystal
lattices, in which at ambient conditions the motion of interconnected atoms is
vigorous. In spite of this highly dynamic environment, particles that arise from
interaction with light, so-called excitons, interact amongst each other strongly
and are stable. An analogy would be that of a perfectly choreographed set of
multiple dancers in perfect choreography during a high-magnitude earthquake. The
details on how and for how long these particles interact is of central
importance in this project. To study these details, researchers at Georgia Tech
will develop experimental methods based on lasers producing very short bursts of
light (femtoseconds, shorter than amillionth of a billionth of a second) to
study selectively their mutual interactions as a function of time. In parallel,
researchers at the University of Houston will develop theoretical techniques to
model the experiments. These collaborative activities will result in new
understanding of the fundamental materials physics of these exciton
semiconductors, which will facilitate the next significant breakthroughs in
optoelectronic devices for solid-state lighting and
lasers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project will develop a coherent two-dimensional (2D) photoexcitation
spectroscopy optimized to probe multi-particle correlations in semiconductor
materials implemented in functional optoelectronic devices. The technique is
based on phase modulation of a sequence of four variably delayed ultrashort
laser pulses, and phase-sensitive detection of the photocurrent induced by that
pulse sequence. This permits acquisition of 2D coherent spectra by isolating
specific nonlinear contributions to the photocurrent excitation signal. This
methodology has been previously implemented by several researchers. Recently it
was demonstrated that an incoherent contribution to the measured line shape,
arising from nonlinear population dynamics over the entire photoexcitation
lifetime, generates a similar line shape to the expected 2D coherent spectra in
many condensed-phase systems, in which photoexcitations are sufficiently mobile
such that inter-particle interactions are important on any time scale, including
those long compared with the 2D coherent experiment. The co-investigators
propose a heterodyne detection scheme that surmounts this limitation, and will
exploit the technique to study multi-particle correlations involving excitons
and charge-carriers in two-dimensional, quantum-well-like hybrid organic-
inorganic metal-halide perovskites. The specific objectives are (i) to develop a
heterodyne detection protocol for photocurrent-detected 2D coherent
multiexcitation spectroscopy and to demonstrate it in a highly efficient GaAs
photodetector, in an optimized methylammonium lead-iodide perovskite solar cell,
and in a phenylethylammonium lead-iodide 2D perovskite light-emitting diode;
(ii) to develop a multiquantum 2D variant based on the same detection scheme and
to study multi-excitons and trions in the 2D perovskite device above, and (iii)
to develop an accessible, general modeling protocol for the photocurrent-
detected 2D coherent excitation spectra based on parametrized lattice
Hamiltonians, which connects early-time non-Markovian dynamics with the time-
integrated response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.