* 1903189
* Dynamics of Stratification in Multicomponent Colloidal Films During Evaporative Drying
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Surita Bhatia, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 05/31/2024
* USD 347,888.00

Nanoparticle films have wide applications, including antibacterial paints,
corrosion-resistant coatings, and battery separator membranes. Often, the
locations of certain components in the film must be carefully controlled. This
has traditionally been achieved with expensive multi-step fabrication processes.
Recent mathematical models of nanoparticle film formation have identified a
means to create complex, vertically-structured coatings in a single step, a
process referred to as stratification. This process has the potential to
decrease production time and costs of multifunctional nanoparticle films.
However, there are few experimental studies of the stratification process. In
this project, a new experimental technique that involves scanning through the
film with a narrowly-focused X-ray beam will be performed during the
stratification process. These experiments will follow motion of particles
throughout the film formation process, and will ultimately provide information
on how stratification depends on the nanoparticle concentration, nanoparticle
size, evaporation rate, and other processing parameters. The research will help
improve manufacturing processes for multicomponent films used in applications
that will benefit human welfare and health, such as inorganic-polymer films for
next-generation batteries, drug-loaded coatings for medical implants, and mold-
resistant paints for humid environments. Impacts related to STEM workforce
development include training of a graduate student and undergraduate students in
novel experimental techniques for colloidal materials. The investigator will
also aim to recruit students from underrepresented populations for the research.
Finally, concepts from the research will be incorporated into new curriculum
materials and video lectures on fluid mechanics for high school audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has identified a means to create
vertically-structured coatings in a single step during stratification.
Theoretical descriptions of binary colloidal mixtures show a variety of
stratification regimes as the volume fraction and Peclet number of small and
large particles are varied. However, comprehensive comparison of model
predictions with experiments has not yet been achieved because of difficulties
in (i) quantifying the vertical concentration profile of particles in the film,
and (ii) following motion of particles during the film formation process. This
project will use small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) with a narrowly-focused
beam, performed at varying vertical positions in the film, to fully explore the
complex stratification behavior predicted by recent models. The objectives of
the work are to: (1) create an experimental process diagram of stratification
behavior as a function of particle volume fraction and Peclet number; (2)
conduct the first measurements of stratification during film formation by
performing time-resolved microbeam SAXS; (3) conduct X-ray photon correlation
spectroscopy (XPCS) studies to yield knowledge of how particle diffusivity and
dynamics vary during film formation; and (4) integrate research into new
curricular materials and video lectures on fluid mechanics for high school
audiences. The work will provide the first in situ measurements of particle
concentration during film formation in multicomponent systems and the first
direct experimental test of recent stratification models in both final dried
films and during the film formation process. The project will also help
establish new advanced scattering techniques for characterization of colloidal
materials. Finally, the data and insight gained will aid in driving improvements
to theoretical descriptions of stratification. The research will broadly impact
development of single-step processes to create multicomponent films with complex
concentration profiles, decreasing production time and costs of multifunctional
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.