* 1903430
* Numerical Modeling of Laser-Driven Experiments to Study Astrophysical Processes in Magnetized Turbulence
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Petros Tzeferacos, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,736.00

The goal of this project is to use numerical simulations to design and analyze
experiments at the world's most energetic laser facilities to demonstrate and
study high energy astrophysical processes in the laboratory. Magnetic fields are
present throughout the universe and play critical roles in astrophysical
phenomena, such as the acceleration of extragalactic charged particles, cosmic
rays which can reach energies that are a billion times larger than those
achieved in the Large Hadron Collider, the world's highest-energy particle
accelerator. However, the origin of cosmic magnetic fields is not fully
understood. The consensus among cosmologists and astrophysicists is that they
are the result of the amplification of tiny seed fields, which are stretched and
twisted by turbulent motions in astrophysical plasmas -- a process called
turbulent dynamo. The magnetized turbulence then mediates the propagation and
acceleration of cosmic rays as they randomly scatter with the tangled magnetic
fields. These astrophysical processes occur frequently in space but are
extremely hard to recreate in terrestrial laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to design and model laser-
driven experiments that will demonstrate for the first time in the laboratory
(1) the turbulent dynamo mechanism in the radiative, compressible regime, and
(2) the acceleration of charged particles via second-order Fermi acceleration in
magnetized turbulence. These experiments will be carried out at the Omega Laser
Facility at the Laboratory for Laser Energetics at Rochester, the National
Ignition Facility (NIF) at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and the GSI
Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt, Germany. The effort will
exploit the mature TDYNO (turbulent dynamo) experimental platform, which was
developed and deployed in a prior highly successful three-year experimental
campaign at Omega and NIF. The experiments will be designed through simulation
campaigns using FLASH, the highly capable radiation magneto-hydrodynamics code
developed by the University of Chicago, and large-scale three-dimensional
simulations on the Mira BG/Q supercomputer at Argonne National Laboratory. The
simulations are critical to ensuring the laser-driven experiments achieve the
plasma conditions necessary for these processes to operate; determining when to
fire the diagnostics; and interpreting the results of the experiments. The
results of the project will be of broad interest to the plasma and astrophysics
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.