* 1903219
* SBE TWC: Small: Collaborative: Pocket Security - Smartphone Cybercrime in the Wild
* SBE,SES
* 08/25/2018,08/31/2019
* David Maimon, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 92,871.00

Most of the world's internet access occurs through mobile devices such as smart
phones and tablets. While these devices are convenient, they also enable crimes
that intersect the physical world and cyberspace. For example, a thief who
steals a smartphone can gain access to a person?s sensitive email, or someone
using a banking app on the train may reveal account numbers to someone looking
over her shoulder. This research will study how, when, and where people use
smartphones and the relationship between these usage patterns and the likelihood
of being a victim of cybercrime. This research is the first step to a better
scientific understanding how the physical world surrounding smartphone use
enables cybercrime. Tired users may be less cautious in browsing to unsafe
websites, or distracted users may miss a critical pop-up that a virus has been
detected. Once these unsafe patterns of behavior are identified, new techniques,
tools, and training can be developed to help prevent smartphone users from
becoming victims of cybercrime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research expands
existing theories of victimization in the domain of mobile devices, where both
the criminal activity and the victimization occur online but may be affected by
the offline environment. This research collects sensor data from the smartphones
of 160 volunteers, such as GPS location, call frequency, and app usage. The
smartphone sensor data is combined with questionnaires, demographic data from
the U.S. Census, and neighborhood condition data from Google Street view. This
research also provides a baseline of smartphone security threats stemming from
behavioral and social factors, and applies new methods for social science
research using mobile sensor data to unobtrusively observe the daily activities
of subjects. Finally, this research adds to the body of knowledge on the
fundamental limitations of sensor-based activity and context inferences,
provides a unique corpus of smartphone sensor data that is freely available to
the scientific community, and a set of open source tools for collecting and
analyzing the data.