* 1903662
* P2C2: Characterizing East African Climate Through a Major Faunal Transition at 250 - 550 ka
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Isla Castaneda, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 346,563.00

The great lakes region of tropical East Africa has been a magnet for human
occupation and settlement since the origin of our species but currently is one
of the most underdeveloped in the world. Meanwhile, the future climate trends of
the region remain relatively unknown. This project will provide a perspective
from the past on the future hydroclimate of the Lake Malawi basin, against which
climate models can be compared for more reliable predictions of rainfall and
drought and thus offer a much needed technical basis for water management in the
region. The results will also provide important context to the evolution of our
species and other mammals of eastern Africa during a crucial time period of its
archaeological and evolutionary history. The project will support graduate and
undergraduate students with mentoring activities designed to improve the
likelihood of success in future careers which address national environmental and
societal needs. The researchers will offer a workshop to secondary school
educators that will bring hands-on experience with sediment cores. The
researchers and educators will work together on curriculum development about
modern day environmental and climate concerns by creating tested teacher-prep
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research project will develop
a high-resolution record of past temperature and rainfall in southern East
Africa that spans a relatively well dated, recent, and significant evolutionary
event that occurred sometime between 500 and 300 thousand years ago. The study
will focus on the Lake Malawi basin in southern East Africa, where the Lake
Malawi Drilling Project recovered the longest, high-resolution record of climate
change yet to be recovered from the African continent. Researchers will analyze
sediments in the Lake Malawi drill core at roughly a 1000-year interval for
temperature and rainfall between 250 and 550 thousand years ago, as recorded by
organic geochemical signals in the sediments (TEX86, leaf wax carbon and
hydrogen isotopic composition). These analytical results will be compared to
other such results from around the world, to seek commonality in the timing or
direction of climate change. The team will also compare their results with
climate model reconstructions of the region, to test the accuracy of various
climate models that hindcast African climate, and to better comprehend what
caused the observed climate behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.