* 1903871
* RUI: Thermodynamics of Nucleation: Atmospheric Aerosols from Acids, Bases, and Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* George Shields, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 333,358.00

Professor George Shields of Furman University is supported by the Environmental
Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of Chemistry and the Atmospheric
Chemistry Program of the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences. The goal
of the project is to examine properties of molecular complexes in the
atmosphere. These molecules are formed from water molecules, sulfuric acid
molecules, and other trace molecules. Such molecules are important because they
are fundamental to how particles, and from these, clouds, form. The mechanism
for the start of cloud formation is currently not well-understood. Undergraduate
students carry out the research and gain experience in chemical modeling for
several years. The team includes female students and students from
underrepresented minorities. A post-doctoral associate participates in the
research and the mentoring of the undergraduate students. Professor Shields has
a long-standing collaboration with researchers working with undergraduate
research groups, known as MERCURY. Historically, about half of the undergraduate
students from these cohorts attend graduate school.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
quantum chemical calculations determine the minimum energy structures,
thermodynamics for formation, and relative abundance of molecular clusters.
Clusters that serve as neutral and ionic cloud condensation nuclei contain
acids, bases, and water. The acids considered are sulfuric acid, formic acid,
and amino acids. The bases include ammonia and amines. The work combines a
genetic algorithm for configurational sampling with efficient high-level quantum
chemical methods that have been computationally expensive for systems of this
size until now. The calculated trends in thermodynamics of cluster formation are
compared with experimental nucleation rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.