* 1903561
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Where Has the water Gone? Results from a Watershed Model with Dendroclimatic Inputs
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Franco Biondi, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 216,883.00

This project aims to determine the past behavior of river discharge,
evapotranspiration, and snow-water equivalent by applying a combination of
multiple tree-ring variables and water balance modeling. This research is part
of an effort to improve the understanding of runoff from about one-third of the
200 largest rivers which has changed significantly since the 1950s yet lacks
context for much longer (century-scale) information on seasonal runoff
variability for individual watersheds that could help constrain future climate
model projections.

Specifically, the researchers aim to determine the past behavior of river
discharge, evapotranspiration, and snow-water equivalent by applying a
combination of multiple tree-ring variables and water balance modeling. Seasonal
inputs, i.e. precipitation and air temperature, will be derived from multi-proxy
tree-ring chronologies (early- and late-wood width, blue intensity, and wood
anatomy measurements) in the western U.S.

The field study design will update tree-ring chronologies that are part of the
ITRDB (International Tree-Ring Data Bank) and will combine classic sampling
methods with modern standardization tools. Compared with statistics-only
reconstructions, the use of a watershed model may provide a way to perform
sensitivity studies that improve the estimation of uncertainty in the extended
records, in particular with regard to landscape and vegetation factors
influencing infiltration and runoff efficiency (ratio of runoff to
precipitation).

A proof-of-concept study is included in the project to clarify how our monthly
water balance model can be calibrated and run using seasonal instrumental and
proxy records of climate. Accuracy of discharge reconstructions by the water-
balance approach will be compared with that of reconstructions by the
conventional approach of regression of gaged discharge on tree-ring data.

The study area is the combined Truckee/Carson River Basin (Nevada and
California), which embodies many of the water resources issues currently
confronting managers and planners in the western U.S. Drought characteristics of
this basin will be examined to place recent droughts in a long-term context.
Spatial aspects of drought variability related to large-scale climatological
drivers will be evaluated by comparing the new reconstructions with existing
ones for other western rivers. The project also includes development of an
interactive online mapping tool for use by resource managers, planners, and the
general public in exploring the history of local and regional hydroclimate.

The potential Broader Impacts (B.I.) include data useful for improved management
of water and forest resources in the Truckee/Carson Basin and by extension in
the Sierra Nevada, a critical mountain range for freshwater resources in the
western United States. The project will support two graduate students directly
engaged in the project as well as several undergraduate students. The project
will also develop an online mapping tool that K-12 students who participate in
UA Tree-Ring Lab's outreach program would be able to use.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.