* 1903631
* STARSS: Small: Design of Light-weight RRAM based Hardware Security Primitives for IoT devices
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Shimeng Yu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 09/30/2020
* USD 193,012.00

Our society has become increasingly dependent on electronic information exchange
between personal devices and the cloud. Unfortunately, the number of identity
and secure information leaks is on the rise. Many of the security breaches are
due to insecure access channels to the cloud. The security problem is likely to
be exacerbated in the Internet-of-Things (IoT) era where billions of devices in
our homes, offices and cars are digitally connected. On the other hand, the
Integrated Circuit's global and distributed supply chain has introduced hardware
security issues, such as hardware Trojans, counterfeiting, etc. In such context,
each IoT device should be equipped with a unique signature that can be used for
authentication by the cloud and the data transmission between devices and the
cloud should be securely encrypted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physical Unclonable
Function (PUF) is proposed to serve as the unique device signature for
authentication and to generate the cryptographic keys for data encryption.
Today's implementations of PUFs with silicon technology are either vulnerable to
modeling attacks or side-channel attacks, and they are not robust under
environmental variations. In this project, the PIs propose resistive random
access memory (RRAM) technology to design the hardware security primitives,
including weak PUF, strong PUF and true random number generator, to overcome the
limitations of today's silicon design. The PIs exploit RRAM's intrinsic physical
randomness as an entropy source. The design targets are small area, low power,
high reliability and high tamper resistance. The design and fabrication of RRAM
test chips are part of the proposed research.