* 1903691
* ICorps:  Polymer Semiconductor Educational Kits
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Michael Walter, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impacts of this I-Corps project are to improve hands-on laboratory
experiences in the field of materials science and to increase STEM awareness for
students/instructors at the 9-12 and undergraduate levels. The educational kit
bridges the gap between theoretical and practical molecular materials
technologies. The kit is an interactive learning tool designed for
interdisciplinary laboratory activities and can be used in physics, chemistry,
engineering, and material science educational settings. The kits provide all
needed materials, a fully developed curriculum, and training for implementation.
Professional development workshops for instructors help to integrate the
laboratory activities into instructor?s existing science curriculum while
addressing national and international science standards. There is a significant
market for hands-on laboratory activities that incorporate contemporary science
experiments currently under investigation and development at the university
level. School districts and science / engineering departments will likely be
interested in acquiring the kits, making them a commercially impactful and
important education platform. The kit is flexible and can be expanded upon to
include future experiments and professional development. The kits can also be
used and developed for extracurricular activities such as science fairs and
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project involves a polymer
electronics laboratory kit to improve materials science education for 9-12 and
undergraduate students. The three-module kit and curriculum use polymer
semiconductors to provide hands-on inquiry activities integrating themes of
electrical conductivity, light emission, and light-harvesting solar energy
conversion. These themes are critical to contemporary materials science research
and education. The kit includes materials to evaluate the electrical properties
of conductive colloidal polyaniline inks, to construct a polymer light- emitting
diode using polyphenylene vinylene, and to build a polymer solar cell using
semiconductive polymers and nanoparticulate TiO2. Designed initially for high
school science classrooms, the activities developed also meet new collegiate
undergraduate education requirements for macromolecular, supramolecular, and
nanoscale systems in the curriculum and can be used in undergraduate teaching
laboratories. The modules and kit have also been implemented in professional
development workshops for training 9&amp;#8722;12 science educators to help
integrate the laboratory activities into their
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.