* 1903127
* China-US Group Theory Summit 2019
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Thomas Keller, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 01/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports participation of US-based researchers in the China-US Group
Theory Summit 2019 held at Texas State University in San Marcos, TX, on August
22-25, 2019. Group theory is a branch of modern algebra studying the notion of
symmetry. It is a fundamental and highly active field of research within the
mathematical sciences and has ramifications throughout all of mathematics and
the sciences. There are large communities of group theory researchers in all
continents, and they keep in touch through international meetings and
conferences. However, local conditions and cultural circumstances under which
mathematical research is done differ quite a bit between different regions of
the world. The focus of this proposal is on research in group theory in the USA
and in China. One major goal of the conference is to establish and strengthen
ties between group theorists in China and the USA. It is the first conference in
group theory with this focus.

The conference will provide group theory researchers in China and the USA a
forum to disseminate their own research as well as to learn about new and
significant results in the area. It will help to bridge the gap between the
group theory communities in the United States and China, and lead to future
cooperation and collaborations. Speakers from both countries will cover a large
variety of the subjects in the area, which include representations of solvable
groups, representations of simple groups, character theory, classes of groups,
groups and combinatorics, p-groups, and fusion systems. There will be about
fifteen invited talks and a limited number of contributed talks. The conference
will provide an inviting atmosphere to foster new collaborations; young
researchers will have the opportunity to present their work and learn about the
latest developments in the field. It is expected that it will have a great
impact on the math research communities in both countries. More information
about the conference can be found at https://www.math.txstate.edu/research-
conferences/gtsummit.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.