* 1903740
* High Performance Laser Scribing of Advanced Thin Film Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Shuting Lei, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2024
* USD 372,150.00

Thin film materials have broad application in electronics, light source,
renewable energy, sensors, mechanical systems, etc. With the emergence of new
thin film structures there is increasing demand for high performance laser
scribing techniques capable of producing narrow (&lt; 10 micron), straight
walled cuts with little imparted surface damage. The research aims to address
this challenge at the fundamental level by studying the laser-matter interaction
mechanisms under a new laser double pulse irradiation strategy for thin film
scribing. The basic research from this project will generate scientific
knowledge to enable the development of high performance laser scribing
techniques that can find application in numerous advanced technology areas
including scribing of solar cells and smart window glass, patterning of flexible
electronics, micromachining of microelectromechanical systems and light emitting
diodes, etc. In the solar industry, for example, recent years have seen
tremendous progress in thin film solar photovoltaics, especially perovskite
solar cells exceeding 20 percent power conversion efficiency. The research could
accelerate the adoption of thin film solar technology and contribute to a clean
energy future free of air pollution, hazardous waste, and negative environmental
impact. Besides potential industrial and societal benefits, engaging educational
materials and activities derived from the project will be developed to train a
diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students, and to educate both K-12
students and the public. The principle investigator will take advantage of the
new laser micromachining infrastructure to involve students from
underrepresented groups in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
verify that a femtosecond-picosecond double pulse irradiation will create a
uniform critical electron number density through multiphoton absorption and
avalanche ionization and enable a narrow thin film scribe with high surface
integrity. The research objective is to identify the parameter window for pulse
energy and time delay, and determine the laser-matter interaction mechanisms
under this double pulse irradiation scheme. A combined experimental and
numerical modeling approach will be used to verify the approach and to gain a
deep understanding of electron dynamics and ablation mechanisms in a thin film
structure when irradiated by a femtosecond-picosecond pulse train. The basic
technical approach is to develop a numerical model to predict the free carrier
density and the resulting ablation shape, while a model-based approach will be
used to design and conduct thin film scribing experiments. This research will
contribute to the scientific community by advancing the fundamental
understanding of laser-matter interaction with advanced thin film
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.