* 1903627
* INFEWS US-China: Creating Ocean Wave Powered Resilient FEW Systems in Saline Coastal Regions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Lei Zuo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 10/31/2022
* USD 508,000.00

This project was awarded through the "National Science Foundation (NSF) /
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Joint Research on
Environmental Sustainability Challenges" opportunity. Interconnected food-
energy-water (FEW) demands are increasing due to increasing population and
economic growth. In the US and China, there is a trend of population
concentrated on the coastlines. However, the resilience of coastal ecosystems is
weak since the coastal zone, an interface of land, water, and air, is greatly
affected by human activities. Coastal lands frequently contain salt-affected
soils rendering these lands unsuitable for agriculture. Reclamation of these
lands could vastly improve worldwide food production. However, reclamation of
salt-affected soils currently requires huge inputs of fresh water and energy.
One promising solution is to desalinate seawater in coastal areas, but
desalination requires a large amount of energy. This project proposes wave
energy as the renewable energy source to desalinate seawater for coastal
reclamation. Furthermore, to optimize a reclamation management plan, the demand-
supply relationship between FEW Systems will be established through a stronger
understanding of how the dynamic coastal soil-water-salt balance is impacted by
changes in tidal cycles, society, and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this US-China collaborative project, five researchers in multidisciplinary areas
from Virginia Tech, Wuhan University of Technology in China, and Nanjing
Agricultural University in China will team up to create a self-sustainable FEW
System in saline coastal regions. This system will be realized through the
integration of three areas of innovation: 1) Wave energy-based seawater
desalination systems, 2) sustainable reclamation of saline-sodic-alkaline soils,
and 3) a nexus of ocean energy, freshwater, and coastal agriculture. Specific
research tasks include: 1) Modeling and design of a novel ocean wave surge
energy converter and an ocean wave energy powered desalination system; (2)
Modeling of coastal salt-soil-water balance dynamics and optimizing soil
reclamation management and agriculture irrigation specific to coastal regions;
and (3) Development of a supply-demand model for the FEW System to estimate the
optimal operation conditions for each system, followed by conducting field tests
and verification. If successful, the proposed research will convert traditional
coastal agriculture from a freshwater- and energy-consuming practice into a
self-sustainable, environmentally friendly practice that balances ecosystems.
Success of the proposed research can potentially convert millions of acres of
salt-affected coastal lands in the US into arable lands, with minimal
interference on the current roles of these lands to purify water, sequester
carbon, provide habitat, and support recreation. Furthermore, this project will
involve a collaboration between the US and China and provide unique
international education experiences for students. Hence, the proposed self-
sustainable FEW System can serve as a demonstration to inspire industry
worldwide and provide a new avenue for international collaborations to
creatively solve FEW System problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.