* 1903756
* Lepton Magnetic Moments and Fine Structure Constant
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Gerald Gabrielse, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 819,473.00

The most precise prediction made to date by a fundamental physical theory is
that of a "magnetic moment," the strength of the magnet within the fundamental
particle of electricity (the electron) and its antimatter counterpart (the
positron). So far, measurements of the magnetism of these particles agree with
prediction to a very high precision--much more precisely than those who
formulated the theory ever expected. This is despite the fact that the same
theory has serious problems: it predicts that no universe would survive after a
big bang, and it has not been able to explain why the universe is made of matter
rather than antimatter. What is wrong in our mathematical description, and the
source of the fundamental imbalance between the properties of matter and
antimatter, have yet to be discovered. This project will investigate such
problems by measuring an electron's or positron's magnetism even more precisely
than before. To do so, a single elementary particle will be suspended for months
at a time. Batteries and magnets will keep the charged particle from colliding
with any apparatus. Cooling the apparatus to nearly absolute zero will make a
nearly perfect vacuum. To measure the magnetism, the separations of the lowest
energy levels of the system will be probed by stimulating transitions between
these levels using radio waves, and measuring the frequency of the waves that
make these transitions occur most rapidly. This project promises to improve the
measurement precision by an order of magnitude or more by stimulating two
transitions simultaneously. Methods developed as part this project so far are
being used to stabilize the magnets in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and to
analyze the constituents of modern pharmaceuticals via ion cyclotron resonance
(ICR) analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical detail, a single
electron or positron will be suspended in the electric and magnetic fields of a
cylindrical Penning trap. Refrigeration below 0.1 kelvin will allow cryopumping
to produce a nearly perfect vacuum and eliminate blackbody photons from the
cylindrical cavity formed by the metal trap electrodes so the electron can
radiate down to a cyclotron ground state. Electromagnetic driving forces will
stimulate further cooling of the particle, and others will stimulate changes in
its cyclotron and spin state. These one-quantum changes will be detected using
quantum non-demolition methods that keep repeated detections from changing the
quantum states of interest. Spontaneous emission of the particle's cyclotron
motion will be inhibited, using a combination of the choice of the magnetic
field strength and the cavity size, to give averaging times long enough for
detecting a single quantum state of a single particle. The magnetic moment in
natural units is essentially the measured ratio of the particle's spin and
cyclotron frequencies, both of which will be measured simultaneously to greatly
reduce the effect of tiny but unavoidable drifts of the magnetic field. The
measured magnetic moments, the most precisely measured properties any elementary
particle, will test of the most precise prediction of the standard model of
particle physics at an unprecedented precision.