* 1903477
* CBET-EPSRC: Developing standardized cell-free systems for prototyping complex synthetic biology circuits and pathways
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Richard Murray, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 498,700.00

This research was funded in response to the NSF Engineering - UKRI Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council Opportunity NSF 18-067.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The capability exists to design and implement functioning
circuits and reaction pathways inside cells. This project makes use of cell-free
systems to overcome some of the difficulties associated with these activities in
living cells. The necessity to test performance inside cells limits the possible
pathways to those that are not toxic to the host cell. Unfortunately, the
performance of cell-free systems has proven to be erratic, exhibiting poor
reliability. This project will establish a reliable, reproducible, cell-free
platform. The design-build-test cycle could be shortened dramatically if it
could be accomplished in a cell-free environment. This would have a beneficial
impact on scientific research, engineered devices, and STEM education. As a
collaboration with Imperial College London, this project will also promote
research exchanges, providing US students with international research
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to
standardize cell-free systems from engineered E. coli and other organisms. Such
systems will be used to explore the boundaries of cell-free prototyping and
enable more detailed understanding of key mechanisms. This could accelerate the
usage and broader utility of cell-free systems in industry and academia. The
long term vision is to establish cell-free systems as a platform for
implementation of synthetic biological circuits, pathways, and systems, where
modular and complex biomolecular systems can be engineered in a systematic
fashion. This project seeks to overcome some of the current limitations of cell-
free systems through a combination of experimental characterization and
computational modeling. If successful, this project will expand the utility of
cell-free systems to a broader class of circuits and pathways. The specific
objectives of the project are (1) the development of well-understood cell-free
reaction systems suitable for prototyping circuits and pathways for a variety of
cells; (2) characterization and modeling of complex synthetic biology components
and core mechanisms using cell-free extracts; and (3) development of new
biochemical indicator modules for monitoring and characterizing circuit
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.