* 1903685
* Collaborative Research: INFEWS: U.S.-China: Sustainable Decentralized Wastewater Management: Simultaneous Nutrient Recovery and Pharmaceutical Degradation of Source-Separated Urine
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Shihong Lin, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 177,914.00

This project was awarded through the "National Science Foundation (NSF) /
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Joint Research on
Environmental Sustainability Challenges" opportunity. The Food-Energy-Water
(FEW) Nexus is described as complex and inter-related global resource systems
that rely on different ecosystem resources. FEW Nexus problems stem from the
imbalance of different user activities, such as agricultural and water-use
practices, that do not maintain the integrity of ecosystems that provide the
resources for those activities. A more specific example of a FEW Nexus problem
is the use of fertilizer for agriculture coupled with wastewater treatment
practices. The current economic model of fertilizer utilization is unsustainable
for multiple reasons. Ammonia fertilizer is produced through the energy-
intensive and expensive Haber Bosch process, and phosphorus for fertilizer is
mined at considerable cost. Energy and chemicals are further consumed for the
removal of fertilizer-associated nutrients from wastewater from agricultural
run-off to prevent environmental and public health problems. At the same time,
pharmaceuticals in wastewater are contaminants of emerging concern (CECs), but
conventional treatment plants are unable to adequately remove all nutrients and
CECs. Consequently, nitrogen, phosphorus, and pharmaceuticals pollute surface,
ground, and coastal waters when the inadequately treated wastewater treatment
plant effluent is discharged to the environment. A new paradigm is needed to
enable the transformations to i) economically and environmentally sustainable
nutrient reuse and ii) a safer and more effective management strategy for CECs
in wastewater. Urine streams are rich in nutrients and have high concentrations
of pharmaceuticals. However, urine is immediately diluted over 100 times by
flushing and subsequent mixing with other wastewater streams, making it
difficult to separate CECs and nutrient pollutants. A more rational approach
would be to take advantage of the high concentrations of the nutrients and
contaminants in undiluted urine by carrying out source-separation for
decentralized resource recovery and pharmaceutical degradation, rather than
treating the diluted urine at centralized wastewater treatment plants . This
international collaborative project between the U.S. institutions of Columbia
University and Vanderbilt University, and the Harbin Institute of Technology in
China proposes an integrated treatment approach for source-separated urine,
comprising i) ammonia recovery, ii) phosphate extraction, and iii)
pharmaceutical degradation, to simultaneously achieve sustainable on-site
nutrient recycling and contaminant elimination. Advancing fundamental knowledge
on decentralized technologies for nutrient recovery and reuse and CEC
elimination in urine source-separation and management will yield transformative
impacts to enable the evolution of current wastewater management approaches to a
more sustainable "resource recovery" approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project are to enhance fundamental knowledge of the principal phenomena
governing nitrogen and phosphorous recovery and pharmaceutical degradation in
source-separated urine, and to assess the high-level impacts of implementing
decentralized wastewater management. Specific objectives are: 1) to advance
fundamental understanding of ammonia and water vapor transport across
hydrophobic microporous membranes, 2) elucidate the fouling mechanisms during
ammonia recovery from hydrolyzed source-separated urine, and formulate
appropriate fouling control strategies, 3) investigate the degradation of model
pharmaceutical compounds by advanced oxidation processes, 4) evaluate the fate
of model pharmaceutical compounds and heavy metals in phosphate recovery by
induced precipitation, and 5) assess the national-level environmental and public
health impacts of large-scale implementation of urine source-separation in the
U.S. and China. This study will investigate nutrient recovery and pharmaceutical
degradation of diverted urine to elucidate the common denominators influencing
the different phenomena of, and identify the overall achievable performance of,
ammonia separation, phosphate extraction, and pharmaceutical degradation through
integrated research. The project will advance fundamental knowledge on the
benefits and costs of implementing urine source-separation and decentralized
treatment in the U.S. and China. Critical insights from the specific research
tasks have far-reaching impacts on individual topics, including i) enhanced
transport theory of vapor in micropores, ii) improving the understanding of
fouling and fouling mitigation in membrane distillation, iii) identification of
principal factors governing advanced oxidation processes for pharmaceuticals,
and iv) elucidation of contaminant fate in phosphate precipitation. This
collaborative project will integrate education and research to train and prepare
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in STEM. The researchers will
engage in activities including: (i) recruitment of under-represented groups,
(ii) development of nutrient and microcontaminant modules for K-12 education and
public outreach, (iii) providing undergraduate research opportunities through
structured programs, and (iv) enhancing undergraduate and graduate education by
integrating scientific concepts and technical principles of the research current
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.