* 1903781
* Learning-based Adaptive Optimal Control Principles for Human Movements
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Zhong-Ping Jiang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 309,606.00

The study of human movement, driven by the desire to expand our understanding of
the brain, holds great promise for devising new therapies for people who suffer
from neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's disease and Huntington's
disease. This proposal aims to deepen our preliminary research in learning-based
control theory as a new computational principle of sensorimotor control, while,
at the same time, validating the proposed theory through numerical simulations
and biological experiments. It is an interdisciplinary project that combines
tools and methods from reinforcement learning, nonlinear control theory, and
adaptive dynamic programming. Rigorous stability and robustness analysis as well
as convergence proofs for the proposed learning algorithms will be carried out.
A fundamentally novel aspect of the proposal is that attention will be paid to
continuous-time dynamical systems described by differential equations as opposed
to the conventional models used in the past literature such as discrete-time
systems and Markov decision processes (MDPs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit:&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project is aimed at developing and
validating robust adaptive dynamic programming as a theory of human sensorimotor
learning and control. To this end, there is a great need to develop new results
that go beyond the present literature by considering a wider class of
continuous-time stochastic systems with both additive and multiplicative noise
and strong nonlinearities. Human behavioural experiments are to be designed to
test and develop computational models of sensorimotor control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Even though human movement
problems are targeted in this project, it is expected that the findings of this
project toward learning-based control theory will be useful for other problems
arising from engineering and computational neuroscience such as robotic
rehabilitation. The proposal also includes a plan of educational activities
centered on student supervision, curriculum development, knowledge
dissemination, and collaboration with New York University Center for Neural
Science. The PI hopes to organize workshops and invited sessions at major
conferences, providing an opportunity to students and junior researchers to
interact with leading authorities in automatic control and computational
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.