* 1903808
* Quantifying and Designing for Electrostatic Preorganization in Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Mark Eberhart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2022
* USD 494,999.00

Enzymes are essential protein molecules that facilitate or catalyze the chemical
reactions required for life in all organisms. With this award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Anastassia
Alexandrova from the University of California, Los Angeles, and Dr. Mark
Eberhart from the Colorado School of Mines to investigate how the entirety of
the protein molecule, consisting of thousands or even tens of thousands of
atoms, creates local electric fields that allow enzymes to function as highly
efficient and specific catalysts. This effect at the enzyme's active site,
called electrostatic preorganization, is detected through quantum mechanical
tools. The understanding of electrostatic preorganization and the development of
these quantum mechanical tools are applied to engineer artificial enzymes with
enhanced catalytic functions. The resulting artificial enzymes are potentially
important in disease prevention, industrial production of chemicals, and
environmental remediation. In addition, the project promotes professional
development and training of high school science teachers through an initiative
called "See the chemical bond". This initiative uses visual and quantum
mechanically enabled techniques in a classroom setting to give substance to the
important though often poorly understood concept of chemical
bonds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal develops quantum-mechanically rigorous
computational techniques to probe electrostatic preorganization, and assesses
its effect on the proficiency of both natural and artificial enzymes. An
extension of the Quantum Theory of Atoms in Molecules (QTAIM) in conjunction
with dynamics simulations will be developed to determine the perturbative
influence of the full protein structure to the charge density (rho) in an
enzyme's active site. The directed evolution of artificial enzymes are followed
using these probes, while interrogating the progression of preorganization.
These studies detect the extent to which enzymes evolve toward improved long-
range electrostatics. The insight resulting from these computational
investigations allow integration of preorganization into enzyme design by
strategically improving electrostatics through remote mutations, with the
predictions tested experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.