* 1903347
* Collaborative Research: Constraining African Climate since the Last Glacial Maximum via integrated Climate and Proxy System Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Sylvia Dee, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 260,592.00

Earth surface temperatures in the tropics are an important factor in the global
climate system because they directly influence atmospheric water vapor content
and heat transport towards the poles. Widely accepted global climate models
predict that tropical Africa will warm by 5 degrees Celsius (9 degrees
Fahrenheit) in the coming century and these changes are expected to have both
regional and global consequences. This research project will provide an
important perspective on these predictions from past regional climate histories
by evaluating the performance of model simulations of past temperatures based on
lake sediment proxy records. The researchers will develop a new proxy system
model for use by the scientific community and host webinars to educate and train
users on the model. The project will support research opportunities that will
reach historically underrepresented groups through programs such as the Girl
Scouts of America, Research Experiences for Undergraduates at Rice University
and Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science at University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research, as well as an undergraduate research
opportunity at Brown University.&lt;br/&gt;Current understanding of past
temperature history in the tropics has improved in recent decades with advances
in proxies for lake temperature from geochemical records preserved in lake
sediment cores. However, these lake sediment proxies fundamentally record lake
temperature, while climate models primarily simulate air temperature and other
Earth surface variables. This collaborative project will help bridge the gap
between the lake proxy records of past climates and global climate models to
bolster understanding of the controls on Earth surface temperature. The
researchers will create new geochemical proxies from existing lake sediment
cores, synthesize regional proxy records from tropical Africa and develop a
proxy system model to translate between climate model outputs and recorded lake
temperature proxies. This proxy-model comparison will be used to evaluate the
patterns, rates, sensitivity and mechanisms of temperature changes in tropical
Africa since the Last Glacial Maximum approximately 21,000 years ago.
Specifically, the researchers will 1) analyze records of tropical African
temperature to determine regional patterns, rates, and amplitudes of past
temperature variability; 2) Use a new proxy system model (PSM) for lake archives
to quantify the impacts of proxy-system processes on the reconstructions; 3) Use
output from paleoclimate model simulations to simulate lake temperatures and
proxy uncertainties with the PSM; 4) Compare African lake and air temperatures
predicted by the PSM and the Paleoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project
(PMIP 3 &amp; 4) simulations of the LGM, the mid-Holocene (6 kyr BP), and the
pre-industrial, and in transient climate simulations of the past 21 kyr to the
reconstructions; 5) Test the sensitivity of African temperature changes to
orbital, greenhouse gas, and ice-sheet forcing in single-forcing transient
simulations, and investigate mechanisms for these
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.