* 1903449
* I-Corps Teams:  Duocon - Advanced Wireless Technology
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Jonathan Fay, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is significant
since the platform is an enabler of a range of high-speed wireless
communications for next generation broadband applications. The next generation
of the telecommunication network (5G and beyond) is going to be a technological
paradigm shift, which is not only an evolution of the network but also the
underlying fabric of an entire ecosystem of fully connected intelligent sensors
and devices. 5G is an enabler of many applications and will impact virtually
every industry sector, ranging from automotive, manufacturing, healthcare to
smart city Internet of Things (IoT) and smart homes. Full realization of the
economic growth of 5G, however, will depend on how robustly the network is
deployed, and will require different approaches from those used in the past. In
order to enable the ten-fold increase in data-rate and capacity, 5G network will
heavily rely on advanced wireless technologies. The company's technology
platform will solve some of the key challenges of wireless radios and networks,
and will pave the way towards the rapid roll-out and growth of 5G, in the global
race to get to the 5G first.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to
enable multi-gigabit wireless communications for the emerging high-speed
wireless applications. The core of the company's technology is a high-
performance RF front-end, which enables our unique combination of features in
our innovative wireless transceiver. The proposed RF front-end is based on novel
system-level architectures along with high-performance RF components and sub-
systems that are fundamentally different from the existing state-of-the-art
fiber-speed wireless modules. To enable realization of the RF front-end, the
team is applying a set of innovative design methodologies and technologies to
tackle the challenges of the proposed complex RF front-end architectures. The
company's RF front-end platform is the core technical contribution and
intellectual merit of the approach, which provides the hardware necessary to
enable the vision of a truly fiber-speed network with the ultimate network
robustness, agility, with significant cost savings for the operators and
businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.