* 1903603
* Doubly-Threaded Polycatenanes and Polyrotaxanes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Stuart Rowan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 546,909.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry is funding Dr. Stuart J. Rowan from University of
Chicago to develop synthetic methods to build new polymer architectures and to
study how these architectures impact polymer properties. Conventionally,
polymers or long chain molecules are prepared from smaller molecules that are
joined together by carbon-carbon covalent bonds. Covalent bonding occurs when
pairs of electrons are shared by atoms and it constitutes the basic building
principle for all of organic chemistry. The approach in this work is rather
unique because the repeating units in the targeted polymers are not covalently
bonded to one another, yet cannot be separated unless covalent bond breakage
occurs. Essentially, the monomer units are interlocked together like individual
pieces in a metal chain or necklace. The molecular version of two interlocked
rings is called a catenane and, when they are liked together the overall
structure is a polycatenane (it looks like a metal chain). A related interlocked
polymer in which a long polymer molecule is threaded through a ring molecule,
like beads on a string, is called a polyrotaxane. Such interlocked polymeric
materials may have unique physical properties and potential applications in the
areas of molecular electronics, energy absorbing materials, nanorecording and
optical bioimaging. The activities associated with this award increase
broadening participation and enable training of high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students in synthetic organic chemistry and polymer chemistry. The
outreach program 'Natures Materials' is created as a part of the Cleveland
Museum of Natural History's Martin Luther King Discover Day which demonstrates
how natural polymers are used everyday. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both polycatenanes
and polyrotaxanes consist of components that are interlocked together and held
in place with a mechanical bond. In this research, an investigation on how the
structure of the components can be used to impact product distribution,
molecular weight, and the resulting properties of polycatenanes is conducted. In
addition, research activities expand the types of interlocked polymers that can
be accessed via the metallosupramolecular template approach to doubly-threaded
poly[3]rotaxanes and slide ring gels. The access to such new interlocked
polymeric structures, along with a better structure/property understanding of
such systems, allows the development of materials with the potential to exhibit
an unusual property matrix. These structures open the door to new polymeric
actuators and materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.