* 1903506
* Collaboration in Modeling the Grinding of Silicon Carbide Fiber Reinforced Silicon Carbide Ceramic Matrix Composite
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Albert Shih, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2024
* USD 537,167.00

Advanced materials which can maintain structural strength at high temperature
are critically important for the energy efficiency and reliability of the
aircraft engines and power generation turbines. The silicon carbide fiber
reinforced silicon carbide (SiCf/SiC) is a new generation of material for such
high temperature applications. Grinding using diamond abrasive is the final
finishing manufacturing processes to achieve the part accuracy and surface
integrity. The high-speed contact between the diamond abrasive and the brittle
SiCf/SiC material during grinding may generate surface cracks, which will
greatly affect the strength and reliability of SiCf/SiC components. Modeling
brittle composite materials, to isolate processing conditions where fracture
does not occur, is difficult using conventional approaches due to the small size
of the reinforcing fibers (diameter about 10 microns) with respect to the bulk
material. This research focuses on verifying the feasibility and limitations of
using an alternative modeling approach to accurately predict the crack formation
and find the damage-free grinding conditions for diamond grinding of SiCf/SiC.
If successful the project's modelling approach can be applied to other ceramic
reinforced materials and increase the competitiveness of US manufacturing
companies servicing aerospace, defense, and energy industries. This research
will be conducted in close collaboration with the Laboratory of Machine Tools
and Production Engineering, an international leader in grinding research, at
RWTH Aachen University in Germany, and aerospace industries within the US. While
NSF is only supporting the research conducted in the US, this project enables US
researchers to leverage research facilities not available in the US for the
benefit of US industries and manufacturing interests. Students engaged on the
project will be exposed to international perspectives, and research practices at
other esteemed institutes enhancing their workforce readiness. Research findings
will also be adopted in the curriculum of manufacturing courses to benefit a
broad group of students and inspire the next generation of engineers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the ability of the smoothed particle
hydrodynamics (SPH) modelling approach to model and gain fundamental
understanding of the material removal and damage mechanisms in SiCf/SiC
grinding. A comprehensive experimental program will be used to evaluate the
modeling outcomes and isolate model limitations. SPH is a particle-based, mesh-
free simulation method developed to address technical challenges including the
large negative rake angle cutting edge, random orientation and distribution of
diamond grains, and large strain and high strain rate deformation and fracture
of the SiC fiber, fiber-matrix interface, and matrix. The single grain diamond
scratching of SiCf/SiC will first be studied through experiments and SPH
modeling to identify SiC material models and SPH techniques. The multi-grain
experiment and SPH modeling of the grinding of SiCf/SiC will then be carried
out. The damage mechanisms will be investigated to isolate the damage-free
diamond grinding conditions for SiCf/SiC. In summary, this research will advance
the tools available to gain insights into fundamental knowledge of material
removal and damage mechanisms in diamond scratching and grinding of SiCf/SiC and
other ceramic matrix reinforced composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.