* 1903722
* INFEWS: U.S.-China: Integrated systems modeling for sustainable FEW nexus under multi-factor global changes: Innovative comparison between Yellow River and Mississippi River Basins
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Hanqin Tian, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Food, energy, and water (FEW) are essential to sustain human life and well-
being. To meet the growing demands of human population that is expected to reach
9.6 billion by 2050, the global and regional capability in providing abundant
and affordable FEW will be increasingly important to social stability and
economic development. Excessive nitrogen loading to water systems during food
production has long been a serious problem for humans to access clean water,
while the increasing water demand by energy production further exacerbates water
scarcity and pollution. This project addresses an important research challenge
at the FEW nexus: How can we balance Food-Energy-clean Water (FEWc) production,
both spatially and temporally, with limited resources and changing environment?
The project focus is on the Mississippi River Basin (MRB) in the U.S. and the
Yellow River Basin (YRB) in China because these two basins are of global
importance and are facing paramount challenges in meeting the growing demands
for FEW. MRB, the largest river basin in North America, drains about 41% of the
conterminous U.S. and most of the U.S. Corn Belt. The YRB, the second largest
river basin in China, drains 11.5% of land area in China and is a key food and
energy-producing region supporting 107 million residents. Research outcomes from
this project will shed light on optimizing resource use efficiencies and
predicting FEWc sustainability in the context of multiple-factor global changes
including climate change, air pollution, urbanization, land and water use
changes, and social-economic development. This project will foster science
communication and stakeholder engagement for critical issues in the FEWc nexus,
through summer school program, workshops and conferences, and university's broad
strategy of external engagement in both U.S. and China. This project will also
assist policymakers in making informed decisions regarding future policies that
will enhance the quality and quantity of food, energy, and clean
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
understand and quantify the complex interactions and feedbacks within the FEWc
system towards a basin-scale sustainable FEW provision (that is, to optimize
resource allocation for maximizing crop production and energy generation and
minimizing water pollution). The project will build an integrated systems
modeling framework that incorporates crop, hydrological-biogeochemical, energy,
and economic models, to advance our understanding and quantification of the
complex interactions within the FEWc nexus, and predict FEWc sustainability
under future climate and resource use scenarios at a basin level. The integrated
systems model will be tested on the MRB (a Clean Water-targeted FEW) and the YRB
(a Water Conservation-targeted FEW), to examine the limiting factors of FEWc
nexus in these two intensively-managed while contrasting river basins. Through
modeling assessment and predictions, the U.S.-China joint research team will
test a series of hypotheses on spatiotemporal variations in limiting factors,
sustainability of FEWc, and management potentials across these two river basins
from 1960 to 2050. Benefiting from a U.S.-China joint program, such between-
basin comparison will test different emphasis of FEWc connections, and form a
quantitative and computational modeling tool that is applicable to other
intensively-managed landscapes with similar FEWc conflicts across the world. The
project will 1) characterize the FEWc dynamics and the mechanisms underlying
natural and anthropogenic driving forces; 2) build an integrated systems
modeling framework that simulates interactions, feedback, and socioeconomic
constraints of FEWc at a basin scale; 3) assess and predict the roles of
resource use and management practices in pursuit of FEWc in the context of
global changes. The management options verified by this modeling framework will
potentially change cultivation practices, energy structure, and most
importantly, increase supply of clean water to
inhabitants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.