* 1903543
* INFEWS: U.S.- CHINA:  Modeling Interdependent FEW systems in the US and China: Nexus for Sustainability, Markets and Trade of Energy and Agricultural Commodities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michael Strager, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 494,888.00

This project was awarded through the "National Science Foundation (NSF) /
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Joint Research on
Environmental Sustainability Challenges" opportunity. The Food-Energy-Water
(FEW) Nexus, from a global perspective, contains closely interconnected resource
systems of food, energy, and water. As the world's population expands to an
expected 9 billion by 2050, there will be an urgent demand to balance different
resources, such as hydrocarbon fuels, agricultural products, and fresh water,
across these three systems to achieve different goals without putting undue
strain on the ecosystems that provide these resources. Innovations in hydraulic
fracturing and horizontal drilling have enabled tremendous growth in hydrocarbon
fuel extraction from unconventional reservoirs in the US. This growth has
significant implications for energy prices, food production, international
trade, and management of water resources. Projections indicate that robust
natural gas production in the US will continue into the foreseeable future,
pulling fertilizer and energy prices down and leading to changes in agricultural
production practices. Although irrigation water shortages and/or excess
nutrient-contaminated water runoff from agricultural fields have threatened
water sources in most agricultural regions in the US, China, and other
countries, the impacts of growth in unconventional resource extraction on water
resources in agricultural systems have not been studied within the FEW system
frameworks. Fertilizer and energy prices are key determinants of crop planting
choices, acreage allocation decisions, fertilizer application rates, irrigation
water use, and sustainability of water resources in agricultural regions. The
goal of this project is to examine the interdependencies between energy
policies, natural gas supply, agricultural production, international trade, and
sustainability of water resources. This project at West Virginia University, in
collaboration with researchers at Zhejiang Sci-tech University in China,
combines economic models for natural gas, nitrogen fertilizer, and agricultural
commodities with biophysical soil productivity and watershed hydrology models to
reflect the interdependent nature of human decisions and natural systems.
Additionally, some of the research, education, and outreach efforts pertaining
to this project will be accomplished through collaboration with the Chesapeake
Bay Project Science and Technology Committee and the West Virginia SPoT
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique modeling framework in this project
reflects interdependencies between human and natural systems by integrating
partial equilibrium economic models, including spatially explicit land use
components and international trade, with biophysical models for soil
productivity and watershed hydrology. The project expands the scope of prior
studies pertaining to the consumptive water use in irrigation and nutrient
runoff from agricultural fields to include the impacts of the energy markets and
international trade between the US and China, two of the largest trading
nations. Econometric commodity market models and price endogenous partial
equilibrium models are used to examine the effects of changes in supply, demand,
environmental regulation, and trade policy on production decisions and market
outcomes. The economic models for commodity markets and international trade are
integrated with water quantity and quality models via spatially explicit land
use representation. The effects of land use on watershed hydrologic regimes and
nutrient loading are formulated using the Environmental Policy Integrated
Climate model (EPIC) and the Agricultural Policy/Environmental eXtender model
(APEX), respectively. The integrated modeling framework will generate solutions
for understanding tradeoffs between FEW system components involving energy
markets, agricultural systems, and water resources in the Mississippi River and
Chesapeake Bay watersheds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.