* 1903568
* EAGER: Interactions of Engineered Nanomaterials with Red Blood Cells in Health and Disease
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Douglas Goetz, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 04/30/2023
* USD 135,000.00

Studies have demonstrated that some nanomaterials, depending on exposure,
composition, and properties, can disrupt the plasma membrane, a lipid bilayer
that surrounds all cells, thereby causing cell toxicity. However, the role of
the individual leaflets of the plasma membrane in regulating the disruptive
effects of nanomaterials is not known. The plasma membrane is composed of two
leaflets: an inner leaflet facing the cell and an outer leaflet facing the
outside environment. Red blood cells provide an ideal model to study plasma
membrane-nanoparticle interactions due to being one of the few cells for which
the lipid composition of both leaflets is known. In addition, disruption of red
blood cells by nanomaterials can be easily tracked by the release of hemoglobin,
which has a distinct red color. The investigator has recently shown that
disruption of red blood cells by nanoparticles is dependent on the lipid
composition of the outer leaflet with little to no contribution from the inner
leaflet. In this proposal, the investigator will examine how the lipid
composition of the outer leaflet regulates nanoparticle-membrane interactions.
To this aim, the investigator will study the interactions of a set of engineered
nanoparticles with healthy and diseased red blood cells in which the outer
leaflet lipid composition is altered. Chronic myeloid leukemia, a form of blood
cancer, will be used as the diseased model. This disease does not commonly show
symptoms in its early phases but induces changes in the lipid composition of the
outer leaflet of red blood cells. Completion of this project provides benefits
to society through 1) elucidating the role of the outer leaflet lipids in
regulating nanoparticle toxicity, 2) providing information on the toxicity of
nanoparticles to red blood cells in healthy vs. leukemic individuals, and 3) the
development of a rapid screening assay for chronic myeloid leukemia. This
project will involve undergraduate students in research, facilitate hands-on
nanotechnology education, and educate the public through demonstrations focused
on nanotechnology in a local non-profit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials,
depending on exposure and physicochemical properties, can disrupt the cell
plasma membrane. The plasma membrane is an asymmetric lipid bilayer and the
composition of lipids in the outer leaflet (facing the outside environment) is
different from the lipids in the inner leaflet (facing the cytoplasm). The
investigator 's previous research, using engineered silica nanoparticles and
vesicles that mimic each leaflet of the plasma membrane of red blood cells, has
shown that the lipid composition of the outer leaflet is the primary regulator
of nanoparticle-induced membrane damage. In this project, the investigator will
examine the interactions of engineered nanoparticles with the plasma membrane of
healthy and diseased red blood cells in which membrane lipid asymmetry is
disrupted, to examine how the lipid composition of the outer leaflet regulates
nanoparticle-cell membrane interactions. Chronic myeloid leukemia, a form of
blood cancer, will be used as the diseased model. This disease is asymptomatic
in its early phases but is known to disrupt the asymmetry of the plasma membrane
in red blood cells. In this project, the PI will first investigate how
engineered silica nanoparticles bind to, deform, or disrupt healthy vs. leukemic
red blood cells. The PI will then characterize the outer leaflet lipid
composition of healthy and leukemic red blood cells to elucidate how the outer
leaflet lipids regulate nanoparticle-cell membrane interactions. This project is
high risk-high payoff. While significant differences are expected in
nanoparticle-induced membrane disruption in healthy vs. diseased red blood
cells, which have different outer leaflet lipid compositions, there is the risk
distinguishing and characterizing these differences is extremely difficult.
However, if significant differences are observed, this project could be the
stepping-stone for the use of nanoparticles for screening of diseases in which
the plasma membrane lipid composition is altered. This is a transformative
approach, which can lead to a plethora of novel screening assays in the future.
This project will also provide new information concerning the biological
behavior of nanomaterials. Successful conclusion of this research will shed
light on the role of nanomaterial physicochemical properties which induce damage
in the membranes of mammalian cells and characterize differences in
nanoparticle-induced toxicity for different cells which are a function of the
lipid composition of the outer leaflet of cell
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.