* 1903847
* Probing Gravitational Physics with Event Horizon Telescope and Gravitational Wave Observations of Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Lia Medeiros, Medeiros, Lia
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 11/30/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Lia Medeiros is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at the Institute for
Advanced Study. She will use numerical simulations to fit high-resolution black
hole images obtained with the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) and test how gravity
is modified near a black hole, as predicted by Einstein's theory of general
relativity. As a complementary test of general relativity, she will simulate
electromagnetic counterparts of gravitational wave events such as black hole
mergers, and she will use these simulations to predict signatures of merger
events. Alongside this research, she will develop hands-on educational
activities for middle school students to improve their potential recruitment and
retention in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program seeks to advance our
understanding of gravity using observations of black holes and electromagnetic
counterparts of gravitational waves. Medeiros proposes to test general
relativity by comparing numerical ray tracing, radiative transfer, and general
relativistic magnetohydrodynamic (GRMHD) simulations with observations. She will
use EHT observations to derive a set of general relativistic spacetime metrics
that deviate from the standard Kerr metric. She will also use time-dependent
GRMHD simulations to generate images and spectra for comparison with
observations of merger events. The educational component of her work involves
computer coding classes and enrichment activities for local middle school
students, with an emphasis on increasing the participation of girls in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.