* 1903570
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mobile Phone Distribution and Food Security
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Kathleen Fallon, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 15,997.00

In this project, variation and patterns in mobile phone access are investigated
and the effect of mobile phone access on global food security over the last 20
years is assessed. Policy initiatives have proliferated under the assumption
that mobile phones have the ability to foster improvements in development
sectors, particularly in subsistence agriculture (by, for example, allowing
farmers to check weather forecasts). However, there has been little cross-
national empirical research investigating whether mobile phones in aggregate
contribute to development outcomes. If mobile phones contribute to agrarian
sector development in the way that policy narratives and case studies suggest,
their distribution should have positive impacts on global food security across-
countries and over time. Findings from this study will contribute to public
welfare and security by testing the assumption underlying the promise of mobile
phones as a development tool. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on case study
findings that find support for the economic, political, health, and educational
benefits of access to newer information and communication technologies, this
project uses a quantitative cross-national comparative research design to
explain patterns of mobile phone distribution and access. It subsequently
assesses the role of the distribution of mobile phone access in contributing to
one central development outcome, food security. Data come from the International
Telecommunications Union, supplemented with data from other sources. These data
are analyzed using appropriate statistical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.