* 1903674
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Does Liebig's Law Allow for Capturing More Signal from the Forest?
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Alexander Stine, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 223,370.00

This project aims to develop and apply a tree growth model in order to
strengthen the recovery of climate signals (temperature and moisture) recorded
in the width of tree-ring. This tree growth model has the potential to improve
large-scale climate reconstructions and will be useful for understanding and
ameliorating systematic differences between instrumental and tree-ring climate
reconstructions. The growth model is based on the Liebig's law of the minimum
which describes how tree growth is dictated by the most limiting factor (e.g.
sunlight, nutrients, moisture). The researchers will: 1) conduct a comprehensive
analysis of 4,213 tree-ring sites from the International Tree Ring Data Bank to
understand how Liebig's Law influences within-stand variability; and 2)
characterize the ways that Liebig's Law influences the distribution of climate
signal across trees in both a model and observational context. The goal of this
project is to develop reconstruction techniques for inverting growth for
temperature or precipitation in the presence of local limitations on growth.
These reconstruction techniques have the potential to result in substantially
improved reconstructions of local and regional climate variability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include new methodologies to
use tree growth and tree-ring proxies for climate reconstructions. A
dendroclimatology field-based class to first-year students at San Francisco
State University (a designated Minority Serving Institution by the Department of
Education) will be developed, with the goal of recruiting minority and
economically disadvantaged students to the Earth Sciences. The project will
support the education and training of two graduate students. The researchers
will incorporate concepts and results from this project in their respective
classes and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.