* 1903718
* The Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium: 50 years of Enhancing Geomorphology; Denver, CO; October 2019
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Jason Janke, Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 03/31/2020
* USD 54,240.00

Over the past 50 years, the discipline of geomorphology has evolved
substantially over a relatively short timescale. General, historical
interpretations and descriptions of the landscape were replaced by detailed
studies to understand processes at fine scales using quantitative techniques.
Soon thereafter, new tools and technology improved data collection techniques
and expanded observations, providing geomorphologists with a wealth of data to
reveal new research questions. Contemporary geomorphology has become a
challenging system science that evaluates the interaction and complex
connectivity among many variables and incorporates many other disciplines. The
history of the discipline is an important educational resource that can be used
to help shape perspectives of modern geomorphologists. The 50th Binghamton
Geomorphology Symposium (BGS) will be a milestone event which provides an
introspective assessment of the past and future of the discipline. The agenda
for this BGS aims to make the event more student friendly and diverse. The plans
include a peer mentoring program called "Rocky Mountain Rendezvous" to connect
students and senior researchers, coordination with Diversity Officers and Equal
Opportunity Offices at local colleges, and a panel discussion designed to
address the challenges of inclusivity. A Diversity and Inclusion Statement will
be developed and included in conference materials as well as on the
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past 50 years, BGS has offered many
benefits to the scientific community, culminating in 25 special issues of
Geomorphology and other book publications for the early symposia. The longevity
and continued success of the BGS to advance the discipline has been recognized
at a global scale. The symposium continues to provide a prominent forum for
established and emerging scientists to present, exchange, and disseminate
methods, techniques, and results on geomorphic research to the global community.
Because of its size and focus, the symposium offers an unrivalled opportunity to
engage actively in discussion with a broad range of scientists linked by the
discipline. Opportunities for scientists, researchers, and students to interact
closely in single-session symposium for an extended period are virtually non-
existent at large society meetings such the American Geophysical Union (AGU),
Association of American Geographers (AAG), and Geological Society of America
(GSA). Whereas the symposium will contribute substantially to the scientific
foundations of geomorphic research, it also will address topics of great
importance and relevance to society, including topics such as natural hazards,
environmental change, human impacts, landscape evolution and management, and
policy. The organizers have plans to attract attendees from a broader range of
countries, which will infuse the discipline with a richer international
character.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.