* 1903710
* Collaborative Research: Spatiotemporal Variability and Drivers of East-west Hydroclimate Anti-phasing in the Midcontinental United States During the Last 2000 Years
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Byron Steinman, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 142,621.00

The midcontinental United States (US) is one of the world's largest agricultural
centers and home to more than 70 million Americans. In recent decades, hydro-
climate events in this region have intensified, with generally more frequent and
prolonged flooding in the eastern midcontinental US and more severe and
sustained droughts in the west. This east-west pattern of hydro-climate
variability may be persistent and long-standing, resulting from natural large-
scale ocean-atmosphere circulation regimes, or it may be a more recent
manifestation of anthropogenic climate change. Given that instrumental
meteorological records typically span no more than ~150 years, investigation of
the causes of hydroclimate changes in the Midwest on timescales of hundreds to
thousands of years requires analysis of high-resolution paleoclimate records,
the development of which is the primary objective of this research. Through
geochemical analysis of lake sediment, the researchers will produce a series of
records of lake-level and precipitation changes that will span the past 2000
years in order to determine the spatiotemporal patterns and underlying drivers
of midcontinental hydro-climate variability. This research will 1) produce a
long timescale perspective on hydroclimate that will inform water resource
management strategies, and 2) elucidate regional-scale responses of hydro-
climate to increasing global temperatures. As part of this project, the
investigators will be working with local, state, and federal agencies, including
the United States Geological Survey, to incorporate the results of this research
into flood model development efforts and fluvial erosion hazard mitigation. The
data from this project will additionally inform and benefit research into
climate-society interactions, including the impact of abrupt and long-term
climate changes on Native American societies that once populated the
midcontinental US, but abruptly abandoned much of the region ~600 years ago.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodologically, there are three specific objectives of
this research. 1) The researchers will reconstruct changes in atmospheric
circulation and precipitation seasonality in the midcontinental US during the
last 2000 years using oxygen isotope (d18O) measurements of carbonate minerals
in sediment from two hydrologically open lakes. 2) The researchers will produce
records of local hydroclimate conditions (precipitation:evaporation ratios and
lake-level variability) using d18O, grain size, carbon:nitrogen, and diatom
analysis of sediment from four hydrologically closed lakes. 3) The researchers
will statistically evaluate the open and closed lake hydro-climate records in
the context of atmosphere-ocean variability known from empirical paleoclimate
records and model simulations. Using these approaches, the researchers will
quantify the respective influences of atmospheric circulation and precipitation
seasonality on regional midcontinental hydro-climate and determine the
underlying role(s) of ocean-atmosphere processes. Specifically, the
investigators will test three hypotheses. 1) Multi-decadal to centennial
hydroclimate variability in the midcontinental US during the last 2000 years was
characterized by an east-west hydroclimate dipole with its hinge line located
between the Great Plains and Midwest at ~96oW. 2) Hydroclimate dipole
variability was driven by atmospheric circulation resembling the Pacific North
American mode that altered seasonal precipitation patterns. 3) Midcontinental
hydroclimate and atmospheric circulation anomalies were predominantly controlled
by Pacific basin atmosphere-ocean processes. A critical component of this
research is the education and training of undergraduate and graduate students
while actively working to increase diversity in STEM fields by recruiting and
supporting women and underrepresented minorities in science. One PhD, 2 MSc, and
4 undergraduate students will be directly supported by this project, while
several others supported by other sources will also contribute. Because
translation of science to the public is a critical component of any effective
research project, the researchers and their institutions will engage in outreach
activities including the development of an educational module for 4th to 9th
grade students focused on 1) Midwest climate, both paleo and modern, 2)
paleoclimate reconstruction techniques, and 3) water resource variability. This
module will be developed and implemented by IUPUI's Center for Earth and
Environmental Sciences and made publicly available for other educators to use.
The researchers will work with the Indiana State Museum to incorporate the
projects results into an interactive exhibit on midcontinental Native
Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.