* 1903303
* Bulk Heterojunction Perovskite Solar Cells by Novel Hybrid Perovskite Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Xiong Gong, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 06/30/2024
* USD 491,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Solar cells convert light directly into electricity via
the photovoltaic effect. Their ability to efficiently and economically harness
solar energy makes them a promising source of power. Silicon has proved to be
the best material for making solar cells. A new class of materials, hybrid
perovskites made from organic and inorganic components, have been used as the
light-harvesting active layer in solar cells. Perovskite solar cells have
attracted great attention as their performance approaches that of silicon and
they are compatible with low-cost processing and flexible electronics. So far,
the most efficient state-of-the-art perovskite solar cells were observed from
the lead-based hybrid perovskites. Tuning the optical and electronic properties
of hybrid perovskites by replacing lead or tin with other metal ions is
relatively unexplored. Studies have also shown that unbalanced charge carrier
diffusion within perovskite thin films limits the performance of perovskite
solar cells. This project will address above issues by developing perovskite
solar cells with a bulk heterojunction (mixed) device structure made from novel
hybrid perovskites. The success of this project is expected to significantly
advance the field of perovskite solar cells. The project will also provide
cutting edge research opportunities to undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop
efficient perovskite solar cells with a bulk heterojunction device structure by
novel hybrid perovskite materials. The first objective is to develop novel
hybrid perovskite materials, where lead (or tin) is substituted by different
metal cations. The second objective is to investigate molecular and crystal
structures, film morphologies, optoelectronic properties, and photovoltaic
properties of these novel hybrid perovskite materials. The third objective is to
investigate perovskite solar cells with a bulk heterojunction device structure
by novel hybrid perovskite materials. The fourth objective is to correlate the
device performance of bulk heterojunction perovskite solar cells with molecular
and crystal structures, film morphologies and optoelectronic properties of bulk
heterojunction composite photoactive layers. This project will advance the
fundamental understanding about the interplay of molecular and crystal
structures, the optoelectronic properties of novel hybrid perovskite materials,
device physics and engineering, and the enhancement of device performance of
perovskite solar cells. Insights gained from this work will elucidate materials
design and device physics rules through comparison of device performance with
materials properties. The participation of students in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics disciplines will be increased by engaging high
school and undergraduate students using inquiry-based methods and hands-on
learning activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.