* 1903935
* Building the First Quasars: Simulating the Formation of Massive Black Holes in Protogalaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Jemma Wolcott-Green, Wolcott-Green, Jemma
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 05/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Jemma Wolcott-Green is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at University of
California, Santa Barbara. She will perform high-resolution three-dimensional
computer simulations of the growth of supermassive black holes in the early
universe. Alongside this research, she will design and teach a seminar series
for undergraduates in physics and astronomy, as well as offer mentoring for
women undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research program seeks to advance our understanding of the growth of
supermassive black holes in the early universe. The rapid growth of some black
holes to masses of a billion solar masses during the first billion years of the
universe remains unexplained. This project will focus on modeling the formation
of massive black hole seeds by direct collapse of gas clouds in early galaxies
to try to explain the rapid growth of supermassive black holes. The educational
component of the work will include coursework development as well as mentoring
activities to help increase the participation and retention of women in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.