* 1903857
* Ascertaining Block Copolymer Nanodomain-Guided Protein Adsorption and Surface Assembly Characteristics Towards Creating Functional Protein Constructs
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Angel de Dios, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Professor Jong-in Hahm of the Department of Chemistry at Georgetown University
is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry to study protein adsorption on surfaces.
The study is focused on how proteins adhere and accumulate on the surfaces of
nano-patterned polymeric materials. Protein adsorption on polymer surfaces
impacts numerous everyday applications such as food packaging, health devices
(contact lenses, artificial joints and implanted stents), diagnostic tools, and
biosensors. The objectives of this research is to obtain a molecular-level
understanding of the complex mechanisms underlying protein adsorption and to
identify protein behavior on polymeric surfaces at the nanoscale level. The
knowledge obtained from this research may aid in the development of protein
assemblies for miniaturized and function-tailored biomaterials, biodevices, and
tissue engineering scaffolds. Educational and outreach activities are integrated
with the research activities. These include harnessing diversity through
participation of underrepresented groups of undergraduate and high school
students; enhancing student learning experiences through a newly-developed
course in soft matter characterization; and promoting student networking
opportunities in extended scientific exchange settings beyond Georgetown
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims are to elucidate
noncompetitive and competitive protein adsorption characteristics at the
individual biomolecular level on block copolymer (BCP) nanodomain surfaces that
are precisely tuned for BCP's chemical composition, periodicity, and alignment.
The research also seeks to determine the effects of the BCP nanodomain-related
variables on the adsorption characteristics for a broad range of useful model
proteins and to establish a highly effective method for rapidly and precisely
creating nanoscale-patterned proteins with their orientation and alignment
controlled over large substrate areas. By revealing important nanoscale protein
adsorption characteristics of single and multi-protein systems that are
unanswered to date, the study may provide much needed, direct experimental data
for nanoscale protein adsorption with spatial resolution at or below the
individual protein level and at each BCP nanodomain level. New fundamental
toolsets are anticipated from the study in terms of tuning the physical and
chemical parameters of BCP surfaces to effectively guide and control the large-
area organization of given proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.