* 1903965
* Determining the Structure of Biological Membranes through Adhesive Emulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Eric Freeman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 278,747.00

The membrane of a cell separates the cell's interior contents from the
surrounding fluid. The semi-permeable membrane is composed of a lipid bilayer
and various proteins that enable cell-cell signaling and control exchange of
material through the membrane. Interactions among lipids and proteins help
organize the proteins spatially in the membrane. Interactions within each
leaflet of the bilayer have been studied extensively; this project focuses on
transverse interactions between the leaflets. The project will develop a new
experimental approach that uses lipid-coated droplets pressed against each other
to form synthetic lipid bilayer membranes. Measurements of certain
characteristics of the interacting droplets and the membrane will allow the
energetics of transverse lipid interactions to be determined quantitatively.
Findings from this research will show how differences in the compositions of the
two leaflets of a bilayer affect cell function, which could inspire new
therapeutics to detect and combat disease. The project will provide
opportunities for graduate students from several engineering disciplines to
participate in highly interdisciplinary research. The project will also engage
high school and undergraduate students through several existing programs at the
University of Georgia that enhance participation of students from
underrepresented groups in engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the
formation of lipid subdomains in cellular membranes due to lateral lipid-lipid
interactions is well characterized, the accompanying cross-membrane coupling of
lipid subdomains is underexplored. This project will exploit the fluidic
properties of droplet interface bilayers to study these phenomena through a
combination of tensiometry and electrophysiology. Aqueous nanoliter droplets
coated with ordered lipid monolayers will be manipulated into contact to form
model lipid bilayer membranes with varying compositions in each leaflet. An
imposed electric field across the membrane will produce both electrocompression
and electrowetting, causing the membrane to simultaneously thin and expand.
Visual measurements of the membrane area and the angle of contact during this
process will provide accurate values of the membrane thickness and the apparent
bilayer tension without additional calibration. Changes in the membrane tension
during electrocompression will reflect lipid-lipid interactions within and
between the lipid leaflets. Model rafts or lipid subdomains will be created
using photopolymerizable lipids, and changes in the membrane properties during
electrocompression will be tracked as a function of the asymmetric distribution
of these subdomains between the membrane leaflets. This approach will provide
experimental measurements of the mismatch energy generated by leaflet asymmetry,
which has been hypothesized to drive collocation of the lipid domains. The
project will provide interdisciplinary training for a graduate student in
engineering, with emphasis on electrophysiology, tensiometry, interfacial
chemistry, modeling, and instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.