* 1903646
* P2C2: Evaluating Mean Annual Precipitation in the Southwestern United States (US) during the Pliocene-Pleistocene Transition Using Nitrate D17O Anomalies
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Kenneth Ridgway, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,031.00

This project aims to develop a new precipitation record in Southwestern US
during the Pliocene-Pleistocene transition (1-3 Million years). The researchers
suggest to use a new isotopic tracer of precipitation: soil nitrate 17O
anomalies. The analyses will be carried out on sediment samples collected from
the Confidence Hills paleo- lake deposits in Death Valley, CA. This type of arid
environment is suitable for nitrates deposition. The main objective is to assess
quantitative changes in mean annual precipitation using soil nitrate 17O
anomalies and link it to qualitative markers of climate variations such as
shifts in depositional environments. The new data will serve as a test bed for
model simulations of Pliocene-Pleistocene changes in
precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include
developing a long quantitative precipitation record, testing and applying a new
isotopic tracer for precipitation reconstruction from terrestrial sediments, and
providing a critical data input at deep time-scales (1-3 Million years) to test
Pliocene-Pleistocene climate models. Two undergraduate and one graduate student
(PhD student to be recruited from tribal undergraduate colleges) will be
mentored through the project. A Native American K-12 student field trip is
incorporated in to the project and will be led by two native American students
from Purdue University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.