* 1903095
* FSML:  Gulf of Alaska Dive and Marine Research Support Infrastructure Project
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Lisa Busch, SITKA SOUND SCIENCE CENTER INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2020
* USD 345,950.00

Sitka Sound Science Center (SSSC) is a nonprofit center for marine research,
education and outreach located on Sitka Sound in the Gulf of Alaska. This
project will make improvements to the physical plant of its field station to
make dive and marine research more efficient, safer and to provision several
NSF-supported research projects in the biological and geosciences. The project
will also improve SSSC's ability to protect and store scientific equipment for
research in the geosciences. The studies conducted in the Gulf of Alaska and in
the Tongass National Forest are important for improving our nation's
understanding of how natural systems contribute to our economic and food
security. Ocean acidification (OA) occurs more rapidly at higher latitudes
sooner than lower latitude and in places with large amounts of fresh water
inputs. Sitka Sound is a confluence of these factors, causing some of the
highest rates of OA recorded in Alaska. The impacts of OA on the Gulf of Alaska
ecosystem and its dependent human communities raises the importance of marine
research in Sitka at this moment in time. Subtidal and intertidal research from
the Sitka Sound Science Center is already increasing, but is limited by existing
space, aging equipment, safety concerns and a paucity of dedicated dive research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a better platform
and staging area for new, NSF-funded dive and marine research in the Gulf of
Alaska. The project will create a separate area for dive research equipment
storage, and dive researchers' specific needs in the Mill Building of the Sitka
Sound Science Center. It will upgrade the plumbing and the electrical in the
entire building, provide showers, a place for the compressor, a drying room and
bathrooms that will benefit dive research and other scientists that utilize the
Sitka Sound Science Center field station facilities. Creating more dive research
capacity is a critical component to furthering our ecosystem understandings in
this rapidly changing environment. While SSSC's current facilities may be
adequate for the increasing need for intertidal research, it does not have the
ability to increase research in the subtidal. This is a gap in infrastructure,
at the northern edge of the temperate Macrocystis forest, a highly dynamic area
driven by both physical and biological factors. The current SSSC facility lacks
reliable heat, plumbing and electricity. The upgrade will include improvements
to SSSC's Mill Building interior and partitioning off inside the building for
dive research equipment, creating a heated space for drying and changing,
plumbing for toilets and showers with utilities to the facility and updating the
electrical and the storage space for scientific equipment. It will also provide
funding for a high capacity dive compressor, greatly increasing the ability to
service multiple concurrent dive projects. For more about the SSSC, visit their
website at https://sitkascience.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.