* 1903616
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the causes of Atlantic hurricane variability in the late Holocene
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 478,748.00

The spatial and temporal patterns of intense-hurricane risk along the western
North Atlantic margin are poorly known due to the brevity and incompleteness of
observational datasets. In order to understand how this risk may change in space
and time, and explore the potential drivers of changes in that risk on
multidecadal to centennial timescales, we need to extend our observations by
employing proxy records of intense hurricane landfalls. Coarse-grained
hurricane-induced event beds preserved in coastal sinkholes and blue holes
(submerged sinkholes) provide an archive of intense hurricane passage that
extends back many centuries. This project focuses on developing reconstructions
of intense-hurricane strikes at a series of sites across the western North
Atlantic. These reconstructions will provide detailed site-specific information
of intense hurricane frequency across a wide range of climate conditions over
the last two millennia, providing an important baseline for assessing current
and future risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reconstructions of intense-hurricane
strikes based on coarse-grained event bed deposits in deep coastal sediment
depocenters with high-deposition rates provide long term archives of these
events dating back hundreds to thousands of years. The instrumental record of
these events is very limited and is neither sufficient for identifying the
components of climate that influence storm activity on centennial and longer
timescales, nor capable of resolving hurricane-climate interactions during
climate regimes not analogous to the instrumental period. Alarmingly, proxy
records provide evidence that historically unprecedented levels of intense-
hurricane activity impacted the eastern seaboard and Gulf coasts of the USA
during the last two millennia. Determining the spatial and temporal pattern of
past hurricane activity and the climatic forcing mechanisms responsible for this
unprecedented level of intense landfalls is critical for assessing the future
risks facing society. This project will add eight new reconstructions from sites
across the western North Atlantic that fill critical spatial gaps in the
currently available network of high-resolution hurricane reconstructions
spanning the last millennium or more. In addition to adding new sediment proxy
records to the larger existing database, the research team will revisit three
locations (Grand Bahama, Caicos and Cay Sal) that were struck after field
sampling by Hurricanes Matthew and Irma. These strikes by intense hurricanes at
field sites already cored offer a rare opportunity to calibrate the paleo
archives in hand with modern analogs. The expanded network of sites will be used
to assess spatial and temporal changes in hurricane activity. The resulting
database of hurricane chronologies, in combination with analysis of new and
existing but unanalyzed model simulations, can be used to enhance our
understanding of the fundamental processes governing intense hurricane activity.
As part of this project, a graduate student will receive training in laboratory
techniques, field work and data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.