* 1903775
* Regimes of plasma-assisted ignition of turbulent hydrocarbon mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Fabrizio Bisetti, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 361,639.00

Experiments indicate that a special class of plasmas known as non-thermal
plasmas can ignite hydrocarbon/air mixtures under extremely fuel-lean condition
where conventional ignition approaches have failed. These non-thermal plasmas
act through highly reactive molecules that stimulate the combustion process with
low energy input. In this project, we will develop and implement a robust and
accurate predictive model that can be used to optimize the plasma- assisted
ignition of turbulent flows in combustion devices. If successful, the model
developed holds enormous potential to reduce combustion-generated emissions and
improve thermal cycle efficiency with positive outcomes for energy security and
the environment. The project features activities that seek to enhance
undergraduate STEM education at UT Austin and are likely to be adopted in high
schools (G9-12) throughout the United States upon completion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the technological promise with regard to
improving energy conversion processes, a systematic understanding of the
interaction of plasma discharges, coupled plasma and combustion chemical
kinetics, and turbulent transport is lacking. Such understanding is required in
order to implement plasma-assisted ignition (PAI) in practical devices towards
low-emission and high-efficiency energy-conversion technology. The outcome of a
PAI event depends on the competition between transport of energy and plasma-
generated radicals out of the igniting kernel and accelerating chemical kinetics
and heat release. In this project, we will identify the non-dimensional
parameters that govern PAI of turbulent reactive mixtures and define regime
diagrams by leveraging massively parallel and large-scale simulations. The high-
fidelity physical models employed ensure that no closures are invoked. The flow
configuration considered in our approach is a canonical homogeneous isotropic
turbulent flow whereby the rates of turbulent transport and all other relevant
scales may be carefully controlled. Consideration will be given to temporal and
spatial scales of plasma discharges, turbulent flow, chemical kinetics, and
rates of molecular diffusion of heat and mass. Data from simulations will be
analyzed using powerful new mathematical techniques that quantify the
competition of chemical reactions and transport locally and instantaneously
during transient ignition events. An important aspect of our approach is that
simulations will closely mirror PAI experiments in a turbulent combustion vessel
conducted in parallel by our collaborators, providing the unique opportunity for
direct comparisons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.