* 1903415
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Plasma Dynamics of Femtosecond Laser-Induced Photoionization from Near to Mid-Infrared
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Alexey Shashurin, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 391,419.00

Recent progress in the development of laser sources enables generation of laser
pulses at the high intensities, ultra-short pulse durations, and long
wavelengths that could not be previously achieved. These novel lasers have
potential for studying Earth's atmosphere as well as directed energy
transmission over large distances. The central process enabling these unique
applications is laser-induced generation of plasmas known as photoionization.
Fundamental physical properties of photoionization at these extreme laser
parameters are currently largely unknown. This project will advance the
understanding of basic properties of photoionization and plasmas generated by
these new types of lasers. The educational plan for this project aims to promote
plasma science and other careers in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. The research will be integrated into curricula by including results
and demonstrations in several graduate-level courses on topics in plasma science
and experimental methods. Outreach and education at the K-12 level will be
accomplished by developing a cold plasma demonstration facility and a series of
plasma science educational videos on YouTube. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
studies dynamics of plasmas generated by intense femtosecond laser pulses in the
near and mid-infrared range. It will utilize elastic scattering of microwaves
for absolute quantitative measurements of electron number density in a plasma in
new, unexplored regimes. Specific research goals of the project include
conducting thorough absolute measurements of electron number density and
photoionization rates for an unprecedented wavelength range of intense laser
pulses, from the near-ultraviolet to mid-infrared spectral range, and a broad
range of intensities, gas types, and different polarization states. Another goal
of the project is to conduct joint theoretical and experimental exploration of
plasma generation by femtosecond laser gas ionization and subsequent plasma
decay in various gaseous mixtures at atmospheric pressure in the presence of
non-linear optical phenomena. The research program will significantly deepen our
knowledge of femtosecond laser-induced gas ionization and subsequent plasma
decay, the understanding of which is currently very
limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.