* 1903462
* Quantum Kinetics of Laser-Induced Electron Hole Plasmas in Nanowire Arrays
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Jeremy Gulley, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2023
* USD 116,948.00

The interaction of light with matter is a fundamental topic of scientific
research and critical to many modern technologies. The entire research field of
optoelectronics is concerned with explaining the quantum interaction of light
with electronic material components, increasingly on the scale of atoms and
molecules. For many semiconductors, intense laser light can excite electrons,
which then leave oppositely-charged shadows behind, known as "holes". These
electrons and holes behave as a plasma (a gas of charged particles) confined
within the solid. Solving the complicated equations describing such plasmas in
three-dimensional space can be prohibitive, even on today's supercomputers.
Quantum-wires, however, have a thickness over 1000 times smaller than a human
hair, and they allow us to test quantum plasma models on charges that are
confined to only one dimension in space. This project aims to calculate the
evolution of electron-hole plasmas in interacting quantum wires, as well as the
evolution of the light that excites them. The goal is to improve knowledge of
optical and transport properties of light-generated plasmas on time-scales of a
millionth of a billionth of a second. This knowledge is important for
understanding of light-matter interactions, as well as advancements in nano-
optoelectronics, sensing, and many national security applications. This project
also has significant broader impacts in providing undergraduate students a
chance to participate in cutting-edge research, development of new college
course curricula based on the research results, and enabling public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the technical side, the goal of this project
is to develop improved calculations of the ultrafast dynamics of photo-excited
electron-hole plasmas in quantum wires, as well as the scattering of ultrashort
laser pulses incident on a quantum wire array. The computations will couple
Pseudo-Spectral Time Domain (PSTD) techniques of modeling light propagation to
quantum-kinetic Semiconductor Bloch equations for the many-body plasma dynamics
in the quantum wires. This project advances our knowledge of plasma dynamics in
solids by dispensing with several common assumptions often used to simplify such
calculations; including monochromatic laser fields, electron-hole distributions
in quasi-equilibrium, spatially uniform electric fields in the medium, and
neglect of longitudinal fields resulting from the spatial electron-hole plasma
distribution. These assumptions are a limiting factor on today's optoelectronic
calculations involving intense light, particularly on the nanometer length and
femtosecond time scales. The project will seek to find experimentally measurable
indicators of the correlation between the localized response of quantum-wire
plasmas and the spatial-temporal features and phases of the scattered light
pulses. It will also look for a measurable correlation between the current from
driven electron-hole plasmas, as well as localized longitudinal electromagnetic
fields due to induced, long-lasting plasma oscillations in the quantum wires.
The results of the project will also be important for advancements in the
emerging fields of femtosecond electronics and attosecond
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.