* 1903207
* RI: Small: Protecting Social Choice Mechanisms from Malicious Influence
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Yevgeniy Vorobeychik, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 376,178.00

Vulnerability of social choice mechanisms to malicious influence is a long-
standing concern. An increasingly important means of malicious influence
involves digital media platforms through the use of fake or highly misleading
information. The net effect of such influence is to change the attitudes of
mechanism participants about the relative importance of issues, as well as their
perception of candidates and their views and, as a consequence, change social
choice outcomes. This proposal aims to develop systematic quantitative and
algorithmic approaches for studying control of social choice mechanisms when
manipulation targets perceptions about and views on issues. Consequently, this
research has the potential to significantly contribute to the broader
interdisciplinary study of vulnerability of social choice mechanisms to
malicious influence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research will
investigate a novel model of control of social choice mechanisms which builds on
the spatial theory of voting in which voters' preferences over candidates are
generated based on their relative similarity on issues. In this model, the
primary target of manipulation is perception of issues, both in terms of their
relative importance, as well as perception of candidates' views.
Algorithmically, this opens several new classes of problems with little prior
research, such as the problem of issue selection, where the malicious party may
select which issues are most salient, or opinion manipulation where a malicious
actor aims to mislead mechanism participants about where the candidates stand on
issues. Conceptually, this problem has a more direct connection to common means
of subversion of social choice mechanism in reality, such as advertising and
campaigning, both on social and conventional media. Furthermore, this project
will study the dual problem of protecting social choice mechanisms in the
spatial model, providing a series of novel modeling and algorithmic
contributions for this problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.