* 1903226
* Collaborative Research: Novel Statistical Tools for Metagenomics and Metabolomics Data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Wenxuan Zhong, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2024
* USD 759,997.00

Accumulating evidence suggests that disrupting intestinal microbial ecosystems
can cause many serious diseases including chronic diseases such as coronary
heart disease (CHD), neurobehavioral diseases such as autism, inflammatory
diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and etc. For example, the
developing infant intestinal microbiome has been implicated in central
myelination and the maturation and function of microglia (CNS immune cells), a
core deficiency in Autism Spectrum Disorders. Thus, the study of the gut
microbial distributions and their metabolites are very important to find new
therapeutic targets for many diseases. However, compared to the huge amounts of
medical research on human cells, our understanding of the microbial ecosystem is
very limited: the biodiversity of them is barely studied, not to mention their
interactions with the human host. This project will develop a suite of
statistical theory and methods as well as computational tools to facilitate the
understanding of the intestinal microbial ecosystem. The proposed methods are
fast, efficient, and highly accurate. They can be widely applied to any
metagenomic and metabolomic investigations. The research team will include post
doctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to
extend our knowledge of intestinal microbial ecosystem by developing novel
quantitative methods for microbial species and their metabolites detection,
identification, and quantification in various diseases. The sensitivity and
specificity of our methods permit accurate detection of microbial species at
very low coverage levels. This is a translational technology that should find
substantial use in biomedical researches and drug developments. More
specifically, the PIs shall develop methods for identifying microbial species
especially unknown species, reducing error in metabolomic analysis, estimating
microbial and metabolite distributions, quantifying microbial or metabolites
distributional differences that are associated with diseases, integrating
metagenomic and metabolomic analysis together to study the microbial ecosystem,
building analytical models to link metabolite profiling with species profiling
to understand how metabolites interact with genetic contents and eventually
affect cell metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.