* 1903249
* INFEWS: U.S.-China: Increasing the Resilience of Human-Nature Interactions in the Yellow River Basin through Coordinated Food-Energy-Water Nexus Management
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Fernando Miralles-Wilhelm, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The resilience of human-nature systems at the nexus of food, energy, and water
(FEW) is threatened by environmental change such as increasing climate extremes,
growing population demands, and evolving land use. Actionable strategies for
improving both U.S. and China's agricultural, economic, and environmental
sustainability must be developed through better understanding of how their
mutual interactions with climate affect the evolution of the coupled FEW
systems. The research project integrates state-of-the-art knowledge and modeling
capabilities in climate, hydrologic, agronomic, biogeochemical, engineering, and
economic sciences. The investigation will build a framework to realistically
couple, predict and apply interactive water, carbon, and nitrogen cycle
processes with agricultural practices, resource management and government
policies to address critical issues of vulnerability, resilience and
sustainability in regional FEW systems. The U.S.-China comparison will determine
the importance of human activities in enhancing or reducing FEW system
resilience, and thereby to provide science-based decision support to navigate
sustainable resources use for food and energy crops production. The project
includes an international exchange program to support education of the next
generation of scientists in a transdisciplinary research framework in which the
cross-fertilization of ideas is central. Students will be engaged in all aspects
of the project and collaborate with senior scientists in both U.S. and China
teams, preparing these broadly trained researchers on new approaches critical
for the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
develop, evaluate, and apply a coupled modeling framework to address the
adaptability of China's Food production-Energy development-Water supply systems
(CFEW). The framework will incorporate environmental changes and human
activities in the Yellow River Basin, where demands on these systems are in
sharp conflict. The study will include the production of the main food and
bioenergy crops; energy development from hydropower, coal reserves and biomass
feedstocks; and the water supply management that includes reservoir operation,
flood control, and irrigation strategy. The proposed approach explicitly
incorporates interdependency, human-centric, and extremality hypotheses to
enable deeper understanding of the natural-socioeconomic interactions
underpinning China's FEW systems resilience and sustainability. The primary
objectives are to: (1) develop CFEW to represent the multi-scale interactions
and coevolution of regional FEW systems with climate and hydrologic processes
responding to major environmental factors and human interventions; (2)
understand key feedback mechanisms driving FEW systems and regional differences
linking natural variations with human activities; (3) determine potential
thresholds in these systems at which changes to human activities damage China's
food, energy and water security and overall system resilience and adaptability,
and (4) identify sustainable food and energy production pathways under limited
land/water resources along with effective uses of the diversion water to contain
these damages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.