* 1903825
* RAPID: Using Information to Promote Human Capital Among Disabled Youth
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Manasi Deshpande, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2020
* USD 149,977.00

The social security administration pays about $10b annually in supplemental
security income (SSI) to children with disabilities. These children have school
dropout rates of 45% and employment rates of 30-50% in adulthood. Each year,
about 70% of the 50,000 SSI children who turn 18 years lose eligibility.
However, qualitative evidence indicates that most households underestimate the
chance of losing SSI. It is possible that inaccurate information may contribute
to lack of human capital investment by SSI children and this may result in poor
adult outcomes. This proposed research will use experimental methods to
investigate the effects of information on parent and child's beliefs in the
possibility of losing eligibility and short-term investment in human capital
formation---such as education and health. The results of this research project
have important implications for SSI and human capital investment policies. This
intervention, if successful, could be scaled up and applied to other government
benefits. In addition, the survey data that will be collected will be the most
extensive information on this at-risk, policy-relevant population; this will be
very useful to researchers in this area. The results of this research will
therefore contribute to improving the living standards of people with
disabilities, reduce unemployment, as well as increase economic growth rate.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates households' dynamic objectives
in educational investments decision making by estimating the effect of beliefs
about the availability of future government benefits in adulthood on educational
investments in childhood. Researchers have studied the effect of government
benefits on contemporaneous labor supply and human capital. This project focuses
on the dynamic effects of government benefits on human capital investment. The
project is motivated by the idea that changes in beliefs about the availability
of benefits provide a way to test this hypothesis. It will select a sample of
SSI children, randomize them into control and treatment groups and conduct a
baseline survey to quantify the extent of inaccurate beliefs and test for
heterogeneous impacts of information by baseline beliefs. There will be two
comparison groups: a group that receives resources, but no information about
ineligibility, and a pure control group. The "treatment group" will receive
information about age 18 ineligibility as well as offer of help on test
preparation and other educational resources. The outcome measure will be take-up
of educational resources. The project will then combine an end-line survey with
administrative data to estimate the effect of information on parent and child
beliefs, investments, and long-term child outcomes. In addition to comparing the
information treatment group to the resource-only group to estimate the effect of
receiving information, the research to estimate the effect of receiving resource
information and compare the information and pure control groups to estimate the
full policy impact of ineligibility information. The results of this study have
important policy implications for the use of information to increase human
capital investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.