* 1903852
* Triple Oxygen Isotope Investigation of Mantle Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Zachary Sharp, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2024
* USD 356,983.00

The mantle composes 67% of Earth by weight, but is overlain by a 5-10 km oceanic
crust or 30-50 km continental crust, making direct sampling of the most abundant
material on the planet impossible. However, samples have reached the Earth?s
surface in various volcanic rocks or by plate tectonic activity. It is the
purpose of this study to apply the new geochemical tool of triple oxygen isotope
geochemistry to these rocks in order to better constrain the origin of mantle
rocks and the degree of recycling of crustal material back into the mantle. It
is ultimately the transfer of volatile compounds between the mantle and
crust/atmosphere that is responsible for changes in the long-term climate of the
planet. Furthermore, high temperature hydrothermal alteration of oceanic
lithospheric material, which includes the shallow mantle, has been shown to be a
potentially important repository for sequestration of atmospheric CO2. The
triple isotope work proposed in this study will better constrain the natural
conditions of alteration of the lithosphere as it incorporates volatiles,
including CO2 and water. In addition to these scientific impacts, this project
will support a first-generation graduate student, and several undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There have been dozens of studies that use the
traditional ratio of the two common isotopes of oxygen, 18-O and 16-O, to place
constraints on the origin and temperature of formation of mantle samples.
Because there is only one isotope ratio being measured (18-O/16-O), the analyses
are often ambiguous. By adding the third rare 17-O isotope to the mix, the
amount of information available is significantly greater. Preliminary work shows
remarkable instances of equilibrium or disequilibrium that would not be
identified with the 18-O/16-O data alone. Ultimately, it is envisioned that the
triple isotope research in mantle materials will be an important component of
broad-based studies of mantle-derived rocks. As such, it is necessary to provide
a foundation for future work, in order to make the concept tractable and
applicable to the general community. This work will define the boundary
conditions, such as the triple isotope composition of "pristine mantle" and
unaltered mid-ocean ridge basalts, the range of triple isotope values of altered
oceanic crust and provide standards to the broader geological
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.