* 1903112
* Collaborative Research: Continuous Manufacturing of Hetero-Nanostructures Enabled by Colloidal Atomic Layer Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Jonathan Owen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 206,255.00

Cadmium selenide nanoplatelets are attractive materials for next generation,
energy efficient displays and solid-state lighting devices. The synthesis of
high-quality nanoplatelets is a multi-step process that is difficult to study
and scale up using conventional approaches. This award supports collaborative
research to develop a continuous manufacturing strategy that consistently
produces highly efficient nanoplatelets. The projected strategy utilizes a
layer-by-layer growth process that enables cost-effective synthesis of the high-
performance nanomaterials. The project contributes to fundamental knowledge of
the nanoplatelet growth process, the requirements of flow synthesis methods, and
determine nanoplatelet structure through photoluminescence-performance
relationships. If successful, the research could reduce the energy consumption
of displays and solid-state lighting devices produced by mid to large-scale U.S.
companies, and thereby benefit the nation's prosperity, health, and security.
This collaborative research project involves integration of several fields
including colloidal synthesis, reaction and chemical engineering, and materials
science. This grant trains graduate and undergraduate students in the continuous
manufacture of advanced materials. Additionally, the multi-disciplinary nature
of this project facilitates participation of women and underrepresented groups
in research and greatly impacts engineering education through hands-on
experiments for undergraduate students. Furthermore, the YouTube is used to
disseminate the acquired advanced manufacturing knowledge to a broader
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continuous flow manufacturing process based
on the colloidal atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique for synthesis of high-
quality nanoplatelets is highly modular and versatile. Continuous flow
manufacturing has the potential to overcome the current limitations of the batch
scale production of emissive nanomaterials. However, some key scientific
questions need to be thoroughly explored to realize the continuous manufacturing
of semiconductor nanoplatelets using the colloidal ALD process. This research
project develops the fundamental knowledge required for each step of the layer-
by-layer growth process for nanomaterial synthesis. The continuous flow
synthesis process is capable of synthesizing and purifying colloidal
nanoplatelet heterostructures using a linear sequence of multiple reactor
modules. The nanoplatelets manufactured in continuous flow are composed of a
graded alloy emissive layer and several passivating shell layers engineered for
solid-state lighting and micro-display applications. Continuous flow reactor
design, a library of novel synthesis precursors, and in-line liquid-liquid phase
separation technique enable unprecedented process intensification in advanced
manufacturing of colloidal nanoplatelets. The novel continuous manufacturing
process utilizing intensified flow reactors paves the way for in-flow
manufacturing of other colloidal nanocrystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.