* 1903944
* Feedback Processes of Low Metallicity Protogalaxy Analogs
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Jacqueline Monkiewicz, Monkiewicz              Jacqueline     A
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Jacqueline Monkiewicz is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at Arizona State
University and New Mexico State University. She will use observations of nearby
galaxies that are analogs of galaxies in the early universe to study how
efficiently ultraviolet and X-ray light can escape into the intergalactic medium
from these galaxies. This information will provide insight into how the first
galaxies ionized the neutral hydrogen in the early universe. Alongside this
research, she will develop tools for presenting astronomy to blind and visually
impaired audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program seeks to
advance our understanding of the epoch of reionization in the early universe.
The escape fraction of ionizing photons from early galaxies is an important
component to better understanding reionization. This project will use a
particular low-redshift population of dwarf galaxies that are considered to be
analogs of high-redshift Lyman-alpha emitters. The project will use ionization
mapping through spectroscopy to study the physical processes that affect the
escape fraction. For the educational component of her work, Monkiewicz will
develop a sonified sky smartphone app and a portable tactile planetarium for the
blind and visually impaired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.