* 1903790
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Ceramics as a Chronological Indicator
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Alice Yao, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 15,826.00

Mannat Johal, a PhD scholar at the University of Chicago, will investigate how
people and societies experience time through their participation in everyday
activities of production and consumption. While time is generally understood in
terms of quantifiable units such as hours, days, months and years, recent
scholarship has highlighted that human experiences of time are diverse, and
rooted in activities rather than objective measurements. As a discipline that
tracks long-term processes of continuity and change, archaeology is particularly
well-suited to tracing the rhythms and durations of a range of activities,
everyday acts of cooking and consumption as well as events like death and
commemoration. Further, archaeological studies emphasize how relationships
between people and the material world - landscapes, monuments and objects -
influence how people and societies form a sense of history, and develop their
collective memory. These complex experiences of time have been significant
historically and remain important in today's world, as seen in disputed claims
to heritage, debates over the repatriation of museum objects, and a widespread
interest in documenting and preserving traditional practices. Researchers
collaborate with scholars and government officials in India to train students
and produce knowledge about the past that is disseminated to both academic and
non-academic audiences. Additionally, this team of researchers will collaborate
with local authorities to create a museum with finds excavated at
Maski.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shifting the focus from meaningful monuments to the
sphere of everyday life, the research will study how the production and use of
ceramic vessels shaped the rhythms of household activities in medieval south
India. Ceramic vessels were common objects accessible to a wide range of the
population and used for a variety of purposes, such as cooking, storage, eating,
and transporting goods. Working with a team of excavators at Maski, located in
the semi-arid southern reaches of India's Deccan plateau, the researcher will
study how ceramic vessel forms shifted over time, and the ways in which potters
created vessels that may have been considered "traditional" or "novel." She will
combine evidence from typological analysis with data on ceramic pastes to assess
how potters created vessels with varying levels of durability. This research is
part of a larger effort to develop a historical archaeology of the Indian
Subcontinent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.