* 1903486
* RAPID: Assessing the Performance of Elevated Wood Buildings, including Manufactured Housing, in Florida during 2018 Hurricane Michael
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Thang Dao, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 11/30/2020
* USD 44,615.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will investigate the wind
performance of elevated site-built and manufactured housing during Hurricane
Michael, which made landfall in Florida on October 10, 2018, just a few miles
per hour (mph) below a Category 5 hurricane. This hurricane was the strongest to
hit the continental United States since Hurricane Andrew in 1992. The observed
impact of Hurricane Michael presents a unique and important opportunity to
investigate the wind performance of elevated site-built and manufactured
housing, given that recorded wind speeds reached and exceeded design winds at
the coast and further inland. Florida has one of the largest inventories in the
United States of manufactured housing, the most vulnerable residential structure
to hurricanes, which also often houses the most socially vulnerable households.
While damage to manufactured housing has been widely noticed following major
hurricane events, this type of structure has received minimal research
attention. Manufactured housing is a subset of elevated housing, where elevated
site-built homes are also very common in the areas impacted by Hurricane
Michael. The influence that the elevation height, stilt distribution, and
foundation type have on wind loading and damage experienced by elevated site-
built and manufactured housing structures is presently unknown. This project
will investigate these fundamental knowledge gaps through ephemeral data
collection of the performance of elevated housing following Hurricane Michael.
Damage to housing is often responsible for half of the disaster losses following
major hurricane events notwithstanding the widespread disruption it causes
through household dislocation. Findings from this study will be shared with
national and state-level codes and standards committees to improve the
resilience of common, but understudied, residential buildings, in order to
promote continuity in national welfare and prosperity following a hurricane
event. Data collected through this grant will be shared on the NHERI Data Depot
and Reconnaissance Portal (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org) for broad use by the
engineering community.

The Hurricane Michael wind field had a wide range of inland wind speeds, and
thus presents the opportunity for on-site damage investigation of different
types of residential building structures, including elevated site-built and
manufactured homes. Current codes and standards do not account for the air flow
that occurs underneath elevated residential buildings. Preliminary research has
shown that different elevations could amplify the wind pressures measured on the
wall and roof surfaces, suggesting unconservatism in current code-based design
approaches. This RAPID award will assess damage to a range of elevated and non-
elevated homes, and make comparisons based on elevation height, stilt
distribution, and foundation type in areas that experienced design-level and
higher wind speeds during Hurricane Michael. Furthermore, manufactured homes in
the Hurricane Michael impacted areas are designed for either Zone II (100 mph)
or Zone III (110 mph) peak wind speeds, as well as for 75 mph sustained wind for
transportation on highway/interstate purposes. Most wind loads used in design
currently consider three-second gust wind speed, which is an instant wind load
that assumes structural component and material behaviors stay in the linear
range during an extreme wind event. Examining damage to manufactured housing at
the sites where wind speeds were sustained at 75 mph or less will advance
missing knowledge on whether failures are initiated by fatigue, caused by
sustained wind loads, and progress into catastrophic failure of the unit. This
gained knowledge will direct future research foci for manufactured housing
studies to have better damage mitigation plans for both retrofit (old) and
design (new) of manufactured homes. The reconnaissance team will enter areas in
Florida affected by Hurricane Michael and collect on-site data, including images
of damage and building information, for analyses and advancement of fundamental
knowledge on elevated site-built and manufacturing housing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.