* 1903109
* Upgrading the Jicamarca Radio Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* David Hysell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 08/31/2022
* USD 953,820.00

The NSF-supported Jicamarca Radio Observatory (JRO) in Peru has been operational
for over 50 years. This major center for upper atmospheric research, training,
and education, currently facilitating the research efforts of investigators
supported by NSF's Geospace Programs, NASA, and the U.S. Air Force. The
observatory participates in the World Day investigations, which is a globally
coordinated observing effort where participating radars make simultaneous
measurements of the upper atmosphere. The observatory also performs specialized
experiments, maintains a large instrument cluster in partnerships with other
investigators, hosts visitors at different professional levels, and conducts
internship programs and schools in aeronomy and space weather. JRO is also
preparing to support NASA's ICON (Ionospheric Connection Explorer) and GOLD
(Global-scale Observations of the Limb and Disk) missions as well as a NASA
sounding rocket campaign in Peru planned tentatively for 2022. This award will
support upgrades to the facility to maintain its historically highly productive
status. These upgrades are to complete the final half of electronic antenna beam
steering upgrade, to entirely replace the deteriorating ground screen that the
main antenna sits above, and to upgrade obsolete tube amplifiers to solid state
amplifiers which will increase the power output of the
antenna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jicamarca is the foremost ground-based instrument
for studying the equatorial ionophere and can observe echoes from the lower,
middle, and upper atmosphere, ionosphere, topside, and plasmasphere to an
altitude of nearly 10,000 km. Jicamarca is unique because if its high power
(50-MHz operating frequency), its modularity, and its proximity to the magnetic
equator. The frequency allows it to probe both exceptionally low and
exceptionally high altitudes compared to other mesosphere-stratosphere-
troposphere (MST)/incoherent scatter radars, in a region with few instruments.
The capabilities permit discovery research even after several decades of
operation but are suffering from the postponement of essential maintenance and
upgrades. The new ground screen will improve the gain and the beam shape which
directly impacts pointing precision. The beam steering and switching capability
along with increased power will enable new and improved experiments to be
carried out including monitoring of equatorial spread F and of mesosphere-
stratosphere-troposphere winds and turbulence, as well as planetary and solar
radar experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.