* 1903157
* RAPID: Assessment of coastal & offshore change due to Hurricane Florence: Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Joni Backstrom, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 10/31/2019
* USD 18,305.00

Hurricanes that make landfall at low-lying coastal regions, such as barrier-
islands like those on the Outer Banks of the US southeast coast, are known to
cause significant impacts on the coastline and installed infrastructure within
reach of higher and more forceful than normal waves and the tidal surge. Storm
impacts can range from minor beach and dune erosion to complete coastal
devastation (as seen, for example, with Hurricane Matthew in 2016 and with
Hurricane Michael in 2018 that came ashore at Mexico Beach, FL). Abundant
scientific research has documented the serious impacts these storms have on
beaches and other subaerially exposed parts of the coastline. However, much less
is known about the role the offshore region, extending seaward from beaches,
plays in coastal response and resilience. This research helps fill this gap by
using shipboard marine geophysical surveys and other techniques to map the
seabed in coastal waters offshore Wrightsville Beach that lies just east of
Wilmington, North Carolina and is near where Hurricane Florence made landfall.
Wrightsville Beach is associated with recreational areas and commercial and
residential buildings. Goals of the work are to document changes in seabed
bathymetry, geomorphology, and sediment distribution resulting from Hurricane
Florence out to water depths of ~10 meters. The resulting data will be used to
try and determine why effects on beaches, even at locations on the same beach
that are closely spaced, can be very different. Broader impacts of the work
include student training and providing information to coastal managers, local
policy makers, and the public about the link between strong storms, like
hurricanes, and beaches and the offshore region.

This project seeks to understand what role the offshore region at Wrightsville
Beach, North Carolina, which was close to the center of Hurricane Florence's
landfall, played in the highly variable beach erosion observed at three
locations. A range of shipboard marine survey techniques that include a
combination of single-beam bathymetry, side scan sonar, and seabed grab sampling
techniques, will be used to characterize the three locations. These new data
will be compared to pre-Florence beach elevation data and off shore surveys and
will be augmented by Hurricane Florence-induced wind and wave data that are
publicly accessible from local offshore buoys. These data will be used to test,
validate, and compare with predictions obtained from the SWAN numerical
hydrodynamic model developed by the Delft coastal group in The Netherlands. If
good correlations can be found between the data/observations and model output,
similar methods could be adopted and employed by coastal scientists and managers
elsewhere to better assess potential risk areas and mitigation strategies for
hurricane strikes at other barrier island locations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.