* 1903600
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Elucidating the Drivers and Consequences of Changes in Atmospheric Rivers from the Last Glacial Maximum to the Present Day
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Christopher Skinner, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2023
* USD 224,310.00

This project aims to investigate the response of atmospheric rivers (ARs) to
changes in the mean climate state and radiative forcing. This will be
accomplished using a new set of paleoclimate simulations from the Community
Earth System Model (CESM2) with the goal to understand the processes that drive
past, present and future ARs responses, and evaluate their impact on regional
hydroclimates and ecosystems. The researchers plan to conduct eight different
experiments with the CESM2 in which ice sheets, orbital configurations,
meltwater fluxes and carbon dioxide concentrations will be varied independently
since the last glacial maximum. An ARs tracking algorithm will be implemented to
objectively identify ARs across climate states and then used to quantify the
distribution, frequency, intensity, and seasonal character of ARs changes and
their impact on precipitation. The project is organized about three specific
objectives: 1) develop a robust AR tracking algorithm for use in climate change
studies; 2) understand the relationships between ARs and climate system
forcings; and 3) quantify the contribution of AR changes to regional
hydroclimate over the last glacial-interglacial transition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include a better
understanding of the role of ARs within the climate system. An international
collaboration is planned to conduct an official Atmospheric River Tracking
Method Intercomparison activity with the resulting AR catalogues being archived
and made publicly available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supports the
training of a graduate student and a Postdoctoral scholar. In addition, a
professional development workshop for regional high school teachers will be
organized as part of an ongoing program at the University of Massachusetts
Lowell. A set of modules centered on the physics of the climate system and the
interdisciplinary applications of climate science will be developed and made
available to the workshop participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.