* 1903442
* Experimental Study of Ion Species Separation in Multi-Component Plasma Shocks
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Colin Adams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 240,000.00

Shock waves, frequently observed in air, also occur in high temperature gases
where electrons have been liberated from ions, forming a plasma. This project
will experimentally study shock waves by colliding plasma jets with stagnant
plasma. When the plasma is composed of species of differing electric charge and
mass, the rapid change in plasma properties across the shock wave can cause
separation of these species, further complicating the shock structure.
Understanding the physics present in these scenarios is important to furthering
the understanding of astrophysical phenomena, including Type II supernova
explosions, as well as the physics of implosions that occur in inertial-
confinement fusion experiments. This project will collect detailed experimental
data characterizing collisions between high-velocity multi-species plasma jets
and stagnant plasma in an experiment where shock thickness is predicted to be
large enough to be readily observable by diagnostic
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to experimentally identify
shocks in multi-component plasmas in a parameter space where it is possible to
resolve the structure of the ion shock layer. Interactions of collisional multi-
species plasma jets with stagnated plasma will be studied in a regime where the
mean-free-path is small enough for the jet interaction to be collisional yet
large enough to attempt diagnosis of the shock structure over a few hundred
mean-free-paths. The scope of the project will be to identify shocks formed
during these interactions and investigate the parameter space to confirm whether
the observed shocks are present in multi-ion-species plasmas. A series of multi-
ion-species plasma jets will be emitted by a linear plasma-armature railgun.
Shortly after the first jet stagnates against a barrier, the second jet will
encounter the stagnant plasma at velocities sufficient to drive a shock in the
plasma. A suite of diagnostics will be used to capture data indicating the
presence of individual plasma species. The diagnostics that will be employed
include (i) high spatial resolution survey spectroscopy to locate emission from
ion species at the shock front and (ii) multi-chord interferometry which will be
used in conjunction with spectroscopy to infer charge state and electron
temperature in the shocked and unshocked regions. The experimental observations
sought by this research have the potential to shed light on never-before-
observed shock structures caused by collisional diffusion of ion species. This
could enhance understanding of astrophysical phenomena and the physics of
inertial fusion plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.