* 1903053
* Engineering New Anisotropic Superfluid Phases of 3He
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* William Halperin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2022
* USD 510,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; The proposed project highlights research
training of two graduate students. It includes current participation of one
local high school student developing state-of-the-art software, science
education of student teams from elementary school and from a local high school,
and an ongoing research project of an undergraduate student to develop a novel
detection instrument for a new generation of nuclear physics experiments. These
activities are outgrowths of, and made possible by, the PI's silica aerogel
growth laboratory. One success story involves three young 7th grade girls who
learned to grow silica alcogels as part of a science competition that won state
and then national-regional championships. The present project supports this
educational program with mentoring from the PI and his graduate student team. In
fact, the central part of the research project is focused on quantum fluids
confined within aerogel, an extremely porous glass used to engineer new quantum
states of superfluid helium at ultra-low temperatures, a key component of the
project. The importance of low temperature research and technology in today's
quantum world is that it drives development of instrumentation, pushing limits
in temperature ever lower, where the PI's laboratory has made significant
contributions. This work supplies a need for trained postdocs and new faculty
appointments in experimental condensed matter physics and inspires recruitment
of young scientists with background in many body physics, complex symmetry
breaking, and quantum phase transitions. Investigation of the superfluid helium-
three paradigm provides guidance for solutions to some of the challenging
scientific problems of the day, ranging from qubit coherence in quantum
information science to materials physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Superfluid helium-three is a known topological quantum
condensed system that is predicted to host Majorana fermionic excitations in the
form of quasiparticle bound states, a subject of interest to researchers in the
field of quantum information science. The proposal, Engineering New Anisotropic
Superfluid Phases of Helium-three, is a platform for both basic research and
instrumentation development. Today it is known that it is possible to stabilize
new types of helium-three superfluid phases exhibiting different spontaneously-
broken symmetries by engineering anisotropy through confinement of the
superfluid in highly porous, anisotropic, aerogels or in thin films. Each phase
has its specific type of orbital and/or spin topological singularities including
vortices and superfluid textures of its orbital and spin angular momenta. The
surface of the superfluid B-phase, and the vortex cores in the superfluid
A-phase, the latter being a chiral phase, are predicted to harbor Majorana
fermions of intense interest to researchers in quantum information science.
Chirality, in this context, is the combination of loss of mirror symmetry in
conjunction with broken time-reversal symmetry, a key property of topological
superconductivity. In the proposed work new anisotropic phases of superfluid
helium-three are investigated using nuclear magnetic resonance and resonant
acoustic cavity techniques for a wide range of magnetic field and temperature.
Recent success in the PI's laboratory on which the proposed program builds, is
the capability of continuously holding temperatures below 0.001 K, for as long
as several months. These extremely efficient refrigerators allow maintenance of
quantum coherence over long time scales and offer opportunities for improvement
in qubit performance, an essential requirement for quantum information
processing. Preliminary results are promising for understanding the unusual
interplay of anisotropy and magnetic field. One aspect of this research is
motivated by prediction of a topological thermodynamic phase transition of
Majorana fermions at the free surface of topological superfluid helium-
three-B.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.