* 1903211
* I-Corps Teams:  Compression and friction properties of lubricants in boundary lubrication
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2019
* Yongsheng Leng, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 07/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
industrial lubricant companies or automotive lubricant companies with a better
understanding and a design strategy for new lubricant products, especially for
high-loading, ultra-thin film lubrications. It has been predicted that three
major economic areas are related to tribology and lubrication engineering --
energy, manufacturing and transportation. These three areas all follow a trend
towards increasing the efficiency, in which lubricants or new lubricant
formulations are a critical component in an intense competition to provide goods
at the lowest costs. This market pressure will continue to create a demand for
new machinery and new type of lubricants that can improve the efficiency of
manufacturing operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds a bridge that
connects research findings in the computational lab to the real industrial
world. Commercial importance for the lubricant products is a significant energy
and cost savings in many sectors and new enabling technologies. The project also
provides a unique opportunity for students to practice computational nano-
tribology and research commercialization training in the real world, benefiting
the lubricant industry, environment, and society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project uses core technology and innovation of computational molecular
simulations to understand and design new lubricant products. Synthetic base oils
with different viscosity modifiers under high loadings are targeted. The project
explores the commercial opportunity of simulation technology through
collaboration with potential customer lubricant companies. So far the nanoscale
mechanical behaviors of base oils in boundary lubrication are still not well
understood. This project focuses on atomic-scale friction behavior of realistic
lubricant oils with/without additives and develops new computational models to
provide unique insights into the atomistic behaviors of lubricants under
compression and shear in boundary lubrication. Through collaboration with
potential industry customers, computational molecular simulations reveal the
fundamental lubricant-surface interactions under extreme boundary lubrication
conditions. This project creates a new frontier for the advancement in tribology
and lubrication engineering while meeting current customer needs. In addition,
there is a commercialization potential to attract industrial partners to develop
the next-generation lubricants for industrial and automotive lubricant
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.