* 1903727
* Cooperative Institute for Dynamic Earth Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Bruce Buffett, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2023
* USD 415,175.00

Advances in disciplinary tools and major infrastructure efforts have fueled
impressive progress in our ability to probe the interior of the Earth and
characterize the evolution of the surface environment. New data sets and new
methodologies offer valuable insights, yet the emergence of habitable
environments on our planet is still poorly understood. Part of the impediment to
progress is due to the disciplinary nature of research. A more integrated
approach that leverages the knowledge and latest achievements in each of the
relevant disciplines is needed to generate new ideas and to identify new
observations that distinguish between competing hypotheses. The investigators
plan a summer program for the Cooperative Institute for Dynamic Earth Research
(CIDER) on the theme of early Earth and the evolution of habitable environments.
They seek to lower barriers to more integrated research by promoting cross-
disciplinary education of researchers at all career levels. They also intend to
develop a workforce that can more effectively engage in interdisciplinary
research with the goal of enabling more rapid progress on an important and
unsolved research problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed four-week summer
program brings together a cohort of senior graduate students and postdocs from
institutions across the country to tackle the important question of how the
early Earth developed a habitable environment. Senior participants from various
US institutions, and representing a range of disciplines, will serve as
instructors and mentors for group research projects. The first two weeks of the
program are devoted to lectures and tutorials, covering the basic tools and
approaches of the various disciplines. The second two weeks are used to develop
research projects in groups with a good mix of disciplinary expertise. The
outcome will be a better understanding of Earth evolution, including important
questions related to the cycling of water and carbon through the Earth system,
which regulates the long-term stability of climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.