* 1903466
* ECCS-EPSRC - ShiRAS: Towards Safe and Reliable Autonomy in Sensor Driven Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Roman Shterenberg, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,592.00

Modern sensors generate massive amounts of data. Algorithms that are data-
driven, able to train themselves or "self-tune", have revolutionized the area of
autonomous systems. However, capturing confidence from the integration of
heterogeneous large-scale data remains a challenging task for these algorithms.
Our work will develop pioneering approaches that will introduce safe and
reliable autonomy at different levels in sensor-driven systems. The main focus
is on machine learning methods with quantified uncertainty or confidence bounds
for the provided solutions. This research will entail significant theoretical
knowledge through formal development, analysis and evaluation of the proposed
approaches, resulting in safe and reliable machine intelligence. Scalable,
effective and robust algorithms will be available for one of the most critical
challenges in computational intelligence. Understanding and assessing the
uncertainty of modern machine learning models has critical consequences,
especially when the output of such models is fed into higher-level decision
making processes. These include autonomous drones and vehicles, diagnosis in the
medical domain and surveillance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Case studies and
applications of this research include industry and government partners in the
areas of detection of weapon and contraband (in collaboration with the
Transportation Security Laboratory at the US Department of Homeland Security),
rotorcraft safety (US Federal Aviation Administration), intelligent
transportation systems (UK Highways England, Valerann Ltd UK, and TransDAC, US),
and smart cities and surveillance (QinetiQ Ltd UK, Thales Ltd). Open-source
software libraries, based on state-of-the-art deep learning frameworks, e.g.,
TensorFlow and PyTorch, will be built for the rapid dissemination of the
developed core computing techniques. The proposed effort also includes
integrating the research into the undergraduate and graduate curriculums,
developing outreach packages which deliver hands-on experiences covering the
fields of autonomous monitoring and the issues facing future intelligent
transportation systems and the cities as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.