* 1903343
* Travel Support: 2019 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) and Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Chemical Reactions at Surfaces; Ventura, California; February 16-22, 2019
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2019
* Emmanouil Mavrikakis, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,440.00

The award will provide funding in support of participation by U.S. graduate
students and post-doctoral researchers at the 2019 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS)
and Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Chemical Reactions at Surfaces to be
held back-to-back in Ventura, California February 16-22, 2019. The conference
and seminar will expose a new generation of scientists and engineers to the
latest international advances in surface science and engineering as applied to
some of the world's most pressing technological challenges. International
exchanges of this type are essential for ensuring that U.S. scientists and
engineers maintain leadership in areas of critical importance such as concrete
materials, catalysis, photocatalysis, and biomolecules, where surface phenomena
play an important role. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC on Chemical Reactions at
surfaces is the preeminent international meeting in the field of surface
chemistry and related catalysis. Together with the GRS, it will bring together
an interdisciplinary group of students and young researchers from chemistry,
physics, chemical engineering and materials science. They will have an
opportunity to present their work in the form of oral presentations or posters
while interacting with some of the most eminent researchers in the field. The
GRS and GRC will address fundamental aspects of surface chemical reactions,
which are related to the grand environmental and sustainability challenges
facing mankind. Specific emphasis will be given to defining the next generation
challenges in surface chemistry and surface science. Participation by young
researchers will add significant value to this conference and will foster
communications among current and future leaders in a field that combines
academic and industrial issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.