* 1903626
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Hydroclimatic Response of El Nino-Southern Oscillation to Natural and Anthropogenic Radiative Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Michael Evans, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 253,878.00

This project aims to develop delta oxygen-18 isotope data series from cellulose
extracted from an existing collection of ring-dated teak (Tectona grandis L. f.)
tree core samples from Muna, South Sulawesi, Indonesia. Preliminary results
suggest that Muna oxygen-18 is an indicator of ENSO-related precipitation
variation, but with a higher signal-to-noise ratio.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the Muna collection contains up to 44 cross-dated
increment cores, the researchers will use isotopic sampling at annual resolution
with 6 replicates per year, on samples available for the years 1656-2005. This
is a 350-year interval spanning both pre-industrial and anthropogenic greenhouse
gas and land cover/land use change forcing levels, multiple realizations of
explosive volcanic and solar forcing, and years for which net forcing is
minimal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interpretation of the isotopic data will be tested
against existing proxy sensor models using meteorological data, a new collection
of precipitation oxygen-18 isotope data, and parameter sensitivity studies.
Composite cellulose oxygen-18 isotope response and uncertainty estimates will be
derived using estimates of the external radiative forcings estimated for the
same time interval. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will test the null of
no difference in inferred ENSO event return interval and amplitude using
superposed epoch analysis for unforced years, volcanic event years, solar-forced
decades, and pre-industrial, transitional and anthropogenic time windows for
aerosol, land use/change and greenhouse gas forcings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential Broader Impacts include possibly providing a new analytical technique
to apply to relatively untapped and potentially critical climate archives of the
tropics, support of U.S. mentored international research experiences for
graduate and capstone undergraduate students at the University of Maryland, as
well as support for a graduate student&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.