* 1903335
* Kinetic Studies of the Relativistic Pinch:  A Key to Particle Acceleration in Astrophysical Plasmas
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Dmitri Uzdensky, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2024
* USD 749,217.00

Rapidly flaring gamma-rays and other radiative signals from blazar jets and
pulsar wind nebulae indicate that standard models for energy dissipation and
particle acceleration in relativistic cosmic plasmas, which invoke shock waves
and hydromagnetic diffusion, are probably incorrect. This project uses powerful
new computational tools to study a promising alternative: the direct dissipation
of magnetic energy through reconnection and turbulence in collisionless
relativistic plasmas. The study will explore relativistic particle acceleration
and the associated radiation in a much more realistic astrophysical context than
the idealized configurations used to obtain encouraging preliminary results.
This work will yield insights into the interactions of black holes with their
cosmic environments. The innovative approaches to PIC simulation can be applied
to a broad range of problems in space physics and laboratory plasmas. There is a
range of associated research experiences for undergraduates, as well as support,
training and mentorship for a postdoctoral researcher. Contribution to public
scientific literacy comes through collaboration with the Fiske Planetarium,
using visually arresting graphics and animations from the
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations which have started from idealized
configurations have shown robust nonthermal particle energy distributions and
variability characteristics. The particle distributions correlate with the
initial magnetization of the plasma, which is the ratio of magnetic energy
density to relativistic plasma enthalpy. Surprisingly, similar correlations
develop in systems with different compositions (pairs or electron-ion plasma)
and in setups ranging from idealized reconnecting current sheets to three-
dimensional driven turbulence. A vertical kinetic study will follow unstable
magneto-hydrodynamic pinch configurations through their nonlinear development to
the resulting turbulence, reconnection, particle acceleration, and radiation.
The well-tested Zeltron radiative Particle-in-Cell (PIC) code, developed by this
team and publicly available since 2014, enables a thorough analysis of "kinetic
beaming," and a study of the relationships between microscopic kinetic processes
and macroscopic features such as secondary flux ropes, current sheets, and bulk
flows. State-of-the-art computational tools allow kinetic and radiative plasma
phenomena to be related to macroscopic magnetohydrodynamic instability, under
relativistic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.