* 1903597
* INFEWS: US-CHINA: Biochar-Enabled Biologically Active Filtration System for Sustainable Water Management in Rice Agriculture
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Mengyan Li, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project was awarded through the "National Science Foundation (NSF) /
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Joint Research on
Environmental Sustainability Challenges" opportunity. As the world's population
expands to an expected 9 billion by 2050, there will be an urgent demand to
balance interconnected resources such as agricultural products, fresh water, and
fuel without putting undue strain on the ecosystems that provide these
resources. Treating Food-Energy-Water (FEW) Nexus as interconnected rather than
as three independent systems drives new technological advancements that could
increase the environmental sustainability and improve the economies of
communities that adopt these new advances. This project will focus on rice, a
basic staple food source that feeds over a third of the Earth's population. Rice
production is staggeringly water-intensive, representing the highest use of
fresh water resources. Irrigation water discharged from rice paddies carries
excessive amounts of nutrients, pesticides, and other contaminants of emerging
concern (CECs), which pollute rivers, streams and reused irrigation water. To
tackle water stress, reduce water pollution, and improve rice quality,
researchers from the New Jersey Institute of Technology, in collaboration with
researchers at Zhejiang University in China, will develop a biologically active
filtration (BAF) system which takes advantage of microbes that consume unwanted
organic matter contaminants. The BAF can be easily deployed to the existing
water discharge channels at rice paddies to treat irrigated water. It will be
developed and tested at select rice production sites to optimize its efficiency
and cost-effectiveness in purifying the irrigation water, given the field
conditions and social and economic constraints. This novel technology has the
potential to transform conventional rice production into a sustainable
agricultural practice by turning agricultural wastes into bio-oil and biochar,
thereby synergizing the use of biochar and microorganisms to treat agricultural
pollution. The BAF process and products will be coupled with recycling treated
water for irrigation, and the bio-oil can be used as a renewable energy
alternative. In collaboration with local governments, regulatory agencies,
farmers, and universities, both the U.S. and Chinese research teams will conduct
vibrant outreach activities to transfer and disseminate this technology to
broader rice farming communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective adsorbent media
and a biofilm with versatile and robust catalytic potentials are essential
components for BAF systems. This project will advance our understanding of these
two components and optimize their performance to mitigate commingled nonpoint-
source contaminants commonly found in the irrigation water for rice production.
The surface chemistry of biochar and its interactions with target contaminant
molecules will be investigated to improve the adsorption capacity and
selectivity of this material. During biochar pyrolysis, yield of bio-oil will be
optimized as a renewable energy alternative. Microorganisms attached to the
biochar are key players for nutrient removal and CEC degradation. A
comprehensive blueprint of actively expressing metabolisms in the biofilm will
be revealed at both community and single cellular levels using the combination
of omics and single cell analysis. Novel biotransformation pathways and
associated enzymes/genes will be discovered to untangle underlying molecular
mechanisms, enabling the design of molecular tools to monitor biofilm
biotransformation performance in the BAF systems. Improvement of nutrient
removal will be achieved by leveraging filter dimension and flow rate to
synchronize nitrification and denitrification stratification in the attached
biofilm. Development of models will facilitate the prediction and design of
operational performance in accordance with contaminant removal mechanisms. Built
upon comprehensive socioeconomic analyses of the life-cycle impacts, cost-
effectiveness, and local acceptance, pilot-scale BAFs at select rice paddy sites
will be established as model systems that are adaptable by China, the United
States, and other rice-producing countries. The goal of these pilot studies is
to achieve water contamination mitigation, food safety assurance, bioenergy
production and carbon sequestration, and protection of human and environmental
health. Through distant learning modules and cross-university training, this
project will cultivate next-generation leaders with intercultural skillsets,
perspectives, and proficiencies to unite multidisciplinary experiences and
tackle the complex food-energy-water challenges using sustainable and innovative
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.