* 1903367
* Pathways to Diesel Technology Careers for High School and Community College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* James Tarasiewicz, NORTHEASTERN TECHNICAL COLLEGE
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2023
* USD 272,337.00

In South Carolina, the diesel mechanics industry is expected to grow 13% between
2014 and 2024. This growth represents an estimated 6,900 annual job openings
throughout the state. For example, the new international inland shipping port in
Dillon, South Carolina, has created an urgent demand for skilled diesel
technicians. To address this regional workforce gap, the project will develop a
new diesel mechanics curriculum that incorporates best practices and existing
resources in dual enrollment, stackable credentials, STEM education, technical
skill training, industry partnerships, career awareness, and employability
skills development. This project will also focus on providing this career
preparation to rural and underserved students. By preparing rural high school
students for careers in high-growth technical fields, the project has the
potential to advance innovative methods for meeting the nation's changing
employment needs. Findings from this project will be disseminated throughout
South Carolina and may serve as a prototype model for learning communities
interested in rural technician education throughout the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a model for diesel
technology programs intended to produce highly skilled technicians who have a
state-of-the art education and the skillset required for a successful future.
This project will enable the collaboration of a technical college with rural
school districts and industry partners to minimize barriers for the recruitment
and retention of rural students by: 1) developing career pathways; 2) launching
a newly approved and accredited diesel careers degree program; and 3) increasing
the supply of qualified potential employees for the region's diesel technologies
industries. In this effort, the college will leverage its interactive
videoconferencing systems to provide virtual connections with rural high school
classrooms and laboratories. High school ninth grade students will participate
in career awareness modules, industry tours, and start dual enrollment STEM-
focused computer courses. Tenth grade students selecting the diesel technology
pathways will continue with online, hybrid, and classroom courses in relevant
technology. Juniors and seniors will continue their dual enrollment and complete
at least one National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence certification
by high school graduation. Students will be able to transition to the College's
Diesel Technology major and participate in work-based learning and industry
apprenticeships to complete their degree. Program completers will be ready for
work with industry partners, thus contributing to the nation's skilled technical
workforce. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.