* 1903957
* Synthesis and Reversible Self-Assembly of Monodisperse Plasmonic Nanorods Permanently Ligated with Photoresponsive Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Zhiqun Lin of the School of
Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology is
developing a new class of nanomaterials which contain polymers on their surfaces
that are responsive to light. Nanoparticles are very tiny particles about
500-100,000 times "thinner" than a human hair. However, they have surface area
to volume ratios orders of magnitudes larger than seen in traditional materials
such as steel, wood, concrete or plastic. As a matter of fact, just a couple of
grams of such particles can have an area as enormous as a football field.
Combining nanoparticles in a controlled manner to create materials with useful
properties is often very tedious and challenging synthetic task. This work
greatly simplifies the assembly of nanoparticles into materials by utilizing
precisely designed polymers on their surfaces. These polymers when activated by
light drive nanoparticles to combine in a controlled manner and therefore act as
a photo-switch. Such control by a virtue of polymer architecture and chemistry
has the potential to provide important knowledge that could impact the
development of useful stimuli-responsive technologies that are often seen in
optical cables used for high speed internet, durable "smart fabrics", light
sensors, and even drug delivery in cancer therapy. The work has a broader impact
through the development of several activities and programs that focus on
education of students, especially women and students from underrepresented
groups. The research team is further broadening the impact of their work by
including and mentoring high school teachers from the greater Atlanta
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on the synthesis and
reversible self-assembly of monodisperse plasmonic nanorods permanently ligated
with photo-responsive polymers. The innovative and highly transformative
strategy is focused on (a) designing and crafting monodisperse polymer-tethered
plasmonic gold nanorods and nanotubes with accurate control over their
dimension, (b) systematic exploration of their structure-dependent optical
properties and (c) investigation into light-enabled self-assembly of particles
intimately and permanently capped with photo-responsive polymers, and
accordingly the reversible optical properties. The knowledge gained from the
project has the potential to impact the development of technologies with
applications in optics, optoelectronics, catalysis, sensory materials and
devices, energy conversion, drug delivery, nanotechnology and
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.