* 1903321
* Conference on Frontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Denis Blackmore, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 10/31/2022
* USD 34,925.00

This award supports the participation of undergraduate and graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, junior faculty, and other researchers in a conference on
"Frontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics" (FACM) at the New Jersey
Institute of Technology (NJIT) on May 23 - 24, 2019. FACM 2019 is focused on
mathematical and applications challenges related to systems involving particles
in fluids, broadly interpreted. This topic is motivated by the significant
recent progress that has been made in areas of discrete and continuum modeling
of such systems, as well as in related fields within physics, biology, and the
engineering disciplines. These systems are of relevance to a number of
applications including materials science, energy applications, as well as health
and medicine. We also envision a significant focus on high-performance computing
which is integral part of the research in this field. The conference, which is
this year carried out jointly with the 11th Northeast Complex Fluids and Soft
Matter Workshop, will include mini-symposia on applications of networks and
computational topology to granular systems, as well as on suspensions, active
matter, and related materials science systems. The conference will bring
together mathematicians, scientists and engineers, with significant
participation of junior researchers. More information can be found on the
conference website http://m.njit.edu/Events/FACM19/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
FACM conference series has been organized over the past fifteen years by the
Department of Mathematical Sciences and Center for Applied Mathematics and
Statistics at NJIT. The annual meeting is a forum for the dissemination of
research in applied and computational mathematics and statistics. FACM
conferences are more focused and student centered than large society meetings,
and a goal of the organizers is to introduce future leaders in applied
mathematics and engineering disciplines to established investigators and
emerging research areas. Participation of a large number of local junior
researchers who typically attend NCS workshops will be particularly important
this year. The junior researchers will have a chance to present their work
through posters and contributed talks which they will present in minisymposia
alongside leading scientists. For students and postdocs, this will be a learning
and networking experience that will help them with their research and career
paths. Special efforts will be made to continue the participation
underrepresented groups in the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.