* 1903423
* SaTC: EDU: Collaborative: INteractive VIsualization and PracTice basEd Cybersecurity Curriculum and Training (InviteCyber) Framework for Developing Next-gen Cyber-Aware Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Xiaoli Yang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 11/30/2022
* USD 231,422.00

Technology use among teenagers has greatly increased without a concomitant
increase cybersecurity skills in this population. Several factors, including
lack of standard high school cybersecurity curricula, and lack of cybersecurity
awareness among teens, have contributed to teenagers becoming targets of
cybercrimes such as cyberbullying. This research aims to leverage the increased
technology use of teens to (a) develop a security mindset at the high school
level, (b) spread awareness of the risks and threats associated with use of
smartphone/tablets and other tech, and (c) inculcate interest in cybersecurity
careers (with a long-term goal of addressing the national shortage of
cybersecurity workforce). The project seeks to achieve these goals by providing
cybersecurity training through interactive, animated visualizations so that
students develop an interest in cybersecurity careers. Educators will have
access to the educational materials developed which may lead to the better
assessment of students' cybersecurity skills. This new interactive animated
visualization framework for high school cybersecurity education has the
potential for wider, nationwide adoption. As cybersecurity continues to become a
national and global security threat, this research will facilitate the
development of a new generation of workforce and a safer cyber-
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop an innovative
teaching plan and pedagogical methods for high school cybersecurity education.
The framework will be designed and used in a summer camp setting to help
students understand cybersecurity threats, defense, and prevention mechanisms.
Open-source smartphone app development tools will be integrated into the
curriculum to determine if the framework aids teens in understanding the
cybersecurity risks. A series of research questions will investigate the extent
to which the "new" curriculum promotes a better understanding of cybersecurity.
The effectiveness and rigor of this curriculum will be measured in several ways,
including (a) using a task load index to quantify rigor, (b) administering
surveys to gain insight about students' motivation and perceptions of
cybersecurity, and (c) analyzing students' learning using analytical course
rubrics. Deliverables of this project will involve (a) interactive animated
visualization based cybersecurity tutorials for summer camp mode delivery to
high school students, (b) availability of all tutorials for accessibility to
other educators, and (c) publications and meeting presentations to share project
outcomes more widely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.