* 1903899
* Structural determinants of reaction specificity in PLP-dependent arginine oxidases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Nicholas Silvaggi, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 411,000.00

A general understanding in biochemistry is that the molecular structure of an
enzyme defines its function and, thus, two enzymes having the same or very
similar structures (homologs) should catalyze the same or similar chemical
reactions. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Nicholas Silvaggi from the University of
Wisconsin Milwaukee to determine how homologs of an enzyme from two different
organisms produce different products using different chemical steps. The
pyridoxal-5'-phosphate-dependent L-arginine deaminase (or MppP) enzyme from the
organism Streptomyces wadayamensis (SwMppP) was found by Dr. Silvaggi to react
with molecular oxygen to add a hydroxyl group onto the amino acid arginine. The
enzyme from Paenibacillus elgii (PeMppP) has a nearly identical structure to
SwMppP, but instead creates a new double bond in the middle of the arginine side
chain. Both products are ultimately incorporated into secondary metabolites
including antibiotics. The lessons learned from these studies help to predict
the functions of new proteins uncovered through genomic studies, and to better
understand how existing enzyme structures adapt to perform new functions. An
outreach program is developed by Dr. Silvaggi to improve the scientific literacy
of the public. This program produces short video explanations of scientific
questions raised by 3rd and 4th grade students, with the goal of showing how
science relates in very intimate ways to their everyday
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The non-proteinogenic amino acids L-enduracididine
(L-End) and 4,5-dehydroarginine (dhArg) are components of bacterially-produced
natural products mannopeptimycin and indolmycin, respectively. Both L-End and
dhArg are produced by PLP-dependent oxidases. The enzyme from Streptomyces
wadayamensis (SwMppP) uses molecular oxygen to install a hydroxyl group at
carbon 4 of the L-Arg substrate side chain, while that from Paenibacillus elgii
(PeMppP) creates a double bond between carbons 4 and 5 (PeMppP). SwMppP and
PeMppP have nearly identical tertiary structures and share identical active site
residues. The only structural differences appear to be at the dimer interface,
leading to the hypothesis that differences in the quaternary structure impact
the shapes of the active sites and thus the binding mode of the L-Arg substrate.
A primary question being addressed is how these two structurally similar enzymes
synthesize different products through their different chemical mechanisms.
Although much is known (or can be inferred) about the mechanisms of SwMppP and
PeMppP, neither mechanism has been fully characterized. In this project, the
novel alternative substrate 3,4-dehydro-L-arginine is used to bypass the early
stages and thus probe the late stages of the catalytic mechanism of SwMppP
though stopped-flow and quench-flow kinetics, NMR spectroscopy, and mass
spectrometry experiments. A similar strategy is used to study the mechanism of
PeMppP. The outcomes of this research will be detailed information on the
reaction mechanisms of these two MppP-like proteins and consequently how
evolution has modified the Type I aminotransferase fold to perform new catalytic
functions. These outcomes expand our knowledge of PLP-dependent enzymes
specifically and of enzyme structure-function relationships in general, and
improves the accuracy of protein function predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.