* 1903188
* Metal-organic framework chemical-sensitive field effect transistor for highly selective gas sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Roya Maboudian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2023
* USD 399,927.00

There is a high demand for miniaturized, low-power gas sensors that can be
widely deployed in wireless applications for improved environmental protection,
for public health, and for safe and efficient operation of many industrial
processes. This proposal seeks to develop such sensors for the sensitive and
selective detection of greenhouse gases, such as methane and carbon dioxide at
ambient temperatures. Due to their relatively inert nature, greenhouse gases are
extremely hard to detect at room temperature and hence at low power. More
specifically, a transistor-based device will be developed employing a new class
of porous material systems called metal-organic-frameworks. These novel
chemicals will be engineered to bind selectively to the target gases. The
broader impact of this work lies in its impact on other scientific fields, on
society and in its educational and outreach activities. More broadly, insights
will impact many disciplines and technologies using MOFs, such as gas separation
and CO2 sequestration; proposed device designs have the potential to disrupt
many sensing applications, such as workplace safety and air quality monitoring.
Additional significant impact is on human resource development. The project will
provide core training for graduate and undergraduate students who will benefit
from interdisciplinary training at the crossroads of electrical engineering,
surface chemistry, and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is
centered on a new device architecture based on chemically gated field effect
transistors, which can operate at room temperature, are compatible with
integrated-circuit fabrication techniques, and can be rendered extremely
selective by suitable functionalization of the chemically sensitive gate. Metal
organic frameworks (MOFs) have been identified as the functional element for
their demonstrated extreme selectivity to gaseous species. In particular, this
proposal aims to demonstrate ultra-low power, chip-scale gas sensing of
greenhouse gases. The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies both in the
novel design architectures and in the selection of new materials for the
dielectric and the chemically sensitive layers. From a fundamental point of
view, the proposed research will allow understanding and predicting the factors
affecting the growth of ultrathin MOFs, to achieve their integration in an
electrical microdevices, and to optimize materials and designs for enhanced
chemical sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.