* 1903989
* Dynamics of leaves with different wettability due to raindrop impact
* ENG,CBET
* 08/16/2018,08/31/2020
* Sunny Jung, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 57,457.00

PI: Jung, Sunghwan Proposal Number: 1604424

Based on how easy it is for a surface to be wetted by water, it can be
hydrophilic or hydrophobic. The proposed research is inspired by biological
surfaces, like leaves, that exhibit different wetting behavior in their
lifetime, and turn from hydrophobic to hydrophilic as natural or man-made
pollutants interact with their surface. Investigating how the dynamics of drops
splashing on leaves change because of changes on surface characteristics is
important for understanding early catastrophic leaf loss and developing methods
to avoid it. This can have further implications on predicting levels of food and
forest resources.

Most of the previous work done by biologists and biochemists about shedding of
leafs, has focused on acute chemical effects of air contaminants on leaf
surfaces. Nevertheless, both the physical mechanism of a leaf turning
hydrophilic and the dynamical aspects of hydrophilic leaves in response to
raindrops are not well understood, which may significantly contribute to
catastrophic leaf loss after rain. The PI proposes to investigate the interplay
between a leaf?s wettability, elasticity, and drop spreading, inspired by a
raindrop impacting a leaf in nature. First, the mechanism of transitioning from
hydrophobic to hydrophilic leaves will be explored. Secondly, the spreading
dynamics of a droplet on a curved substrate will be formulated both
macroscopically and microscopically in terms of wettability and a falling speed,
which will allow the estimation of an impact force and drop-spreading radius on
the leaf. Finally, a leaf?s mechanical moduli and ultimate strengths will be
characterized, in order to understand bending and torsional deformations of a
leaf upon drop impact. The PI will pursue personal and educational interests for
students with disabilities. As an educational objective, the PI will develop
research programs that assist disabled students in overcoming the difficulties
encountered in the current educational system, due to impaired social and
communication skills. A proposed peer-buddy program is designed for students
with autism or other social impairments by exposing them to laboratory research
along with typical peers in structured environments. An inclusive environment
would provide the students with structured research opportunities, which would
help to develop the confidence and capacity needed to effectively communicate
and collaborate with their peers, and eventually become future engineers or
scientists.