* 1903729
* Rocky Mountain snowpack changes and their hydrologic consequences during the Holocene
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Bryan Shuman, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 246,806.00

Loss of high-elevation snowpack in the intermountain western US poses major
societal risks for the region, where increased temperatures may permanently
reduce snowpack amounts and impact baseflow in rivers and streams. This research
looks towards the geological record of past climates recorded by proxy in
organic sediments in lakes and uses this information to provide a perspective on
how future water resources in the region will respond to climate change. The
past records of the water cycle provide this long-term context to recent changes
by analyzing the combinations of temperature and precipitation changes that have
impacted snowpack in the past. Such reconstructions can help anticipate future
changes. The results of this research will be communicated to broad audiences of
stakeholders from public agencies to residents of the region. The research team
will work with the University of Wyoming Geology Museum and media outlets, such
as Wyoming Public Radio, to present the results through interviews and media.
Research and education capacity will be built at the University of Wyoming and
at a long-term monitoring site maintained by the US Forest
Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a novel combination of lake
sediment biomarker and mineral analyses to constrain the changes in snowpack,
temperature, runoff, evaporation, and dust deposition over the past 11,000 years
in three small Rocky Mountain watersheds that are sensitive to climate change.
Specifically, the research will develop three new C29 n-alkane (leaf wax) and
C23 n-alkane (aquatic) hydrogen isotope records, along with three x-ray
diffraction records of lake sediment mineralogy, and three comparable branched
GDGT (glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraether) records of lake water temperature.
The combination of these proxies will provide a multi-proxy perspective on
changes in Rocky Mountain snowpack, and use to assess climatological and
hydrological factors involved in the proxy records. In so doing, the combination
of these different types of data will enrich the understanding of the
variability of water resources in the western US and the mechanisms underlying
these changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.