* 1903440
* Understanding Heterogeneous Nucleation and Growth Kinetics for Innovations in Clean Energy and Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Steven Decaluwe, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 379,874.00

Heterogeneous nucleation and growth (HNG) phenomena at liquid-solid interfaces,
where dissolved species precipitate out of solution and adsorb at solid
surfaces, play crucial roles in many natural and engineered systems. For
example, better understanding of HNG phenomena in advanced battery chemistries,
such as Li-O2 and Li-S, are required to identify chemistries, electrode
microstructures, and charge/discharge strategies to improve efficiency, energy
density, and durability. In membrane water filtration, research is focused on
minimizing mineral scaling, which reduces system efficiency and module lifetime.
However, innovations for these and related devices will require both enhanced
theoretical understanding of HNG processes and improved computational tools to
extend theoretical models to device-relevant scales. The proposed research will
enable innovations in clean energy and water via fundamental insights into the
factors controlling HNG phenomena and developing open-source computational tools
to enable modeling capabilities at device-relevant
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work starts with classical nucleation
and growth theory, which is then modified as necessary to create accurate and
efficient modeling tools that can be applied across a range of contexts and
length scales. These tools will be validated against a novel platform of
operando measurement techniques, which on their own will provide insights to a
range of fundamental questions regarding HNG processes. Validation against two
disparate systems, Li-O2 batteries and reverse osmosis water filtration, will
guide the development of modeling tools that are robust and generalizable. The
two different testbeds will help identify which phenomena are fundamental to all
HNG processes, while also giving a sense of the broader set of cofactors which
may influence HNG rates in different contexts. The modeling tools will be
employed in system-level models to demonstrate their utility for scientifically-
guided innovations in critical clean energy and water applications, providing an
exemplar for future multi-scale simulations which bridge science and
engineering. In addition to training a graduate student in research, the
principal investigator plans to pursue outreach activities aimed at improving
middle-school science education and connecting researchers across disciplines to
holistically address the impacts of technology on the Earth's biological
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.