* 1903544
* Collaborative Research: Regional hydrologic and vegetation changes over the last 150 kyr in the Searles and Death Valley basins
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* William McGee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2022
* USD 258,807.00

The southwestern U.S. is currently experiencing profound water stress and is
predicted to face declining water availability in the coming century. Past
variations in the abundance of water in this region can be documented from study
of ancient lake basins there. This project will produce a reconstruction of
water availability, vegetation, and moisture sources in the Searles and Death
Valley basins of the southwestern U.S. spanning the last 150,000 years. The
researchers will use shoreline deposits from each basin to constrain ancient
lake levels. Sediment core records from the centers of each basin will provide
paleoclimate information that spans both wet and dry periods. Plant wax
preserved in the cores will provide insight into past vegetation changes that
reflect variations in moisture sources. Radiometric dating of sediments will
give precise ages of environmental changes in the ancient lakes. Lake shoreline
ages will be used to interpret past lake volumes in the Searles and Death Valley
basins. Collectively, this information will be used to model past river flow and
water budgets. This work will also lay the foundation for future development of
a continuous 3.2 million-year sediment record from the Searles basin, including
past warm periods. This project will train graduate and undergraduate students
at 5 institutions. Binghamton University participants will lead field tours to
visitors to Death Valley National Park through a partnership with the Death
Valley Natural History Association. Outreach at the University of Southern
California will involve collaboration with the La Brea Tar Pits Museum and will
focus on teaching 4th grade visitors how Pleistocene lakes relate to the museum
fossil fauna of the same age. The MIT group will incorporate project findings
into climate-themed outreach at the Cambridge Science Festival, Girls' Day at
the MIT Museum, and at the New England Aquarium. Researchers from SUNY College
at Oswego and Keystone College will incorporate research outcomes into
paleoclimate and sustainability courses that reach hundreds of students per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The southwestern U.S. is a water-stressed region that
is projected to experience declining water availability over the coming century.
Model projections show substantial disagreement in the regional circulation
responses to projected emissions scenarios, with divergent predictions of the
magnitude and spatial fingerprint of future drying. Lake records have the
potential to offer detailed reconstructions of the hydrological, atmospheric,
and vegetation responses to a wide range of forcings and to provide future
opportunities to benchmark model performance. Lake records from the Searles and
Death Valley basins in southern California show dramatic lake level and
vegetation changes over the last 150 kyr, reflecting in part large changes in
river flow from the societally-important Owens River system. These records
require new analyses to improve imprecise chronologies and refine lake level
reconstructions and correlations from these neighboring basins. This project is
a multi-faceted reconstruction of past hydrologic and vegetation changes
spanning the last 150 kyr in the Searles and Death Valley basins. The
researchers will use tufa and other nearshore deposits to constrain lake levels
in both basins, and existing and new measurements from a recently collected
core, SLAPP-SRLS17 from Searles basin, and core DV93-1, Death Valley, to provide
continuous multi-proxy records. Sedimentary structures and textures, evaporite
mineralogy and facies, siliciclastic grain size changes, and rock magnetic
variations in cores will be used with shoreline constraints to model past
hydrologic and lake chemistry changes in Searles basin, providing quantitative
constraints on past river inflows and precipitation-evaporation balance. Plant
wax delta13C and pollen will provide insight into past vegetation changes, and
plant wax deltaD will be used to track changes in moisture source and water
vapor history. In both basins, U/Th dating will be used to provide precise age
models, with support from 14C and paleomagnetic measurements in Searles Lake
deposits. Paleointensity variability and evidence for magnetic field excursions
will provide an independent method for dating the SLAPP-SRLS17 core. Together,
the two basins will provide replicated, well-dated hydrological and vegetation
records using independent approaches to test interpretations of the cave oxygen
isotope records from nearby Devils Hole and Leviathan Caves to the northeast.
These records will provide a quantitative estimate of the volumetric changes in
water storage and the magnitude of precipitation isotopic shifts to better
determine atmospheric circulation changes and the resulting hydrologic
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.