* 1903135
* Inverse Mapping of Spatial-Temporal Molecular  Heterogeneity from Imaging Phenotype
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Teresa Wu, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* huixia wang
* 12/31/2020
* USD 405,636.00

A significant challenge in treating some aggressive cancers and neurological
diseases is the lack of understanding regarding the spatial-temporal molecular
heterogeneity of the diseased tissue/organ. Molecular characteristics and
interaction vary significantly across different spatial sub-units of the
tissue/organ. The spatial pattern also changes over time as the disease
progresses. The capability of mapping out the spatial-temporal patterns of
molecular biomarkers is instrumental for elucidating the biological underpinning
of disease formation, progression, and treatment resistance. This mapping,
however, is extremely challenging, because it would require dense sampling of
the diseased tissue/organ of a living person by highly invasive biopsy, which is
infeasible. In reality, only a few samples can be taken, leaving a vast amount
of unknown blank regions. On the other hand, recent years have witnessed the
rapid advances of biomedical imaging technologies, which create structural and
functional images of various modalities. Multimodality images can be taken non-
invasively and for the entire diseased tissue/organ; importantly, they provide a
complementary phenotypic presentation of underlying molecular characteristics.
This creates an unprecedented opportunity to generate inverse-estimates of the
underlying spatial-temporal molecular characteristics from the images to fill in
the "blank regions." Once achieved, such inverse-estimates would help decipher
the complex biological system of the diseased tissue/organ and inform new
effective treatments with unparalleled precision adapted to spatial-temporal
molecular heterogeneity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is
to develop a suite of new statistical models for inverse mapping/estimation of
the spatial-temporal heterogeneity of molecular biomarkers from multimodality
image phenotype. The investigators propose a novel modeling framework that
integrates data-driven and biological-principle-driven mechanistic models, and
meanwhile fuses global-scale image data and sparsely-sampled local biopsy
measurements. This framework embraces modeling approaches to characterize both
spatial heterogeneity and temporal dynamics of the disease. Furthermore, to
account for patient similarity and specificity, the investigators propose a
robust transfer learning model for integrating each patient?s data with
information selectively transferred from other patients to avoid the negative
transfer. Also, the project tackles joint modeling of a biomarker panel for
characterizing spatial-temporal biomarker interaction. The proposed models will
be validated in two applications: glioblastoma and Alzheimer's Disease. This
project is expected to generate significant insight for unraveling the complex
biological systems underlying these diseases and provide the groundwork for new
treatment intervention. Additionally, the proposed modeling framework integrates
statistical and bio-mechanistic models, which bridges two traditionally separate
research fields together. The research team is committed to educating the next
generation statisticians and biomedical researchers with cross-disciplinary
skills, recruiting minority and women students, and disseminating research
results in both statistical and bio/biomedical
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.