* 1903427
* Offshore Export of Glacial Water and Ice in an Eddying Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Olivier Marchal, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 898,804.00

A popular hypothesis in climatology posits that the discharge of large amounts
of water from continental glaciers and ice sheets ("glacial water") into the
North Atlantic may disrupt ocean circulation and cause climate change. Implicit
in this hypothesis is that the glacial water would spread away from the coast,
as a buoyant (light) surface layer, and decrease the density of surface waters
in the open ocean at high latitudes. In turn, the formation of deep dense waters
and the attendant northward flux of heat would be reduced. In this project, a
computer model of ocean circulation, with unprecedented spatial resolution, will
be used to study the pathways of glacial water discharged into different oceanic
regions along eastern North America. The model will simulate small-scale eddies
and will be coupled to an iceberg model, so that the ability of various oceanic
processes to transport meltwater and icebergs seaward could be tested. This
project will promote the progress of science by elucidating the contribution of
various oceanic phenomena to the offshore export of glacial water in both liquid
and solid forms. It will be profitable to the scientific community by (i)
informing the design of glacial water perturbation experiments performed with
coarse-resolution climate models which cannot explicitly represent small-scale
eddies in the ocean, (ii) constraining the interpretation of seafloor and
sediment core observations which suggest that deep-keeled icebergs moved
southward along the western North Atlantic margin and that glacial meltwater
intruded recurrently beyond the continental shelf during the last 30,000 years,
and (iii) sharing experimental results via open-access web sites. This project
will support education by engaging a Graduate Student and three Undergraduate
Students. The Graduate Student will be exposed to the capability of modern ocean
circulation models to study dynamical phenomena of climatic relevance. The three
Undergraduate Students will conduct laboratory experiments of freshwater
discharge with rotating turntables and make the video footage of the experiments
available on-line. A how-to manual will be written and linked to the footage, so
scientists, teachers, and students could repeat the experiments. Finally, this
project will benefit society by (i) providing a better assessment of the
potential of both past and future glacial water discharges to cause climate
change, and (ii) serving as a template for future model studies on the impact of
icebergs on offshore shipping activities and oil/gas exploration in high-
latitude waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, over the course
of this project, a coupled ocean circulation-iceberg model with submesoscale
resolution will be developed and used to produce detailed simulations of the
evolution of glacial water entering the ocean along eastern North America in
liquid and solid forms. The specific objectives of this project are (i) to test
the role of different dynamical phenomena in the offshore export of glacial
water from the Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS), which occupied North America the last
(de)glacial periods, (ii) to develop a parameterization of glacial water export
for use in coarse-resolution climate models, and (iii) to yield constraints on
the interpretation of seafloor observations and sediment records from the
eastern North American margin in terms of glacial water discharges from the LIS.
To meet these objectives, a model with kilometer-scale or higher resolution will
be applied in regional domains. The work plan of this project includes three
tasks. (1) A numerical model of ocean circulation will be configured to
represent two oceanic regions in the western North Atlantic: the Grand Banks of
Newfoundland, and the Middle Atlantic Bight including the oceanic region near
Cape Hatteras. (2) The circulation model will be coupled to an iceberg model.
(3) Experiments with the coupled model will be conducted to elucidate the roles
of three processes in the seaward export of glacial water: coastal current
separation near the Grand Banks, transport by shelfbreak eddies in the Middle
Atlantic Bight, and entrainment with the Gulf Stream near Cape
Hatteras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.