* 1903719
* Collaborative: INFEWS: U.S.-China: Synergistic Effects of Petroleum Production and Ocean Environmental Changes on Oyster Health
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Wei Xu, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 208,087.00

This project was awarded through the "National Science Foundation (NSF) /
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Joint Research on
Environmental Sustainability Challenges" opportunity. Understanding the
connections between interrelated food, energy, and water (FEW) systems is
essential for the development of sustainable worldwide seafood production. Fish
and shellfish serve as an important source of high-quality protein and non-
saturated fat. Near-shore aquaculture supplies over 50% of global seafood
production. However, over the past decades, seafood species and the production
of these species have been severely affected by water contamination as a result
of energy production and climate change. In this study, investigators from Texas
A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi, Louisiana State University, and Dalian Ocean
University in China will identify potential risks of oyster production systems
exposed to the contamination of petroleum products and the adverse environmental
factors of UV radiation, ocean salinity fluctuation, and ocean acidification. An
ocean model containing simulated environmental stresses will be developed to
predict how petroleum products impact the development and growth of oysters in
near-shore habitats in the Gulf of Mexico (GoM) and in Bohai Bay (BhB), China.
Data generated from this investigation could support the Food Safety
Modernization Act goals of risk-ranking consumable
seafood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to address the two themes proposed
in the National Science Foundation/National Natural Science Foundation of China
Joint Research on Environmental Sustainability Challenges; 1) quantitative and
computational modeling of a FEW system and 2) innovative human and technological
solutions to critical FEW systems problems. The project uses the oyster as a
model aquaculture species to assess the toxicity changes of crude oil compounds
in response to environmental stresses. With the increasing activities in the
petroleum industry along coastal lines, the accumulation of oil pollutants in
oysters becomes a concern for human health. The locations to be studied in this
project, the GoM in the US and the BhB in China, share the common
characteristics of robust seafood harvesting in conjunction with a vigorous
petroleum production industry. However, these marine environments have distinct
differences due to their geographic locations. Hence, the two unique systems
represent diversified FEW networks. This diversity of the networks is expected
to be explored by the computational modeling approach developed in this study.
The strategies and methods employed can be further extended to other marine
aquaculture species. Moreover, this investigation on the marine impact of crude
oil can translate to other marine contaminants such as pesticides and
pharmaceutical products, which have also become of concern in onshore/offshore
aquaculture. Research results will provide 1) a better understanding of the
toxicological alterations of petroleum products under global environmental
change; 2) the impacts of the modification in petroleum products on the health
of aquaculture species; 3) identification of environmental stress modified
petrogenic products and their toxicities to oysters that should serve as
references for the management of onshore/offshore aquaculture and oil
production; and 4) prediction of impacts of oil production on global ocean
environments and world aquaculture concurrent with climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.