* 1903171
* Collaborative Research: A paleoclimate perspective on the response of Southwest North American rainfall to elevated greenhouse gases
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Jessica Tierney, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 62,899.00

In recent years, severe drought in southwestern North America has prompted
intense interest in understanding the future trajectory of hydroclimate in this
vulnerable region. Studying past greenhouse climates can help identify the
processes that might drive future rainfall changes in the Southwest. One such
interval, the mid-Pliocene Warm Period, which occurred 3.3 million years ago and
featured CO2 concentrations similar to near-future values, presents an
interesting conundrum. Simulations of the Pliocene suggest widespread dry
conditions across the Southwest, just as models predict drying across much of
the southwest by the end of the 21st century. However, multiple lines of
geological evidence suggest wetter conditions in the Pliocene. This research
project aims to resolve this apparent paradox using a combination of state-of-
the-art, high-resolution climate model simulations and new reconstructions of
southwestern rainfall spanning the Pliocene to the present. The reconstructions
will provide some of the first constraints on the Pliocene history of regional
climate features like the North American Monsoon. These data and model
simulations will be used to evaluate sources of bias in model simulations of the
Pliocene and to understand how this past interval of climate change may have
differed from current warming. The project has direct applications to improving
projections of southwestern rainfall in a warming world. The results of the work
will be disseminated to the public and stakeholders via museum lectures, and
will complement ongoing efforts to develop hands-on research experiences for
high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleoclimatic research can clarify
the future behavior of regional climates by studying the past. This project
exemplifies this goal by using new data from the mid-Pliocene Warm Period,
specifically the mid-Piacenzian, to understand the response of North American
Southwest rainfall to elevated greenhouse gases. This project tests the
hypothesis that the spatial footprint of summer rainfall was much more extensive
in the Pliocene. The research will reconstruct Plio-Pleistocene rainfall
seasonality from marine sediment cores along the California margin and Baja
California. Measurements of stable isotopes in leaf waxes will explicitly
resolve changes in the balance of summer vs. winter rainfall. Complementary
measurements of ocean surface temperature from organic proxies like alkenones
will provide additional, independent constraints on regional environmental
change. The project will also conduct a suite of Earth system model simulations
to explore how changes in atmospheric parameterizations and model configuration
influence simulated patterns of Pliocene rainfall. Proxy data and model
simulations will be interpreted synergistically, with models helping inform
proxy interpretations, and proxies helping to assess model skill. The research
meets two major goals: first, it provides novel constraints on the Plio-
Pleistocene evolution of key regional rainfall regimes like the North American
Monsoon (NAM). Second, the project will help clarify the factors that influence
model skill at simulating Pliocene hydroclimate, with broad implications for our
understanding of the model configurations that most reliably predict regional
responses to elevated CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.