* 1903799
* Midisuperspace Laboratories for the Dynamics of Loop Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jorge Pullin, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2023
* USD 419,999.00

The study of how black holes evaporate is perhaps the most important outstanding
problem in theoretical physics today. It requires that we understand the
behavior of two of the pillars of modern physics, gravity and quantum field
theory, in their most extreme regimes. Understanding how physical theories fit
together in challenging regimes has in the past led to insights of spectacular
consequences. An example of this could be Maxwell's understanding of how
electricity and magnetism fit together led to the discovery of radio waves, with
the ensuing transformational changes they induced in our society. A second very
important objective of this type of work is the formation of human resources of
very high quality. Physicists trained in these disciplines have proved valuable
in industry and in finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports studies of
loop quantum gravity in spherically symmetric contexts with the ultimate goal of
understanding black hole evaporation. This includes work on the back-reaction of
quantum fields living on spherically symmetric quantum space-times. The
discreteness of the quantum space-time naturally regularizes the infinities of
quantum field theory. To study the back reaction will require quantum space-
times more realistic than the ones considered so far, including dynamical
evolution. The work will attempt to find the quantum space-time of a collapsing
shell and compute the Hawking radiation produced and eventually the back
reaction of fields living on it. In addition to this, the PI's group will study
the structure of the quantum space-times, in particular their singularity
structure in the case of extremal and super extremal charged black holes and the
Cauchy horizons that appear in the solutions. Finally, the semiclassical
collapse of a scalar field will be studied to understand how quantum effects
change the universality and scaling first discovered by
Choptuik.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.