* 1903592
* Optical Waveguide Lattices with Novel Transmission Properties Towards Enhanced Energy Conversion in Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ian Hosein, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 388,251.00

This grant supports research that contributes to new knowledge related to
optical materials for increased solar energy capture, thereby promoting progress
in renewable, clean energy. The proposed optical structure consists of periodic
arrays of light collecting elements created in polymer materials. The polymer
consists of a blend of components that are synthetically organized into periodic
structures that can control light transmission. When coated over a solar cell,
this structure promises to convert more light into electricity. This would
result in the generation of more power as compared to current solar cells, as
well as mitigation of energy losses that have persisted in solar cell
technologies. This material structure is also a low-cost alternative to more
complicated and costly solar cell coatings. This award supports fundamental
research on the structure-property relationships of this new material structure,
particularly on how it collects light, as well as fundamental property-function
relationships to increase energy conversion in solar cells. Studies of light
transmission and solar cell output are performed, with optical simulations used
to confirm experimental findings. The award also supports the education of high
school and undergraduate students and helps broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadband optical
waveguide lattices show the capability of collecting light from a broad angular
incident range and transmitting it in a single direction. This capability to
control light collection and transmission is attractive as a potential strategy
to meet the critical need to manage light propagation and collection in optical
devices, such as for increasing energy conversion and reducing losses in
industry-standard front contact solar cells. The goal of this project is to
prepare, characterize, and study multiple waveguide lattices created in polymer
thin films as solar cell coatings, with the experimental objective to
demonstrate a wide angular collection window for light, to thereby increase
energy conversion. The structures are produced through irradiation of a
photoreactive binary component polymer blend with arrays of microscale optical
beams, which in turn form multiple arrays of broadband cylindrical optical
waveguides. This research elucidates structure-property correlations between the
waveguide lattices and their light transmission and collection characteristics,
as well as investigates increases in external quantum efficiency and current
density in front contact silicon solar cells when the structures are employed as
the encapsulation layer. Such correlations are established by carrying out
angle-resolved transmission and energy conversion measurements over the full
solar spectrum and as a function of the waveguide lattice parameters, as well as
through corroborative theoretical studies of light transmission using Beam
Propagation simulations. This research promises to advance the capability to
control the optical transmission properties of materials, with the potential to
increase solar energy conversion, thereby advancing renewable, clean energy
production. The educational activities of this award will seek to enhance high
school education by providing research experiences, as well as advancing
undergraduate education in materials science through interactive experiments.
Education and recruitment efforts will focus on groups underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.