* 1903617
* I-Corps:  Injectable Gel for Treating Diabetic Retinopathy.
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Vivek Kumar, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves
improvement in the standard of care for patients suffering from retinal diseases
such as diabetic retinopathy. Vision loss or decline imposes a significant
socio-economic burden on populations afflicted by these debilitating diseases.
The proposed product aims to reduce the frequency of intraocular drug injections
for treating these conditions, which may lead to improved patient compliance.
Commercially, the product may replace current therapeutic approaches based on
antibody technologies. The customer discovery and preparation of a business
model canvas through the I-Corps program will determine a clear go/no-go
decision for clinical translation of the product. Success of the business
strategy may increase the well-being of millions of Americans suffering from
diabetic retinopathy. The translation of the technology from the bench to the
bedside would pave the way for market approval of peptide-based hydrogels in
particular and implantable biomaterials in general.

This I-Corps project would enable customer discovery and preparation of a
business model canvas for the development of an anti-angiogenic hydrogel
intended for the treatment of intraocular posterior segment diseases. The
current standard-of-care, intraocular injections of inhibitors of vascular
endothelial growth factor, cause patient discomfort and increased risk of
infection due to the high frequency of dosage (monthly) required. The proposed
product is a shear-responsive hydrogel, and thus it can be injected into the
vitreous humor of the eye. The constituent peptide contains an anti-angiogenic
domain and self-assembles in aqueous media into supramolecular nanofibers. The
biological activity as well as the favorable material property of the product
has led to the current I-Corps proposal. The proposed product may enhance
technological understanding of the response of intraocular neovascularization to
injectable anti-angiogenic hydrogels, facilitating future therapies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.