* 1903652
* P2C2: New Zealand Climate in Three Warm Periods
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Jonathan Nichols, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2021
* USD 159,798.00

The flux of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to the Southern Ocean is largely
controlled by the position of the westerly winds in the Southern Hemisphere. In
the present climate system, when these winds shift southwards, the carbon sink
in the Southern Ocean is diminished and this has implications for the rate at
which carbon dioxide accumulates in the atmosphere. This project aims to provide
a perspective from past climate states that will help understand the future of
such processes linking climate, atmosphere and ocean circulation and carbon
dioxide accumulation. The project will also help to understand how bioavailable
dust influences ocean circulation and cycling of carbon in the Southern Ocean,
which has implications for the global carbon cycle. The researchers will address
these goals by establishing reconstructions of the climate and environment from
peatland sediments on the South Island of New Zealand with a focus on three warm
periods during Earth's most recent climate history. The project will also
provide opportunities for international collaboration for students and secondary
school educators by participation in the Experiences for Earth Science Teachers
Program (ESTEP). Secondary school teachers from New York and New Zealand will be
paired to participate in the research and develop their experiences into
curricula and supplemental films to engage their students in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research project will establish a series
of reconstructions of climate and environmental change from peatland sediments
on the South Island of New Zealand during two historical warm periods, the
early- to mid-Holocene and Marine Isotope Stage 5e (MIS-5e) and compare them
with trends associated with current warming. The researchers will compare these
with the preceding glacial periods (MIS-2, -4, and -6). This project provides
the funds to establish a chronology for cores obtained from well positioned
peatlands on New Zealand's South Island at study sites that are either within
the modern westerly wind field or near its northern edge. The researchers will
use organic geochemical and stable isotope proxy methods to reconstruct Southern
Hemisphere westerly winds during these warm periods represented in the
chronologies of the cores. These data will be coupled to ongoing measurements of
modern water isotopes and meteorological observations and GCM simulations to
directly interpret stable isotope measurements from sediments as records of
westerly wind variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.