* 1903606
* Collaborative Research: Terrestrial hydrology during the last deglaciation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Gene-Hua Ng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 281,160.00

Water, critical to life on Earth, moves between the atmosphere, oceans, lakes
and wetlands, groundwater, rivers, permafrost, and glaciers and ice sheets.
Earth?s finite amount of water means that whenever one of these reservoirs
fills, the others must empty to balance it. This simple principle - conservation
of mass - has powerful implications for society's ability to understand past
climate and sea-level change, and potentially for predicting these into the
future. To understand the impacts of past changes in water and climate, the
researchers ask a simple and fundamental set of questions: First, how did the
global water balance respond to the climate of the last glacial period? Second,
how did that response in turn impact the climate system through evaporation from
the land, runoff into the ocean, and ecological change linked with the global
distribution and function of wetlands? In this project the researchers will
develop a new model that links these components of the hydrological cycle, and
apply this to the recent geological past when vast ice sheets covered the high
latitudes and lakes filled now-dry basins. By connecting this new model with
geological data, the researchers hope to understand how changes in past sea
level are distributed among ice sheets and water on the continents, including
groundwater, lakes, and wetlands. They will also investigate how sudden
freshwater release can impact ocean circulation and global climate. In parallel
with this research, they will communicate the importance of water in the
environment by sharing their digitally reconstructed ancient land- and water-
scapes online, developing a watershed board game for educators, and contributing
their findings to scientific journals and
Wikipedia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terrestrial water storage plays a crucial role
in climate, ecosystems, land-atmosphere interactions, and sea level. To date,
most studies of the last deglaciation focus on changes in the ice sheets, but
overlook the other components of the terrestrial hydrologic system: lakes,
rivers, wetlands, groundwater, and permafrost. As a result the magnitude and
pace of change of non-glacial terrestrial water storage - and its potential
impact on the climate system - remains unknown. Here the researchers propose to
reconstruct the global hydrologic environment during the last deglaciation. To
do so, they will: (a) compile, integrate, and synthesize proxies for terrestrial
paleohydrology since the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM); (b) develop a coupled model
linking glacial isostatic adjustment, lakes and rivers, and groundwater; and (c)
integrate data and model to quantify the time evolution of global terrestrial
hydrology. This output will allow them to quantify: (1) the migration,
expansion, and contraction of surface water bodies; (2) the total amount of
water stored on land and its impact on sea-level records and ice-sheet
reconstructions; and (3) water inputs to the ocean through evapotranspiration
and submarine groundwater discharge, alongside their potential to reconcile ice-
sheet reconstructions with records of sea level and past ocean circulation. In
conjunction with these research activities, the researchers will deliver their
paleohydrologic reconstructions as maps available on Wikimedia Commons and
Flyover Country, build instructional materials on past environments, and improve
Wikipedia's coverage of hydrologic and paleoclimate
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.