* 1903237
* Collaborative Research: Interglacial climate in Bermuda and beyond
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kyger Lohmann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 512,773.00

This project will assess the variability of ocean surface temperatures along the
U.S. East Coast and in the Caribbean for a key past warm climate period, the
Last Interglacial (MIS 5e, 130-116,000 years ago). The Last Interglacial period
is often thought to be one of the best past analogs to study in relation to
expected near-future climate change because global sea surface temperatures were
slightly warmer than today, and sea level was several meters higher.
Additionally, because the Last Interglacial was geologically recent, well-
preserved fossils that record paleoclimate information in the chemistry of their
shells are relatively abundant. Previous efforts to map past sea surface
temperatures across the North Atlantic have been undertaken, but a glaring data
gap exists along the U.S. East Coast and as far as 1000 km out to sea. More than
40 million people currently live along the U.S. Atlantic seaboard and in the
Caribbean. In addition to the direct impacts of a warmer climate, warming
coastal sea temperatures can also strengthen Atlantic hurricanes, increasing
damage to coastal infrastructure. Thus, it is of societal importance that we
improve our knowledge of the potential for coastal water temperatures to
increase in a warming world. By studying the Last Interglacial time interval,
regional temperature estimates can be obtained from fossils that will help
reveal how much ocean temperatures could potentially warm in this highly-
populated region.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will produce new high
resolution paleotemperature reconstructions from well-preserved fossil mollusks
found in transgressive beach deposits and raised paleo-reef deposits that are
dated to the Last Interglacial. The research team will conduct field work to
gather fossil mollusk samples from sedimentary sequences of interglacial age in
Bermuda, the Bahamas, and multiple localities along the US East Coast from the
Florida Keys up to the Massachusetts Cape. Collected shells will be analyzed for
their stable and clumped isotopic compositions to determine past temperature and
the oxygen isotopic composition of seawater (d18Osw; related to salinity) at
each locality. The clumped isotope paleothermometer represents an advancement
over traditional methods and will produce more robust paleoclimate information
without the need to assume past d18Osw values. The resulting basin-scale map of
interglacial paleotemperature and d18Osw will be useful for inter-proxy, model-
proxy, and paleo-modern-future comparisons and to look for evidence of mid-
interglacial meltwater events. Larger shells will be sampled at sub-annual
resolution to determine paleo-seasonality in temperature at different latitudes.
This research should thus not only yield a spatial pattern of interglacial
hydrography in the study region but will be the first to do so at the seasonal
time scale. In Bermuda, interglacial deposits from multiple past interglacials
will also be sampled to compare stronger and weaker interglacial periods. As
part of this project, one or more graduate students and multiple undergraduates
will receive training in advanced geochemical techniques, field work and data
analysis. Engaging activities relating to fossil and modern seashells will be
brought to elementary and middle school students through science events in
Michigan. The project will support two early career scientists who will receive
mentoring from a senior co-principal investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.