* 1903885
* Unveiling the Ultra-High Energy Universe with Neutrinos
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Brian Clark, Clark, Brian Allen
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 12/31/2022
* USD 328,750.00

Brian Clark is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship
to conduct a program of research and education at Michigan State University. He
will study very light, very penetrating subatomic particles called neutrinos. In
particular, his work will involve designing and implementing searches for ultra-
high energy (UHE) neutrinos by detecting the faint radio signal produced when a
neutrino interacts with the Earth. He will develop techniques for extracting
important information from detected neutrinos, such as their energy, the
direction in the universe they came from, and the type of neutrino, called
neutrino flavor. He will work with existing neutrino detectors at the South Pole
and help to develop a future larger Radio Neutrino Observatory. Alongside this
research, he will mentor undergraduate students who are involved in a summer
research program. He will supervise research projects related to his work and
will guide the students in their professional development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, if successful, will yield the detection of
Ultra-High Energy (UHE) neutrinos, which, like gravitational waves, are probes
of processes hidden to electromagnetic radiation, and it would thus advance the
goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea. The proposed scientific
program will generate the world's most sensitive search for a diffuse flux of
neutrinos with energies above 100 PeV, and potentially lead to the first
observation of UHE neutrinos. Energy reconstruction will allow a precise
measurement of the flux of UHE neutrinos and determine their overall spectrum.
Direction reconstruction will enable a search for point sources, and flavor
determination will make possible tests of neutrino oscillations on cosmic-scale
baselines. The educational component of his work will be to advise and mentor
young researchers through an established summer research program, thus helping
to promote a more capable and diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.