* 1903393
* CBET-EPSRC: Transition and Turbulence in Compressible Boundary Layers Subjected to Concave Surface Curvature
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Lian Duan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2019
* USD 264,990.00

This research was funded under the NSF Engineering - UKRI Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council opportunity NSF 1-067. Any solid body that
moves through a fluid, for example air or water, experiences a resistive drag
force that slows its motion down. Cars, trucks, motorcycles, airplanes, ships,
and submarines all require a lot of fuel to overcome this drag force and move
through air or water. A large part of this resistance is caused by friction
effects between the surface and the fluid. These effects are confined in a very
thin region near the surface, called the boundary layer. The boundary layer
causes no real harm when its motion is very regular and ordered (laminar motion)
because the resistive force is very small. However, on large bodies, like
airplanes and trucks, the boundary layer is often chaotic because there are a
lot of vortices and whirls (turbulent motion), which give a huge resistive
force. The change of a boundary layer from laminar to turbulent is called
laminar-turbulent transition. The knowledge of this change is essential
information for the design of transport vehicles because it is critical to
predict how much drag force is generated. This project seeks to study laminar-
turbulent transition in air flowing over very fast airplanes. The focus is on
the high-speed boundary layers over concave parts of the airplanes, like the
bottom of the wing, because these curved surfaces are much more common than flat
surfaces. These very fast flows also occur inside the engines, over turbine
blades in particular, that compress gases to make the airplanes fly. A
systematic theoretical and numerical study will be conducted in collaboration
with researchers at the University of Sheffield to provide a complete
understanding of when, where, and how a high-speed boundary layer flowing over
concave solid surfaces transitions to turbulence. Integrated with the research
effort, a variety of educational activities will be undertaken to showcase and
instill the excitement of cyberphysics discovery in students at all levels, as
well as to prepare a highly-trained workforce in high-speed flows and advanced
cyberinfrastructure.

The overall objectives of this CBET-EPSRC proposal are to advance the
fundamental understanding of all the stages of laminar-turbulent transition in
compressible boundary layers flowing over concave solid surfaces, starting from
the entrainment of the free-stream disturbances into a laminar boundary layer
(i.e., the receptivity stage) through transition up to a fully turbulent flow.
The inclusion of the receptivity stage is a fundamental ingredient for
transition prediction that has not been previously explored for subsonic and
supersonic boundary-layer flows subject to streamwise concave curvature. The
proposed approach includes receptivity analysis based on advanced nonlinear
asymptotic theory, boundary-layer instability computations, and direct numerical
simulations (DNS). A systematic theoretical and numerical study will be
conducted to clarify the role of Gortler vortices, streamwise-elongated,
counter-rotating structures caused by concave curvature, the dynamics of which
is extremely difficult to predict and control. The detailed study of boundary-
layer physics will also be combined with large-eddy simulations (LES) and
Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) to assess the performance of subgrid-
scale (SGS) and RANS models for transitional flows dominated by Gortler
vortices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.