* 1903098
* Theoretical and Experimental Study of the Influence of Orbital Angular Momentum of Light on High-Intensity Laser-Plasma Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Alexey Arefiev, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2023
* USD 643,683.00

This project focuses on a fundamental physics characteristic of light - its
orbital angular momentum (OAM). A signature of a laser beam with OAM is a
twisted wave-front that is shaped as a helix. The role of OAM in high-intensity
laser-plasma interactions is still poorly understood and this project will
address it through a dedicated computational research program that couples to
experiments at flagship European laser facilities. The Extreme Light
Infrastructure (ELI) laser facilities located in Romania and in the Czech
Republic have some of the most powerful lasers in the world. The project will
explore new methods for creating high-intensity helical laser pulses and new
methods that facilitate the exchange of OAM between a laser pulse and a plasma.
Specifically, the aim is to determine the impact of the OAM exchange on laser-
driven ion acceleration via computational modeling, and to experimentally test
the results of the models at the ELI facilities. This exploratory research will
pave the way towards a long term research program of utilizing helical light
beams for novel nuclear physics and strong-field experiments at the ELI-Nuclear
Physics (ELI-NP) facility in Romania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the context of
high-intensity laser-matter interactions, most of the laser improvements have
been focused on increasing power, on-target intensity, total energy, and the
contrast of the compressed pulse. There is however another fundamental
characteristic of polarized light - its angular momentum. The orbital angular
momentum is associated with an azimuthal phase dependence, so it is independent
of the polarization and can be significantly enhanced by generating a laser beam
with twisted wave-fronts. This project is a collaborative program with an aim to
explore the frontiers of light-matter interaction by pushing the OAM carrying
helical photon beams to relativistic intensities and investigating their
exchange of angular momentum with relativistic plasmas. This project will
combine theoretical and simulation research with a dedicated experimental
program at the new 1 petawatt (PW) CETAL laser and 1 PW and 10 PW ELI-NP laser
facilities in Romania. The project will determine the impact of the OAM exchange
on laser-driven ion acceleration and the conditions for effectively generating a
twisted pondermotive force by short laser pulses. The latter generates a long-
lasting volumetric magnetic field in a plasma suitable for controlling charged
particle transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.