* 1903296
* CMMI-EPSRC: Modeling and Monitoring of Urban Underground Climate Change (MUC2)
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Kenichi Soga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

This research was funded under the NSF Engineering - UKRI Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council opportunity NSF 18-067. In dense urban areas,
the underground is exploited for a variety of purposes, including transport,
additional residential/commercial spaces, storage, lifelines, geothermal heat
pump systems, and industrial processes. These uses all can contribute to changes
in subsurface temperature, groundwater levels and flow. With the rise in urban
populations and significant improvements in construction technologies, the
number of subsurface structures is expected to grow in the next decade, leading
to subsurface congestion and potentially deleterious effects to subsurface
temperature and water conditions. With correct planning, subsurface temperatures
can be harnessed beneficially. However, if unchecked, they can result in a high
environmental and economic costs. The combination of specially packaged
monitoring equipment and an open-source underground climate model developed in
this project will provide a robust framework to assess underground conditions
and evaluate future evolution and potential impacts. Cities, local and state
governments, agencies, utilities, as well as citizens, will be able to access
these tools to make more informed decisions, avoid environmentally unsustainable
practices, and extract value more fairly. In the long term, awareness of the
health status of the underground is a step towards sharing responsibility for
its sustainable and fair use. The ultimate goal is for every city to generate
reliable maps of underground climate, with the ability to understand the
influence of future urbanization scenarios. The outreach strategy is focused on
engaging with the wider community and the profession to raise awareness of the
issues and provide tools to explore solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
collaboration with researchers at the University of Cambridge, the project will
develop a framework for monitoring and predicting temperature and groundwater
distributions at high resolutions in the presence of underground heat sources
and sinks. A low cost and reliable underground weather station using the fiber
optic sensing technologies will be developed and installed at sites in the US
and UK. A high-performance computing based thermo-hydro coupled underground
climate change code will be developed to simulate the temperature and
groundwater variation with time at the whole city scale. The main scientific
deliverable from the district- and city-scale numerical simulations and the
experimental temperature monitoring is a series of archetype emulators, which
are defined based on the geological characteristics, above ground built
environment, such as surface and buildings types, and the density and type of
the underground structures. These archetype emulators will allow efficient city-
scale modelling and enable application of the methodology to any other city or
region with similar characteristics of above and underground built
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.