* 1903721
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Winter Climate Anomalies across North America: Benchmarking Instrumental Trends and Model Projections with High Resolution Paleoclimatology
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Steven Voelker, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 504,060.00

This project aims to: 1) develop 500 year tree-ring-based data sets in
California and Michigan that are distinctive in their ability to reconstruct
winter conditions across distinct regions of atmospheric circulation over North
America; 2) develop reconstructions of prominent winter atmospheric circulation
patterns affecting climate across these regions and much of the United States;
and 3) test how external forcing, across the last 500 years, may have impacted
the reconstructed winter climate anomalies and associated atmospheric
circulation patterns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These continental-scale
reconstructions of atmospheric circulation will rely on two distinctive sets of
pre-instrumental proxy records that each represents a side of the North American
winter dipole that has been characterized by increasingly extreme conditions on
either side of the continent over recent decades. Hence, these winter paleo
proxies can be used to help decipher drivers of winter climate, such as the
polar jet stream and arctic amplification, in response to warming trends and
within the context of the internal variability on inter-decadal
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include support
for early career scientists and graduate and undergraduate students as well as
the development of new and innovative sets of climate data of use to the wider
climate research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.