* 1903210
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Continuous Urine Assay Instrumentation for Monitoring Kidney Function
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2018,09/30/2020
* Srinivas Tadigadapa, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 09/30/2020
* USD 115,773.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on a technology to address
the detection of early acute kidney injury (AKI). AKI occurs in 5 - 7% of
hospitalized patients and results in a mortality rate of about 50%. The
financial costs of AKI are estimated to be 8 billion dollars per year, or about
$130,000 per life-year saved. It is unlikely that this high mortality and
associated cost will be reduced until there are better tools for the early
diagnosis of renal injury. This project translates a quartz resonator based
thermal biosensor concept into a biomedical instrumentation system for
continuous monitoring of kidney function. The project will focus on prototype
engineering, instrumentation, and extensive benchmarking with the aim to provide
accurate and automated measurements of urine creatinine. Coupled with in-line
urine flow, and periodic serum creatinine concentration measurements, a system
for near-continuous creatinine clearance measurement in AKI patients will be
developed. The unmatched stability, sensitivity, and reproducibility of this
system will allow for collection of such data for clinical analysis and early
detection of conditions such as sepsis. The sensor design based on enzyme
immobilized alginate beads placed in a Kapton® tubing, as an easy to swap
disposable cartridge represents a promising clinical diagnostic prototype
demonstration with a viable business model.

This project will develop a calorimetric biosensor prototype based upon
differential measurement as a way to compensate for background thermal effects.
Development of a differential sensor is expected to improve both the sensitivity
and the precision of measurement. The reproducibility, accuracy, and stability
of the measurement system will be critically evaluated using urine samples.
Intra-assay and inter-assay variability will be experimentally determined by
repeated measurements and statistical methods. Accuracy will be determined by
comparison of the creatinine concentrations determined by HPLC (the gold
standard) and the quartz resonator. Agreement between the two methods will be
determined by Bland-Altman analysis. Stability of the system will be determined
by measuring the creatinine concentration of known creatinine test solutions at
regular intervals over a period of 48 hours. The plot of measured concentration
vs time will be used to determine the time to failure. In addition, personnel
involved in this project, one graduate and one undergraduate student, will
receive regulatory compliance experiences through collaboration with our partner
company focused on improving patient outcomes through the successful
implementation of innovative technology into medical devices. The team will be
also participate in several commercialization conferences and events to
establish strategic alliances and partnerships for the technology translation
and commercialization.