* 1904091
* Quantifying and manipulating chirality and amplification of nanomaterials in liquid crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Torsten Hegmann, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 319,840.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Chirality, most simply described by the absence
of mirror symmetry, can be found everywhere in nature and probably in the
universe. Established as a term by Lord Kelvin in 1894, and significantly
advanced by Pasteur and others, chirality has significant implications in
Chemistry, Biology, Physics, Cosmology, and Materials Science alike. Described
as "universal asymmetry" by Wagniere, the origin of homochirality of life is one
of the most central scientific questions. Amplification of chirality underpins
most theories proposed to describe nature's homochirality, i.e. the use of
exclusively one enantiomer (one handedness) of sugars and amino acids to build
all life forms, from simple to complex. This project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program as well as the Condensed Matter Physics
program at NSF, advances recent findings that chirality emanating from nanoscale
particles capped with a monolayer of chiral molecules is uniquely able to
generate more intense responses in liquid crystals than their organic molecular
chiral counterparts. The liquid crystalline state, pervasive in nature just like
chirality, here serves as a powerful test platform to establish size-property
and shape-property relationships governing the amplification of chirality
through space. This research at Kent State University generates data that
advance the understanding of nanoscale chirality and paves the way for new
applications of nanoscale materials as chirality sensors, tunable chiral
metamaterials, and chiral catalysts. Students experience a multidisciplinary
training environment, utilize state-of-the-art equipment, and become proficient
in presenting their research to peers. The project serves as a platform for
several outreach activities including training of high school students, hands-on
lectures and lab research for community college students, and a scientific
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Significant advances
in the understanding and application of the unique features of nanomaterial
chirality are only possible if one can detect, measure, visualize, tune, and
transfer nanomaterial chirality through space and across length scales. To study
this, the ubiquitous liquid crystalline state offers unrivaled opportunities for
both fundamental theoretical and applied experimental research on nanomaterial
chirality, by permitting the visualization as well as quantification of
chirality amplification at different length scales. A range of imaging
techniques such as polarized optical microscopy, fluorescence confocal
microscopy, and transmission electron microcopy are used to study these systems.
Guided by first principle theoretical calculations of a pseudoscalar chirality
index, this experimental work also establishes how chirality amplification at
the nanoscale depends on the nanomaterial type, size, shape, and aspect ratio.
The team synthesizes, characterizes, and studies chiral ligand-capped metal
nanorods, nanodiscs, nanostars, nanotriangles, and nanocages decorated with
chiral ligand shells in nematic liquid crystals, and compares experimental data
of the helical twisting power to theoretical values of the calculated chirality
index. To test how chirality amplification can be applied, chiral nematic
microlens arrays similar to arthropod or compound eyes are created, and the use
of magnetic fields in combination with anisometric chiral molecule-capped
magnetic nanoparticles dispersed in nematic liquid crystal phases examined. The
latter seeks to understand how competing elastic and magnetic forces of liquid
crystal host and dispersed magnetic nanoparticles, respectively, can be
translated into motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.