* 1904838
* Collision Cross Section Measurements Using Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Matthew Asplund, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2023
* USD 495,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Chemistry
Division, Professors David Dearden and Matthew Asplund of Brigham Young
University and their students are devising a new approach to measuring the
shapes of molecules, including the way that biological molecules like proteins
are folded. While superb techniques exist for such measurements, those
techniques require specialized instrumentation. This team is developing new
techniques to extend these capabilities to an additional class of existing
instrumentation with only minimal modification, making these measurements more
widely available. Their approach may also offer enhanced performance for some
applications. These measurements are important because just as a misshapen,
misfolded parachute may not unfurl correctly, misfolded protein molecules (for
example) do not function properly and are believed to be among the root causes
of debilitating conditions like Alzheimer?s or Parkinson?s diseases. Sensitive
detection of the shape is essential to understanding how molecules fit together
and function, and what can go wrong at the molecular level. Students carrying
out this work are trained in skills essential to the 21st century science that
is the foundation of the U.S. economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
graduate and undergraduate students are developing techniques designed to
measure the collision cross sections of gas phase ions, without requiring a
dedicated ion mobility instrument. Two independent approaches to these
measurements are taken. The first examines signal decay as ions are scattered
out of a coherently-orbiting ensemble in a Fourier transform ion cyclotron
resonance mass spectrometer (FTICR/MS). The decay rate (and the corresponding
FTICR linewidth) depends on the collision cross section. The second approach
measures the phase lag between the radiofrequency electric field used to excite
the ions and the ion motion in the presence of a damping buffer gas. This
approach overcomes mass-to-charge and energy limits that are inherent in the
linewidth method. The utility of these techniques is demonstrated by examining
problems in supramolecular chemistry and structural biochemistry. In the course
of this work, graduate students are trained in advanced techniques for high
performance mass spectrometry that are vital for the biotechnology industry and
the emerging field of proteomics. Many of the talented undergraduate students
engaged in this research subsequently pursue graduate studies. The
instrumentation used in this study is also made available for undergraduate
courses in general, analytical and physical chemistry at BYU, which is a
significant supplier of B.S. chemistry and biochemistry students to U.S.
graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.