* 1904430
* I-Corps Teams:  Visiglow: A High-throughput Vision Assessment Tool
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Delia Shelton, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Vipin Chaudhary
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to completely
transform vision screening. With this technology pharmaceutical companies can
automatically and rapidly screen thousands of compounds with non-technically
trained staff in multiple animal models. The long-term beneficial consequences
of the proposed work will include: 1) expanding the breath of translational
research because the technology can be used in all seeing verbal and nonverbal
animals (i.e., drosophila, zebrafish, mice, rabbits, human adults and infants);
2) accelerate compound screening, and 3) ultimately, reduce the cost and time
from drug discovery to market. This I-Corps project advances vision screening.
The technology is analogous to a customizable disco ball, that can automatically
alter light displays to non-invasively assess multiple aspects of vision in
seeing verbal and nonverbal animals. Our past research has proven the technology
is well-matched to screen multiple aspects of vision within 20s in zebrafish, an
important biomedical model. It is a platform technology, therefore the invention
will be important for high throughput screening of pharmaceutical compounds,
biological mutants, and toxicological agents in diverse biomedical models,
thereby advancing drug discovery, gene therapies, and quality control and
assurance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.