* 1904895
* Evolution of Cytochrome c for Optimal Apoptotic Peroxidase Activity
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Bruce Bowler, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 12/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

Programmed cell death (apoptosis) is a critical biochemical pathway that
controls the growth and development of different tissues within an organism. An
important early step in apoptosis is the oxidation of the mitochondrial membrane
lipid, cardiolipin, by reactive oxygen species, including peroxides. This
oxidation activity, which acts as an effective apoptotic on/off switch, is
facilitated by the peroxidase activity of the protein cytochrome c. The
intrinsic peroxidase activity of cytochrome c must be minimized so as not to
accidentally trip the switch. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Bruce E. Bowler from the
University of Montana to investigate how the amino acid sequence of cytochrome c
is optimized for its peroxidase function in apoptosis. This grant aims to
dissect how sequence differences between yeast (no apoptotic pathway) and human
(functional apoptotic pathway) cytochrome c have perfected this switch to be off
when the protein is not interacting with cardiolipin and on when it interacts
with cardiolipin. This project provides training for two graduate students in
molecular biology methods, protein expression, biophysical methods, structural
biology and single-molecule methods so that they can develop into productive
scientists enabling the growth of our scientific infrastructure. The project
also develops visually-exciting educational materials for a science museum in
Missoula, MT that show how proteins carry out their functions, with the aim of
inspiring young people to pursue careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses rationally-designed variants of cytochrome c to evaluate the
sequence determinants that control access to the peroxidase-competent conformer
of the protein. Equilibrium and stopped-flow kinetic methods are employed to
probe the structural dynamics of cytochrome c variants in the presence and the
absence of cardiolipin membranes using absorbance, fluorescence and circular
dichroism spectroscopies, single-molecule methods and X-ray crystallography.
Peroxidase activity is evaluated in the presence and absence of cardiolipin
membranes to correlate variant-dependent conformational and dynamic properties
characterized spectroscopically with changes in peroxidase
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.