* 1904146
* High Resolution Chromatography for Lipids and Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Robert Kennedy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2024
* USD 509,800.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Robert Kennedy and his group at the University of
Michigan are working to improve the characterization of complex mixtures such as
blood and soil extracts, common in nature and industrial processes. Studying the
composition of such mixtures is vital to biology, chemistry, environmental
science, and production of valuable chemicals. A powerful approach to analyzing
such mixtures begins by separating chemical components from one another by
passing the mixture through a chromatographic column packed with small particles
("stationary phase") that interact to varying degrees with different components.
As chemical components emerge from the column they are analyzed by a device
called a "mass spectrometer" for identification and quantification. The ability
to separate mixture components can be improved by using smaller particles and
longer columns, but such changes require higher pressure to drive the sample
through the column. Current technology is largely limited to operating at
pressures below 20,000 psi. As a result, many mixtures cannot be properly
analyzed. The Kennedy group is working to relieve this constraint by developing
chromatographic systems that can operate at up to 100,000 psi. The improved
chromatography will allow better characterization of mixtures in many
disciplines. For example, the group is using the new methods to identify
biomolecular patterns (primarily lipids and proteins) associated with microbes
capable of efficient biofuel production. Efforts to disseminate knowledge about
the important methods, principles, and applications include involvement of
undergraduate students and outreach to even younger students, including members
of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytical separations are
critical to complex mixture analysis. High-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC)
is a dominant method for separations. To analyze many complex mixtures, it is
necessary to achieve higher resolution than what is currently possible. The
Kennedy group is developing next-generation, high-resolution separations for
chemical analysis. They are advancing ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography
(UHPLC) through development of a) fittings that can be routinely used up to 100
kpsi; b) packing conditions for small particles (0.5 to 1.7 um) in long columns;
and c) packing conditions for different modes of LC, such as hydrophilic
interaction chromatography (HILIC) and ion-exchange (IEX), in long columns. They
are also coupling their new UHPLC columns with other separation methods in two-
dimensional (2D) separations coupled to mass spectrometry (MS). They are
targeting unprecedented peak capacity (10,000) by 2D chromatography of lipids
and intact proteins, with the expectation that increasing peak capacity will
result in detection of more compounds in complex samples with better sensitivity
and reproducibility. In a specific application, they are probing the lipidome
and proteome rearrangements in bacteria that develop resistance to toxicity of
fuel products. Identification of such rearrangements is crucial for engineering
bacteria for high-yield biofuel production. The work is being made broadly
available through interactions with collaborators at the National High Magnetic
Field Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.