* 1904154
* EAGER: Development of a Research Tool to Investigate Factors that Influence Researchers' Attitudes about Engagement in Public Science Events
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Noah Feinstein, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Expansion and diversification of the scientific workforce, along with increasing
public trust and support of science, are critical to ensure that the United
States continues to be a global leader in science. Achieving these goals can be
addressed by encouraging scientists to interact directly with the public through
activities that both demystify the process of research and create dialog between
practitioners and the public. This project focuses on identifying positive and
negative factors influencing researchers' participation in public science events
and will develop a research tool to understand profiles of scientists'
engagement with the public. The research tool will be applied widely to
University of Wisconsin-Madison researchers as a test population to explore what
factors are key motivations for why researchers do (or do not) engage with the
public through science. These profiles, in turn, will inform tailored
interventions such as science communication training, exposure to different
audiences and constructive feedback that support researchers in public
engagement. These interventions may increase the likelihood that a more diverse
pool of researchers participate in sustained science engagement with the public.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this EAGER project are to: 1)
develop a validated scale for a public engagement profile for researchers, 2)
establish a public engagement profile baseline for all UW-Madison campus
researchers, regardless of past participation in public engagement with science,
3) survey all UW-Madison researchers following participation in public
engagement with science to identify factors shaping researchers' profiles, and
4) identify emergent public engagement profiles to support identification of key
factors influencing researchers? initial and sustained participation in public
engagement with science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multivariate analysis of
features either in researchers' profiles or in the events in which they
participate may reveal factors that predict researcher engagement, thereby
informing tactics to broaden and increase researcher participation in public
engagement with science. Such tactics would transform the design of public
engagement in science from a process based on intuition and personal experience
to one based on data on factors that systematically attract and sustain
researchers' participation in public engagement with science. Additionally, this
research will offer recommendations for the effective design of collective
impact programs that engage researchers and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.