* 1904719
* Revealing the Mechanisms of Bulk Material Dissolution in Thiol-Amine Solvent Mixtures Toward the Solution Deposition of Chalcogenide Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Richard Brutchey, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; The macroelectronics industry has emerged as a
powerful entity with widespread deployment of thin film technologies, such as
solar cells and flat panel displays. These macroelectronics applications require
innovative approaches to low-cost, large-area electronics, as the drivers are
not compatible with the larger and more well-established microelectronics
industry. To reduce costs and improve market potential for thin film
macroelectronics, research into next-generation macroelectronic thin film
deposition and processing must include a focus on low-temperature solution
processing. The principal investigator is studying a solvent mixture used to
dissolve cheap bulk materials to make inks that, upon solution deposition,
convert to semiconductor thin films under mild conditions. The primary goals of
this project include understanding the chemistry of bulk material dissolution
and leveraging that information to deposit stable semiconductor thin films of
novel composition that are promising for next-generation solar cells. Integrated
into this plan is an outreach program specifically aimed at local community
college students. The principal investigator is partnering with Cerritos
Community College, an institution with a large number of underrepresented
students, to provide internships on materials research. The objective of this
annual 8-week outreach program is to provide these students with STEM research
opportunities that are not afforded to them at the community college level, and
thereby increase their transfer rate to 4-year institutions. An internship
alumni network will be established to maintain formal contact with the interns
after they complete the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; Despite decades of developments in semiconductor thin film
deposition, the vast majority of methods require costly, energy intensive
conditions. As such, there is a need to develop deposition processes that are
less capital- and energy-intensive. The direct dissolution of bulk materials to
yield solution processable inks that convert to thin films under mild conditions
can result in significant cost reductions. This project directly addresses the
challenge by studying inks prepared by bulk chalcogenide, oxide, and metal
dissolution with thiol-amine solvent mixtures. The principal investigator is
leveraging his expertise in inorganic chemistry and materials synthesis to meet
the following objectives: (1) Understand the chemistry behind the dissolution of
bulk materials with the thiol-amine solvent mixture. While a wide scope of bulk
materials has demonstrated solubility in this solvent mixture, there is little
to no understanding of the dissolution mechanism. The dissolution mechanism is
being interrogated through an examination of the resulting molecular solutes and
the chemical factors that affect the kinetics of dissolution. In parallel, a
dual-space approach that combines Rietveld refinement and pair distribution
function (PDF) analysis of X-ray total scattering data is being employed to
monitor thermal conversion of the amorphous dried molecular inks into
crystalline chalcogenide thin films. This approach is intelligently informing
solution processing and crystallization of phase-pure, high-quality chalcogenide
thin films. (2) Use the thiol-amine solvent mixture to solution process
promising chalcogenide thin films for solar energy conversion. The large palette
of inks now available with this system are being used to solution process more
novel, compositionally complex, multinary chalcogenide semiconductor thin films
with properties amenable to solar energy conversion, such as optimal band gap,
polar crystal structures, and materials with high thermodynamic stability
comprised of Earth abundant elements. The most promising candidates are being
explored in next-generation solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.