* 1904960
* Tailorable, responsive, and morphologically-tunable plasmonic chiroptical nanoparticle superstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Nathaniel Rosi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 519,566.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;The study and control of chiral nanoscale
materials are rapidly growing areas of research. A chiral material is something
that cannot be superimposed on its mirror image, like a left and a right hand.
Chiral nanomaterials have the potential to serve as sensors for disease markers,
as catalysts for important industrial chemical processes, and as components in
optical devices as mundane as a camera and as exotic as an invisibility cloak.
This research, which is jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program and the Biomaterials program at NSF, focuses on the
development and advancement of chiral nanoscale materials assembled from gold
nanoparticles. The researchers at the University of Pittsburgh advance
fundamental insights into the construction of these materials and optimization
of the unique optical properties that underscore their practical promise. This
fundamental research involves participation from a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate researchers, who communicate their discoveries in scientific
publications and presentations, as well as in science demonstrations for the
general public. Additionally, to increase diversity in the chemical sciences the
principle investigator engages in targeted recruiting
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Recent years have
witnessed the emergence of a wide variety of chiral nanoparticle superstructures
that exhibit unique plasmonic chiroptical properties. To propel this field
forward and to ultimately realize the technological promise of these materials,
research efforts must focus on the following challenges: i) deliberate
optimization of plasmonic chiroptical properties; ii) design and preparation of
dynamic and responsive plasmonic chiroptical materials; and iii) development of
sustainable and scalable syntheses and efficient means of material manipulation
to allow for their more widespread study and use. The central goal of this
research, which is jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program and the Biomaterials program at NSF, is to address these challenges by
leveraging molecular methods for constructing nanoparticle superstructures that
rely on peptide conjugate molecules to direct nanoparticle synthesis and
assembly. The PI and his group: i) elucidate how the molecular composition and
structure of peptide conjugate molecules affects the assembly, structure, and
properties of helical gold nanoparticle superstructures; ii) develop new
approaches for fabricating photo-responsive helical nanoparticle superstructures
exhibiting 'on/off' plasmonic chiroptical behavior which is coupled to
reversible molecular transformations; iii) establish strategies for controlling
the length and surface chemistry of helical nanoparticle superstructures; and
iv) develop new, sustainable approaches for preparing helical nanoparticle
superstructures. The findings illuminate how molecular-level alterations to
peptide precursors translates into dramatic nanoscale alterations to the
assembly, metrics, and properties of helical nanoparticle superstructures. The
transformational impact of the research lies in the ability to precisely control
the structure of nano- to microscale materials using molecular
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.