* 1904277
* Redefining Renalase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Graham Moran, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2019
* USD 9,453.00

Renalase was an enzyme of unknown biological function for almost a decade. While
it was described as a new renal hormone secreted into blood by the kidney to
consume adrenaline and thereby lower blood pressure and slow the heart rate, no
convincing demonstration of this activity was ever made. Based on a recent
discovery by the principal investigator, it appears that the true function has
nothing to do with blood pressure. Renalase instead appears to be a salvage
enzyme that prevents the loss of a molecule at the heart of metabolism in all
living organisms. This molecule has a tendency to alter its structure in a way
that makes it useless in metabolism. Renalase prevents the accumualtion of the
inactive molecules, saving or salvaging them, by turning them back into the
correct, active structure. This function for renalase involves unprecedented
enzyme chemistry that is likely to be found to be pervasive, utilized by many if
not all forms of life. The intent of this award is to establish a foundational
understanding of this curious new chemical activity. As new enzyme chemistry,
the investigation of renalase will be an excellent platform to teach graduate
students about enzymology. Moreover, the principal investigator will integrate
the discovery of new examples of this activity into an Introductory Biochemistry
Laboratory class such that undergraduates can participate directly in the
advancement of this research by making genuine scientific discoveries in the
laboratory classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
National Science Foundation, Division of Chemistry, Chemistry of Life Processes
Program is funding Dr. Graham R. Moran from the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee to characterize a newly discovered enzyme, renalase that would appear
to be important for efficient metabolic activity in living organisms. The award
will fund a range of research activities that will define the chemical mechanism
of renalase, the structural basis for the activity, and the metabolic importance
of this activity. The methods employed will use a combination of rapid-mixing
pre-steady state spectrophotometric kinetic techniques, structural elucidation
of substrate analog and product enzyme complexes, numerous biophysical
approaches that take advantage of the spectrophotometric reporting power of the
enzyme's cofactor and site directed mutagenesis of conserved active site amino
acids. In addition, Dr. Moran intends to develop an undergradaute laboratory
course in which students discover new examples of this chemistry in a broad
range of organisms such that the course will provide new avenues of
investigation by which the full importance of and context for this activity can
be established.