* 1904230
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Autonomy & Constraint: Health Educators in Schools
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Danielle Bessett, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2021
* USD 15,901.00

Health education in U.S. schools is important, but the curricula and approach
can differ across settings. While policymakers, school boards, and parents
attempt to exert influence over health education policies, health educators must
decide what and how to teach. Even when given mandated curricula, health
educators sometimes find ways to repurpose health education for their students.
Yet we do not fully understand what circumstances or characteristics allow for
such action or how health educators negotiate gaps between curricula and what
they believe their students need. Further, health educators are not a homogenous
group. While some are full-time, certified health educators who teach in a
variety of settings, others are school teachers who teach health education as
one part of their job. Scant research describes health education from health
educator perspective or compares the experiences of community and teacher health
educators in schools. This study will provide needed evidence to address these
gaps. Findings from this project will inform professional organizations that
train and support health educators, thus promoting efforts to improve the
quality and delivery of health education.

This qualitative study will generate interview data from 50 school-based health
educators, comprised of 25 community health educators and 25 teacher health
educators. The project will recruit participants from health education
conferences, professional directories, community health organizations, schools,
and professional teacher associations. The interviews will describe teaching
school-based health education from the perspective of health educators,
particularly their experiences with challenges and opportunities. The project
will assess how health educator experiences are shaped by employment context,
comparing community and teacher health educators to identify how differences in
training, employment, and years of experience structure these roles. The project
will also consider how health educator personal characteristics, such as race,
social class, gender, and age, and structural contexts such as geographical
location and school characteristics, such as school size, shape their classroom
experiences. The analysis will proceed in two phases. First, the project will
code each interview line-by-line, noting any instances of new ideas,
orientations, or experiences, and allowing the data to guide which themes
emerge. Second, the project will engage in a close analysis of the relationship
between the data and theory. The project will review and study the codes from
the first phase to determine similarities and differences, reveal patterns that
are defining features of the interviews, and identify instances that diverge
from the expected themes or initial findings. Findings will inform sociological
theories regarding professionalization and professional autonomy, particularly
in the key context of education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.