* 1904972
* Deactivation of Protein Function and Mapping of Protein-Protein Interactions via Light-Induced Localized Oxidation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Alexander Deiters, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Alexander Deiters at the University of Pittsburgh
to develop new approaches to deactivate proteins and identify protein-protein
interactions. Proteins, which are typically made up of naturally occurring amino
acid units, play a wide range of roles in biological chemistry, including making
chemical reactions faster and interacting with other proteins to start chemical
and biological events. To understand the specific details of proteins involved
in these events, Professor Deiters' team is developing new light-driven chemical
reactions that change the atoms of only the key amino acid sites involved, which
allows identification of the function of the protein or proteins crucial to the
success of the chemical and biological events. The key amino acid sites are
revealed by effectively weighing proteins after they have been marked with
chemical reactions specific to the new atoms in the amino acids. Due to
Professor Deiters' student recruiting strategies and the required combination of
molecule making and protein chemistry, and cell biology, this project provides a
unique training environment for the next generation of scientists at the
interface of chemistry and biology, with them being highly diverse (greater than
60% from under-represented groups). Furthermore, to foster public understanding
and interest in the research and training activities focused on light in
biological processes, Professor Deiters and his team routinely offer outreach
activities at local science museums. The hands-on outreach activities include
the design of experiments that excite children at an early age about science,
while showing them the involvement of chemistry in a range of everyday
processes, such as reactions that make fireflies glow or sunscreens protect
people from the sun's harmful rays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site-specific
introduction of photosensitive chromophores into target proteins enables spatial
and temporal generation of singlet oxygen capable of reliably modifying protein
structure and function with high precision. The approach is based on unnatural
amino acid mutagenesis, followed by chromophore bioconjugation, thereby
providing fully programmable control over the placement of singlet oxygen-
generating chromophores. This affords exquisite control over the proximity of
reactive oxygen species produced within protein surface landscapes and active
sites. In addition to the light-triggered deactivation of protein function, the
targeted protein oxidation enabled by this technology also allows for precise
proximity-based labeling and pull-down, leading to the identification and
mapping of protein-protein interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.