* 1904511
* Studies of Viscophoresis -- Drift in a Viscosity Gradient
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Derek Stein, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2023
* USD 426,605.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;By applying a difference in pressure, voltage,
or temperature to the ends of a tube filled with liquid, we can cause the fluid
or small particles within it to move, and the mechanisms underlying the motion
are well understood. It was recently discovered that when a small glass tube is
filled with liquid and the viscosity is held at different values at either end,
an electrical current begins to flow; the origin of that motion of electrical
charges is not understood at present. This project is experimentally
investigating the origins of that phenomenon by measuring the motion of salt
ions and small fluorescent particles inside nanofluidic channels, where the
physical dimensions and the properties of the liquid can be carefully
controlled. The results shed new light onto the theory of the Brownian motion -
the random motion of small particles caused by its collisions with the molecules
of a liquid. Remarkably, more than a century after the publication of Einstein's
famous theory of Brownian motion, the question of whether a particle drifts in a
viscosity gradient, and if so, in which direction, is still debated. The
conventional picture of the Brownian motion is a walk with steps taken in random
directions and step sizes that are inversely proportional to the viscosity. When
the viscosity varies in space, one must choose whether the size of each step in
the random walk corresponds to the viscosity at the beginning of the step, the
end of the step, or somewhere in between, and this seemingly insignificant
choice has measurable consequences. In fact, different choices can be
appropriate in different physical situations. Experiments can settle the debate
and deepen our understanding of microscopic phenomena that are important in
living cells, in industrial applications, and possibly beyond. The team is
producing a scientific cartoon to explain the Brownian motion and its
fundamental importance to a broad audience of non-specialists.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project is exploring the origins
of a recently discovered nanofluidic transport phenomenon whereby small
particles in solution drift due to a gradient in the viscosity of the solvent.
The team has named this transport phenomenon "viscophoresis". Measurements of
the transport of ions and fluorescent quantum dots in nanofluidic devices with
well-defined dimensions establish the quantitative relationships between the
drift velocity, the viscosity gradient, and other experimental parameters. The
results of those experiments are needed to shed new light on the longstanding
"Ito-Stratonovich" theoretical problem of noise-driven dynamics with
multiplicative noise. Viscophoresis is significant because nanofluidic transport
processes play a vital role in biology, in geology, and in micro- and
nanofluidic technology. This project can lead to new insights or applications in
those domains, where large viscosity gradients frequently arise. This project
provides an excellent training opportunity for a graduate student, and an
educational scientific cartoon is being created to reach a broad audience of
non-specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.