* 1904860
* Bacterial Reaction Centers With New Photochemical Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* JoAnn Williams, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 642,000.00

Deciphering the mechanisms by which the movement of protons is linked to
electron transfer is an important challenge in understanding biochemical
catalysis. Professors James Allen and JoAnn Williams of Arizona State University
are directing their efforts to elucidate this linkage for chemical reactions
that occur in photosynthesis, nature's fundamental process for converting light
into chemical energy. Because control of coupling between proton and electron
transfer is critical for achieving efficient energy conversion and chemical
transformations, this project aims to generate a more complete understanding of
the physical principles that govern these processes in complex systems. The
activities offer societal benefits through broadening participation in science
and engagement of the wider community. To overcome traditional low graduation
rates and limited participation in science degree programs, this project
provides students from a local community college with a personal research
experience in a supportive environment that encourages their continuation in
science. In another avenue of engagement, students work with artists to express
the scientific concepts behind research in bioenergy and photosynthesis and
present their integration of science and art to the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program, with partial co-funding from the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, is supporting Professors James
Allen and JoAnn Williams of Arizona State University to help establish molecular
concepts that explain how proteins effectively perform proton-coupled, multi-
electron-transfer reactions. They are using novel protein design strategies to
modify the bacterial reaction center, an integral membrane protein serving as
the site of the primary photochemistry in photosynthesis. The yields of proton
and electron transfer are being measured for different cofactors and protein
environments. The experimental methods combine structure-based protein design,
enabled by molecular biology and biochemical techniques, with analysis of the
properties of the resulting complexes by optical and magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. The project is designed to expand the tools available for
designing proton-coupled, electron-transfer reactions for catalysis in
biological systems and establish a framework applicable for understanding the
progression of oxidation states in the fundamental water oxidation reactions of
photosystem II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.