* 1904224
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Competing Donor Imaginaries: Gender, Development, and Comparative Aid Chains
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Bair, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 14,213.00

Many international nongovernmental organizations (INGOs) around the world use
the broad category of gender and development to describe their work, but the
programming carried out under this umbrella term varies: some INGOS promote
projects addressing health, education, and vocational skills, while others focus
on reproductive health, economic empowerment, civil rights, and political
participation. Numerous studies document the key role INGOs play in transmitting
global norms and adapting those norms in local contexts. But more recent
research has established that INGO programming is shaped by its local political
economy. We know relatively little about how this variation affects the way that
INGOs organize their operations and with what consequences for local
stakeholders. This project explores how the practices, beliefs and priorities of
INGOs are transmitted along aid chains, or the links through which programs
travel from INGO headquarters to INGO country offices, and finally to
implementing partners. Specifically, this project asks: (1) To what degree, and
how, do aid chains organized by INGOs from different countries vary?; (2) How do
implementing partners, such as employees in government ministries connected to
these aid chains, understand and negotiate the priorities of the funding INGOs
in local political and cultural context?; and, (3) To what extent does
engagement with INGOs shape the self-understandings of these local
practitioners, including their professional identities? The project will advance
policy debates regarding the role of international development aid in promoting
global civil society, and more specifically, the changing landscape of the
development sector and the emergence of important new actors, with implications
for how to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of U.S. aid provided to
non-U.S. countries.

Data from this project are comprised of 100 in-depth interviews, 10 months of
participant observation, and a textual analysis of 20 documents. It is
collecting qualitative data on each organization within two aid chains. First,
it conducts in-depth interviews in U.S. INGO headquarters organizations, as well
as interviews in the U.S. bilateral agency. Then, through 10 months of
fieldwork, the project collects ethnographic observation and interviews in three
sites: the field office of a U.S.-based INGO; an INGO field office abroad; and
an implementing partner organization of these offices. Finally, the project will
conduct short-term observation and interviews in an INGO headquarters office
abroad. To supplement interview and ethnographic findings, textual analysis of
INGO documents will be completed. All data will be coded using ATLAS.TI and open
coding techniques. This research design will enable the project to analyze how
international development programs are articulated and communicated across the
three links, from INGO headquarters and donors, to INGO field offices, to local
partners. This project will extend sociological theories of global civil society
by demonstrating the micro-level organizational and inter-organizational
processes through which national priorities shape global norms. It will also
help to inform sociological theories of development, particularly those that
inform issues related to gender in the developing world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.