* 1904809
* Collaborative Research: Extensive Field Observations and Modeling to Understand Multi-band Precipitation Processes within Winter Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Brian Colle, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 405,812.00

Northeast U.S. winter storms have wide ranging societal and economic impacts,
especially along the densely populated coastal corridor from Maryland to
Massachusetts. Sets of long, thin features with enhanced precipitation rates
called snowbands often occur within winter storms and contribute to large
variations in snow fall accumulation over short distances. Forecasts for snow
accumulation are hampered by gaps in understanding of how snowbands form and are
maintained. The project will use high spatial and temporal resolution
observations and weather models to resolve the processes within the larger storm
that yield snowbands. A set of research instruments located on Long Island, NY
will map the 3D storm structures every few minutes. Measurements will address
where and when the snow particles grow in the storm. Numerical weather modeling
will examine the range of conditions associated with snowband formation and the
characteristics of layers in the atmosphere in which the snowbands occur. The
findings can help improve forecasting of snowfall accumulation as well as be
applied to other geographic regions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work will focus
on intermittent processes for snowband genesis and maintenance. Previous work
showed that sets of multiple snowbands can occur with little or no
frontogenesis, and the presence of instability did not determine whether bands
formed. Additionally, analysis of radar observations did not show clear,
sustained convergence signatures to be locked with snow multi-bands implying
that multi-bands do not have sustained updrafts throughout their lifecycle. The
work will address the role of gravity waves in helping to trigger the release of
instabilities at small time and spatial scales that lead in turn to amplifying
diabatic feedbacks that form the majority of mesoscale snowbands. The project
will collect and analyze high spatial and time resolution observations of
snowbands using a set of horizontal and vertical scanning radars, scanning
LIDAR, additional sounding launches, high-resolution pressure sensors, and
surface snow imagery. The observations will permit examination of the joint
interactions over time among released instability, dynamics, and microphysics at
spatial scales &lt; 1 km and time scales of a few minutes. The project will use
modeling to examine the band forcing and stability phase space using a large
suite of idealized simulations down to large-eddy scales. This work will provide
an improved understanding of banded precipitation within the comma head of
extratropical cyclones along the densely populated northeast
coast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.