* 1904214
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identity Formation in the Military
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Taylor Winfield, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 03/31/2020
* USD 16,000.00

Policy changes in the past ten years ? such as women?s admission into combat
roles, and new accommodations for ethnic and religious minorities-- have brought
questions about military identity to the forefront of national conversation.
These policies allow for soldiers to express their individual identities;
however, they also challenge popular conceptions of soldiers, raising concerns
and possible conflict. This project examines how larger trends of
resocialization and accommodation play out in the day-to-day lives of new
soldiers. The project investigates the experiences of incoming cadet candidates
at the United States Military Academy Preparatory School in West Point (USMAPS).
The project examines how USMAPS works to (re)socialize cadet candidates into
soldiers and future officers, and how cadet candidates, whose civilian
identities are constrained by a regimented institutional context, re-fashion
personal self-definitions and routines. The project will study how cadets
interpret and respond to this re-socialization as they prepare for future
military service. The findings will contribute to understanding of how the
military and other modern institutions socialize new participants to develop
human capital suitable to new institutional roles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses ethnographic
fieldwork, in-depth interviews, and quantitative text analysis to address
questions regarding socialization into the military. The fieldwork involves
participating in cadet candidate academic, physical, character and military
development training. The project will conduct over 100 interviews with cadet
candidates from a variety of social backgrounds, as well as additional
interviews with staff. The project will also include forty hometown visits to
observe cadet candidate behavior outside of the institutional setting, to see
their neighborhoods, and interview family members about how they perceive the
cadet candidate career choices and any changes they have noticed in behavior.
The project also employs quantitative text analysis to study contemporary and
historical documents related to the integration of women and minorities at West
Point and in the U.S. military. Project findings will contribute to sociological
literatures on organizations, diversity and culture, particularly as they relate
to re-socialization into critical U.S. institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.