* 1904921
* Single-Molecule Mechanochemical Sensing for Multiplexed Tasks: A Topochemical Strategy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Hanbin Mao, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2023
* USD 334,000.00

The research objective of this proposal is to take a multidisciplinary approach
to innovate biosensing strategies with ultrahigh sensitivity to detect multiple
chemical or biological targets. The detection will be accomplished by monitoring
the variation of either tension or length of the sensing template upon binding
of chemical or biochemical targets. To detect many targets simultaneously, which
is an essential feature in next generation biosensors, the research team will
incorporate different sensing units in a single template. Each sensing unit is
designed to report the binding of specific targets. Successful completion of
this project will provide new biosensing paradigms with great potential to
transform single-molecule biosensors into viable devices with high sensitivity
and superior efficiency compared to conventional biosensors. During this
project, the investigator plans to integrate educational elements into research
projects. The investigator's lab will train high-school and college students by
recruiting them to carry out this NSF funded research. Research is modularly
designed to facilitate participation of these students into the project. In
addition, the research team will reach out to the public by helping K-12
students for scientific activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project lies in the employment of single DNA molecules as sensing
templates while detection of analytes is based on mechanochemical principles.
Upon chemical binding of individual chemical or biochemical targets to the
single-molecule DNA template, the mechanical property of the template such as
its tensile force and/or extension will change. To detect such a tiny signal
change on the order of picoNewton in force and nanometer in extension, single-
molecule techniques such as optical tweezers and magnetic tweezers will be used.
Since analyte detection is achieved at the single-molecule level, chemical
amplification is not necessary, which increases the efficiency of materials
usage in the mechanochemical sensing. To improve concentration detection limit,
many sensing units will be incorporated in the template using molecular biology
methods such as Rolling Circle Amplification (RCA). In addition, signal is
amplified by spatial arrangement of localized sensing units, a feature that
follows topochemical principles. To increase the throughput of the sensing,
magnetic tweezers will be used so that hundreds of single-molecule sensing
templates can be immobilized on a surface and monitored simultaneously. The topo
chemical sensing strategies are anticipated to lead to viable single-molecule
biosensors with high sensitivity and efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.