* 1904245
* A New Method to Efficiently and Reliably Measure Ternary Diffusion Coefficients
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ji-Cheng Zhao, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2023
* USD 358,987.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion coefficients are a measure
of how fast atoms jump and the speed of intermixing between different elements
(atoms) at various temperatures, thus they are some of the most fundamental
materials properties that materials engineers need to design new materials for
enhanced performance which can lead to higher efficiency and lower emissions for
many devices. For instance, diffusion coefficients dictate how much a jet engine
turbine blade would elongate at high temperatures during high speed rotation (a
phenomenon called creep). Efficient methods have been developed to measure the
diffusion coefficients between two elements (referred to as binary systems), but
no efficient methods exist to measure the speed of intermixing among three
elements (ternary systems). This study aims to develop a revolutionary method to
speed up the measurements of diffusion coefficients of ternary systems. Wide
application of this new high-throughput ternary diffusion measurement
methodology and algorithms will lead to much more data to build databases to
accelerate the design of more advanced materials to enhance US manufacturing
competitiveness. One graduate student from an underrepresented group will be
trained towards her/his PhD degree under the support of this project. Two
undergraduate research assistants from diverse backgrounds will also be hired to
work on this project to excite their interest in structural metals and to allow
them to gain research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to binary diffusion coefficients,
ternary diffusion coefficients are essential to the establishment of reliable
diffusion and mobility databases for multicomponent systems. Each set of
reliable ternary diffusion coefficients (with cross terms) at one composition
are usually measured from the composition intersection point of two separate
diffusion couples (paths), which leads to very low efficiency. Approaches to
extract ternary diffusion coefficients from a single diffusion couple can lead
to very large errors. The objective of this study is to establish a
revolutionary new methodology to reliably measure ternary diffusion coefficients
at unprecedented efficiency, including rigorous evaluations of the cross
diffusion terms. The new stacked-couple diffusion multiples (SCDMs) have the
capability to create numerous composition intersection points across the ternary
composition space. Forward simulation analysis (FSA) of numerous composition
profiles collected from each SCDM will allow extraction of reliable ternary
diffusion coefficients across wide compositions in ternary systems. In essence,
one SCDM can be used to collect reliable ternary diffusion coefficients of
entire ternary systems. This study will demonstrate this new methodology and
validate it using the Fe-Co-Ni ternary system for which reliable diffusion
coefficients are available for a direct comparison. Copious new ternary
diffusion coefficients will then be obtained for 10 ternary systems inside the
Fe-Co-Ni-Cr-Cu system that is a good model system for high entropy alloys
(multi-principal element alloys). During this study, approaches and algorithms
for 2-dimensional ternary diffusion simulations with the presence of phase
interfaces (e.g. bcc/fcc) will be developed to enable efficient and reliable
extraction of ternary diffusion coefficients in multi-phase ternary systems. The
new methodology will enable unprecedented efficiency in measuring reliable
ternary diffusion coefficients for accelerated establishment of multicomponent
diffusion (mobility) databases for accurate simulation of materials processes.
Accurate kinetic simulations will help accelerate new materials design and
processing optimization to enhance the US manufacturing competitiveness. The
methodology may also be extended to systematically and efficiently measure
diffusion coefficients of multicomponent (beyond ternary) systems in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.