* 1904125
* Essential Role of Water and Lipids in G-Protein-Coupled Receptor Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Michael Brown, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Rhodopsin is a visual protein found in the rods of the eye's retina, and is an
archetype for the broad class of membrane proteins known as G-protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs). With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in
the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Michael Brown from the University of
Arizona to explore how the interactions of this protein with lipids in membranes
and with water control the visual signaling process. Although the atomic
structures of proteins, including rhodopsin, are now known, the correspondence
to their actions in lipid membranes remains an open question. This project
combines experiment and theory to study how the flow of water into the protein
affects the activation of rhodopsin within a cellular membrane environment. In
addition, the project provides specialized training in the chemistry of membrane
proteins and lipids to graduate students and postdoctoral fellows as well as
undergraduate and high-school students. The new fundamental knowledge is
disseminated not only through the published scientific literature, but also
through workshops developed with the Arizona Flandreau Science Center. The
project is further integrated with an outreach program involving Arizona's
Science, Engineering, and Math Scholars program, focusing on promising students
who are first in their family to attend college, from low-income households, and
women and minorities. The work involves international collaborations and affords
opportunities aimed at integrating and promoting human cooperation and global
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research project characterizes important
interactions involving membrane lipids and water that control the light
activation of rhodopsin in the catalytic G-protein cycle of visual signaling.
Because activation is a pH-dependent process, whether water goes into or out of
the protein is crucial to the actual chemistry of the reaction mechanism. The
project combines molecular spectroscopy with scattering methods through a
synergetic interplay of experiment and theory. The research is intended to
illuminate the hydration-mediated activation mechanism of rhodopsin, and
explores how the membrane soft matter comprising lipids and water affects the
process. Hydrophilic polymer osmolytes of low specificity are used to quantify
the influx of water into the protein together with gravimetric methods, and
reveal the influences of water on the activation of rhodopsin and its
interactions with the cognate G-protein transducin. The project further
addresses how the membrane lipids govern rhodopsin function in the cellular
environment through the bilayer properties and interactions. The information
from this study is intended to contribute new insights into the fundamental
chemistry of the membrane components that are likely to govern G-protein-
mediated biological signaling at the cellular level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.