* 1904710
* CDS&amp;E:  ECCS: Collaborative Research: PNPM Schemes Adapted for the First Time to Computational Electrodynamics for Solving 21st Century Problems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jamesina Simpson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 187,500.00

In 1966, Kane Yee developed a space-time computational algorithm to solve
Maxwell's equations, which are used to study electromagnetic wave propagation.
His approach developed into what is now known as the finite-difference time-
domain (FDTD) method. Through the ensuing decades, advances have been made to
FDTD enabling it to be applied to a wide range of problems across the
electromagnetic spectrum, literally from low frequencies (sub-1 Hz) all the way
up to visible light. Currently, FDTD is an indispensable tool for modeling very
large and very complex electromagnetic wave interaction problems, especially
those problems requiring the incorporation of multiphysics. However, FDTD is
showing its age. Its basic second-order algorithmic accuracy and difficulty in
modeling smooth, non-grid-conforming material interfaces, have become serious
limitations. Co-PI Balsara recently published a mathematical blueprint for
entire classes of higher-order accurate solutions to Maxwell's equations. These
schemes will overcome the limitations of current modeling approaches while also
retaining their advantages. Since these high-order accurate schemes yield for
all intents and purposes an exact numerical solution of Maxwell's equations, it
will be possible to design more stealthy aerospace and naval platforms than at
present. Similarly, it will be possible to design complex wireless collision-
avoidance and pedestrian-avoidance transportation systems that must absolutely
be fail-safe, such as those to be used in millions of self-driving cars. PI
Simpson will incorporate the higher-order accurate schemes into her "flipped"
course on computational electrodynamics and will post the corresponding video
lectures on YouTube (freely accessible to anyone). Likewise, Co-PI Balsara will
post new chapters, video lectures, and sample codes on his website. A simplified
version of the codes will also be developed to help science and engineering
undergraduates and high school students to get hands-on experience with the
time-dependent Maxwell's equations for solving electromagnetic problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop higher-order
algorithms for computational electrodynamics that include all the versatile
features that are essential in engineering computational electrodynamics. Co-PI
Balsara recently published a mathematical blueprint for higher-order solutions
to Maxwell's equations, called polynomial-of-degree-N/polynomial-of-degree-M
(PNPM) schemes. High-order PNPM schemes have several critical advantages
relative to current numerical solution techniques for Maxwell's equations,
Namely, high-order PNPM schemes: (1) can provide essentially exact solutions for
Maxwell's equations; (2) require only four or five grid cells per wavelength;
(3) preserve the divergence constraints globally (meaning Gauss' Laws are
satisfied globally); (4) can be adapted to arbitrary geometries and non-grid-
conforming material interfaces; (5) maintain a maximum time-step limit that does
not diminish with increasing accuracy; (6) are highly parallelizable on
supercomputers since only a single plane of data need to be shared between
processors. To provide an effective simulation framework to the research
community for solving a wide range of applications, the PNPM methods will be
endowed with a seamless strategy for treating perfectly matched layer boundary
conditions, dispersive media, and total-field scattered-field plane wave source
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.