* 1904867
* Expanding N-Heterocyclic Carbene Surface Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Jeremiah Johnson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 457,814.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Dr. Jeremiah A. Johnson from Massachusetts
Institute of Technology to make a variety of metallic nanoparticles.
Nanoparticles with controlled sizes and attached molecular and metallic groups
(ligands) have enabled technological innovations in fields ranging from green
catalysis and energy conversion to electronics and therapeutics. Despite many
advances, the number of methods available to modify the surfaces of
nanoparticles is quite small, and each existing method has significant
limitations. For example, metal-sulfur bonds, which are by far the most studied
linkages are often not sufficiently stable for certain demanding applications
Their synthesis is not always straightforward, and they may possess unwanted
color/odor. This research examines the use of a variety of new groups on metal
nanoparticles in order to develop materials that may be useful in electronics,
nanotherapeutics and other applications. The research has a broader impact on
the education of undergraduate and graduate students, especially women and
underrepresented minorities. The research team is further broadening the impact
of their work by including and mentoring high school teachers from the greater
Boston/Cambridge area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on the
synthesis of novel N-Heterocyclic Carbene (NHC)-metal complexes, new strategies
for installation of such NHC-metal complexes onto metallic surfaces, and hybrid
organic/inorganic materials that leverage the strength of NHC-metal bonds to
achieve stability and versatility. The activities are divided into three
independent research thrusts. In the first thrust, functional NHC-gold complexes
and nanoparticles are prepared bearing "clickable" functionalities which enable
polymerization of alkene-based NHC ligands on gold nanoparticles. In the second
thrust, NHC@Au nanoparticles-based hybrid materials are designed to contain
block copolymers bearing polyNHC-Au complexes as blocks. These block copolymers
are then investigated as templates for the formation of gold nanoparticles. In
the third trust, a family of NHC@metal monomer complexes with a variety of
metals (e.g. copper, iron, nickel and palladium, is prepared for
copolymerization studies that yield novel NHC@metal alloy nanoparticles. The
research associated with this work provides new tools for the formation of
robust chemical bonds between metals and functional molecules with the potential
to have broad impacts across fields including electronics, supported catalysis,
nanotherapeutics and green chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.