* 1904338
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Anticipating Infertility: The Emergence of a Medical Market for Fertility Preservation
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Jennifer Bair, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 15,894.00

This project investigates the social meaning and implications of fertility
preservation as a new medical intervention directed at healthy women. Egg
freezing, the foremost fertility preservation technology, extends the
reproductive life span by preserving a woman's fertility beyond the limits of
her reproductive years. Rather than treat the condition of infertility in women,
egg freezing anticipates age-related infertility in otherwise healthy women of
reproductive age. Techniques such as egg freezing are now being developed and
marketed as a potential reconciliation of motherhood and professional work by
adjusting women's reproductive timelines to synchronize with career
trajectories. While egg freezing appears to give women more control over their
lives by altering the timing of reproduction, it does so in a social context
that emphasizes motherhood and where the conditions of professional work often
create irreconcilable time conflicts between career advancement and family
formation. Such new technologies also appear in a medical context that promotes
health and the prevention of illness through invasive biomedical interventions.
This project examines this tension at the crux of debates regarding, on the one
hand, claims about women's expanding agency, and on the other, the persistent
messaging suggesting motherhood as essential to their identity. Findings from
this project will inform the medical and public health professions, particularly
in the field of reproductive medicine, regarding their work using new
technologies. In addition, this project will be useful to policy-makers
concerned with eligibility for and accessibility to egg freezing by providing
insight into women's motivations, experiences, and perspectives on fertility
preservation strategies. Findings will also inform societal conversations
regarding the complex relationships between fertility preservation, gender
inequality in the workplace and the issue of work-family
conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation employs a
qualitative mixed-methods design to address two research questions. First, the
project will examine articles published in clinical journals in the field of
reproductive medicine, popular women's and business magazines, and newspapers
since 1980 to trace how professional and media claims have helped establish egg
freezing as an elective, social or lifestyle choice, thus extending to a new
population technologies originally developed for women with compromised
fertility due to illness or other medical issues. Second, the project will
conduct ethnographic observation at educational and marketing events aimed at
promoting fertility preservation. Third, the project will conduct 80 in-depth,
qualitative interviews with experts in the field of reproductive medicine, women
who use egg freezing, and a range of actors who promote fertility preservation
techniques in three United States cities that are major destinations for
fertility services. The project will analyze all data using both open and
structured coding. Findings from the project will inform sociological theories
related to gender, family, and the workplace, particularly those theories
concerning work-family conflict and women's life course in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.