* 1904932
* Investigating organocatalytic routes to degradable polyacetals and polythioacetals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Robert Grubbs, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 412,101.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Robert B. Grubbs and Surita R.
Bhatia of the Department of Chemistry at Stony Brook University are developing
new synthetic routes for the construction of sustainable and biodegradable
polymer-based materials. Polymers or plastics consisting of many repeating units
linked with carbon-carbon bonds have benefited our society in many different
ways. Due to its light weight, durability and ability to conform to shape,
plastic has helped aerospace technologies take giant steps forward over the past
50 years, including advancements in satellites, shuttles, aircraft, and
missiles. In addition, the building and construction, electronics, packaging,
and transportation industries have all benefited greatly from plastic materials.
While chemists have created numerous ways to assemble carbon-carbon units into
polymers, methodologies to disassemble them one-by-one are still very rare. This
reverse process is crucial because it leads to polymer recyclability, therefore
providing a green life-cycle for plastics that would otherwise accumulate in the
environment. This project addresses the molecular recycling of polymers by
providing new synthetic routes for the preparation of polymeric materials with
programmable degradability. New classes of polymers that result from this work
are expected to retain the physical properties of current plastics but with the
added benefit of being recyclable. This work provides training and education to
undergraduate and graduate students in synthetic polymer chemistry, and
collaborative research activities involving researchers from underrepresented
groups at a historically Black university (Prairie View University).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on the design and synthesis of
polymers modeled on existing acrylate and methacrylate backbones with the
potential for similar physical and responsive properties but with programmable
degradability. The research activities focus on the systematic investigation of
the effects of initiators (alcohols and hydroxyl-terminated polymers), catalysts
(triethylamines and other organic bases), and monomer structure (glyoxylate and
glyoxamide monomers) on the control of the polymerization process. The
incorporation of these different polyacetal and polythioacetal blocks with other
polymer blocks into block copolymers is also investigated. The research is
innovative and focuses on the properties and degradation of a class of polymers
with high potential for industrial importance. The synthesized polymers are
expected to have tunable thermoresponsivity, hydrophilicity, hydrophobicity and
to be susceptible to photoinduced cleavage/degradation by
acid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.