* 1904396
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Collective Memory, Behavior, and Group Identity
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Cathryn Johnson, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2020
* USD 5,535.00

This project examines collective memory for a focal group of people in light of
identity theory. Identity theory states that individuals enact their identities
in everyday interaction, based on feedback. In this study, hypotheses will be
tested concerning how collective memory of a high impact epidemic has affected
the relationship between a group's behavior and identity, resulting in
differences between cohorts. Data will be collected through archival research
and interviews. Findings will improve understanding of collective memory and
generational differences, with broader relevance to health interventions and
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods for this project consists of archival
research and interviews. The archival research will draw from collections of
relevant documents from the 1970s to the present in order to identify which
historical narratives persist over time and become collective memories.
Interviews with people from different generations will examine how themes
emerging from the archival work appear in respondents' narratives regarding how
they define their identity and experience their behavior. Results will identify
potential strategies to manage the long-term social impact of traumatic events,
particularly health-related events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.