* 1904497
* Complex Electron Solids Forming in the Two-dimensional Electron Gas
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Gabor Csathy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 406,558.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stripe-like and bubble-like patterns
spontaneously form in numerous physical, chemical, and biological systems. At
the origin of these patterns one often finds classical forces with competing
long-range and short-range interactions. In electron systems quantum mechanical
analogues of these patterns form, but in contrast to their classical
counterparts, these quantum mechanical phases are largely unexplored. The PI
proposes experimental research and educational activities addressing outstanding
questions on the nature of electron solids with stripe-like and bubble-like
morphologies that form in a two-dimensional electron sheet. The team will study
these electron solids by tuning the electron interactions and by examining
quantum mechanical effects. This project offers an excellent opportunity to
train graduate and undergraduate students in modern electron physics,
semiconductor nanofabrication, cryogenics, and sensitive electronic
measurements, skills that are necessary for a successful carrier in science and
technology. The PI has involved and will continue to work with students from
underrepresented groups. Furthermore, middle and high school students throughout
the state of Indiana will be reached through the development of demonstrations
and inquiry based activities with the hope of inspiring them to embark on a
career in the sciences and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-dimensional electron gas is perhaps best
known for the integer and fractional quantum Hall effect. Another remarkable
property of the two-dimensional electron gas is that, when the disorder level is
low enough, charge carriers order into complex electron solids. Such electron
solids are abundant in high quality electron gases confined to GaAs/AlGaAs
quantum wells. One example for electron solids is the Wigner crystal. However,
more complicated solids form when electrons cluster. The electronic bubble phase
is due to ordering of these electron clusters on a hexagonal lattice and the so
called quantum Hall nematic is a filamentary arrangement of these clusters. In
these electron solids elementary quantum mechanics is clearly at play, since
they are stabilized as wavefunctions of individual electrons overlap. The team
investigates the influence of the structure of the quantum mechanical
wavefunction and the effect of the tuning of the electron-electron interaction
on the complex electron solids. In addition, the team investigates recently
found magnetotransport signatures associated with a crystallization of composite
fermions, the emergent particles of the fractional quantum Hall regime. Various
transport techniques will be employed. The planned experiments provide insight
into the nature of the different types of charge ordered phases forming in the
two-dimensional electron gas. Such knowledge contributes to an enhanced
understanding of quantum many-body systems and of the electron solids in other
condensed matter systems and, in the long term, may lead to possible
applications in quantum metrology. Our experiments also offer insight pertaining
to the intensely studied fractional quantum Hall states through studies of the
phase transitions between the electron solids and the fractional quantum Hall
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.