* 1904659
* Polymeric Carbyne Mimics and Main-Group Element-Containing Conjugated Polymers Derived from trans-Enediyne Monomers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Yang Qin, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Nicolay Tsarevsky
* 12/31/2020
* USD 466,510.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Dr. Qin Yang from University of New Mexico
to develop conjugated polymers that contain carbon-carbon double and triple
bonds. The double and triple bonds enable conjugated polymers to conduct
electricity. Since conjugated polymers contain tens of thousands of double and
triple bonds, the polymer's conductivity can sometimes surpass that of common
metals such as copper or aluminum. In this research, conductive polymers are
constructed that contain not only carbon-carbon double bonds and triple bonds as
well as other chemical elements such as boron, sulfur and phosphorous, among
others. Professor Yang's strategy creates a new class of polymeric materials
that have never been prepared before to improve the next generation of
optoelectronic devices such as solar cells and light emitting diodes. The
broader impacts also include the involvement of Native American and Hispanic
communities in research and education. Students are trained in synthetic
chemistry and polymer science and have the opportunity to participate in the
renewable energy industries.

This project focuses on the synthesis of polymeric carbyne mimics and main-group
element-containing conjugated polymers derived from trans-enediyne monomers. The
research activities are centered on the design of unconventional conjugated
polymers that target limitations in conventional materials. A new synthetic
methodology is also developed to systematically produce poly(heteroarylene
vinylene)s containing various main-group elements. Such materials possess unique
properties originating from the heteroatoms that are not found in conventional
hydrocarbon materials. The synthetic methodology significantly differs from
conventional metal coupling reactions that yield conjugated polymers with only
aromatic fused rings. Research activities resulting from this award are expected
to impact the fields of polymer synthesis and optoelectronics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.