* 1904684
* Electronic Resonant Stimulated Raman Scattering Microscopy for Ultrasensitive Vibrational Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Wei Min, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Wei Min of Columbia University is developing new
measurement methods that have the potential to provide chemical information on
individual molecules, the ultimate capability in measurement science. Raman
spectroscopy and microscopy are popular tools for measuring chemical properties
of molecules, as these tools enable research discoveries and chemical
assessments, which are of value to industry, health care, materials and
biological research, and environmental monitoring. However, conventional Raman
methods are restricted, in that many molecules are required to generate a Raman
signal sufficiently different from the background, which is referred to as the
detection limit. Professor Min is improving the detection limit of Raman
microscopy through an unprecedented approach, such that individual molecules can
be chemically characterized on a routine basis, while present in a variety of
chemical and biological environments. Professor Min and his team use this new
form of Raman microscopy to simultaneously obtain images of many species found
inside biological cells, as well as study the behavior of individual enzymes,
thereby facilitating our understanding of the complex biological world. The Min
group is leveraging their expertise in spectroscopy and microscopy to develop
demonstrations and educational laboratory experiments that engage
underrepresented minority students in local high schools and community colleges,
with the goal being enhancement of student physical science skills and interest
in future careers in science and engineering. The impact of these new
instruments and labs is amplified by online dissemination through high-impact,
internet-based instructional videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raman spectroscopy
provides exquisite chemical information about molecular structure and dynamics
resulting from interactions with the environment. Unfortunately, Raman signals
are intrinsically weak in the optical far field. Although established near-field
methods of surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy can offer superb limits of
detection, the strict reliance of near-field approaches on close interaction of
target molecules with metallic nanostructures limits their application to a
select group of chemical and biological systems. The project addresses the
urgent need for ultra-low-limit-of-detection Raman microscopy, without relying
on nanostructures. Professor Min and his team combine resonance Raman
spectroscopy with stimulated Raman scattering microscopy to achieve ultra-low-
limit-of-detection vibrational imaging. This enabling technology results from
enhancement of the Raman scattering cross section by several orders of
magnitude, due to the joint action of electronic resonant amplification and
stimulated Raman amplification, making possible single-molecule limits of
detection. Professor Min and his team employ the new ultra-low-limit-of-
detection Raman microscopy method in multi-wavelength imaging of the interior of
biological cells, as well as in mechanistic studies of single-molecule, enzyme-
catalyzed biochemical reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.