* 1904327
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Performance of Low-Rise Large-Volume Buildings in Florida during 2018 Hurricane Michael
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Jeffrey Berman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 10/31/2019
* USD 26,987.00

Low-rise, large-volume (LRLV) metal buildings are a critical component to
community and national resilience, often functioning as school auditoriums or
gymnasiums, military or civilian aircraft hangars, distribution centers,
supermarkets, churches, industrial and manufacturing buildings, and storage
facilities protecting high-value property. Unfortunately, many of these
structures suffered catastrophic collapses or irreparable damage following
Hurricane Michael, which made landfall south of Panama City, Florida on October
10, 2018, as a Category 4 hurricane. Preliminary assessments by the NSF-
supported Structural Extreme Events Reconnaissance network found that damage to
these structures was common and often disproportionate to surrounding buildings,
indicating a knowledge gap in the understanding of the dynamic loads on these
structures and/or the mechanisms of structural response to these loads during
extreme wind events. This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will support
field deployments to quickly and precisely capture the post-hurricane damage
state of LRLV buildings in the form of high-resolution 3D point clouds, by means
of terrestrial and airborne LIDAR and photogrammetry, and forensic structural
engineering analysis. Post-processing and analysis of the data will inform
advanced computational models of wind load and structural response for these
buildings, which will ultimately enable safer and more efficient designs. By
enabling a better understanding of the complex dynamic behavior of these
buildings under wind loads, the findings from this project can inform future
designs to reduce the frequency of LRLV building failures in future extreme wind
events. The field reconnaissance and analysis will train undergraduate and
graduate engineers in forensic engineering methods and provide high quality case
studies that can be used by the engineering education community. Data collected
from this award will be archived in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-
CI.org).

During hurricane-force winds, the dimensions of LRLV metal buildings can exceed
the integral length scales of the turbulent flow, producing incoherent gust
structures over the surface of the building. The effects of this phenomenon on
peak structural forces, and particularly the internal pressure response, are not
well understood. The goals of this project are to: 1) preserve the precise post-
hurricane condition of LRLV buildings impacted by Hurricane Michael prior to
cleanup, 2) assess the extreme wind conditions to which the LRLV buildings were
subjected, 3) conduct preliminary assessments of the primary drivers of LRLV
building failures, and 4) position future research efforts for conducting
advanced wind load and structural analysis simulations to address the key
knowledge gaps that have led to large failure rates. Data gathering excursions
(3-5 days) in Florida will use multiple sensing technologies to quickly gather
detailed structural information on target structures including terrestrial LIDAR
and measurements, and drone-based LIDAR and imagery. After reducing the data
into 3D models, the analysis process will focus on parameters including building
volume, unprotected opening size, building orientation with respect to primary
wind direction, resonance of internal pressure, structural system (gravity and
lateral), structure age, and pre-event condition. This study will address a key
knowledge gap in hurricane-induced wind loads on LRLV buildings while
simultaneously investigating the structural system response to these loads. The
holistic approach will advance scientific understanding of the phenomena driving
the failures of these systems and inform more resilient building designs for
future events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.