* 1904705
* Thermodynamics of Metal-Protein Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Dean Wilcox, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 416,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Dean Wilcox from Dartmouth College to investigate the
binding of charged metal particles (metal ions) to proteins as well as the
properties of metal ions when they are bound to proteins. Essential metals
(e.g., zinc, copper, iron) have beneficial properties for living organisms.
Proteins play key roles in the import, transport, storage and export of these
essential metals, as well as in the sequestration and removal of other metals
that are toxic to living systems (e.g., mercury, lead, cadmium). Experiments
that measure metal ion binding to proteins provide fundamental insight into how
proteins select the essential trace metals and disregard or remove toxic metals.
Experiments conducted by Dr. Wilcox's research group reveal how proteins tune
the properties of metals for essential reactions. This knowledge is important
because both beneficial and toxic metals have distinct reactivities when they
are bound to a protein (e.g., metalloenzymes). The protocols and analysis
developed in this research and the insight gained from these studies are
valuable for biology and medicine. Students working at the interface of
inorganic, biological and physical chemistry gain important knowledge and
valuable skills for their careers in science and education, thereby enhancing
the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to quantify
the thermodynamics of metal ions binding to proteins, to provide new insight
into important biological processes, and to reveal how proteins modulate the
redox properties of metal ions. First, the metal binding, which is the basis for
biological function, is being investigated. The thermodynamics of the binding of
mercury(II), methylmercury and related species to the Mer proteins in the
bacterial mer pathway for mercury detoxification are being quantified to
elucidate the mechanism of individual steps in this pathway. Other studies focus
on the quantification of binding of copper(I) to the neuronal isoform of
metallothionein, which is a protein involved in metal storage and sequestration
in the brain, and to unique copper storage proteins (Csp's) in methane-
metabolizing bacteria. In both cases, several metal ions bind to the protein.
The mechanism of binding and release of these metal ions, including
cooperativity, is being elucidated. Second, a protocol that determines the
metalloprotein reduction thermodynamics from calorimetric measurements of metal
binding, is being used to investigate selected metalloproteins and
metalloenzymes for new insight into the protein modulation of the metal
reduction potential. Several variants of azurin with higher and lower reduction
potentials are being studied, as are selected copper enzymes. This method is
being extended to studies of metalloenzymes involved in oxygen redox reactions,
specifically superoxide dismutases that contain copper, iron or manganese. In
addition to determining the redox thermodynamics of these metalloproteins, the
thermodynamics and accompanying proton transfer of the two steps of the overall
reaction, O2- oxidation and O2- reduction, are being
quantified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.