* 1904241
* Motivic and Equivariant Stable Homotopy Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Daniel Isaksen, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 175,209.00

Spheres are the basic building blocks of all geometric objects. More complicated
geometric objects can be constructed by fitting these spheres together, but
spheres of different dimensions can fit together in only certain combinations.
Enumerating these combinations of spheres is one of the fundamental questions of
stable homotopy theory. This problem is known as the computation of homotopy
groups of spheres. The project uses spectral sequences to carry out these
computations. They are delicate, intricate, subtle, and complicated, but they
are also understandable with enough insight and patience. Each time a new part
of the machinery is understood, another layer of complexities becomes accessible
for further study. Computer calculations play a large supporting role. The
project promotes the use of videoconferencing to collaborate with peers, to
advise graduate students, and to host online seminars. These efforts build
towards a self-sustaining virtual mathematical research community. One major
benefit of these new modes of interaction is that they erode traditional
barriers to entry. This is especially beneficial for people in remote
geographical locations and for those with non-traditional or non-prestigious
backgrounds who are not typically afforded access to traditional departments of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will compute classical, C-motivic,
R-motivic, and C2-equivariant stable homotopy groups. The key tools are the
Adams spectral sequence, the Adams-Novikov spectral sequence, and the effective
slice spectral sequence. The project consists of a series of interlocking
problems, both algebraic and homotopical. Many of the problems suggest specific
methods for obtaining calculational data about stable homotopy groups. Other
problems address related structural issues, such as exotic periodicity and
Mahowald invariants. A key idea is to use C-motivic calculations to see deeper
into classical structure. Preliminary results suggest that this is a
surprisingly powerful technique that allows for the computation of new stable
homotopy groups in a range. The project also includes a series of techniques for
computing R-motivic and C2-equivariant stable homotopy groups. This represents
the first serious effort to grapple with equivariant versions of tools like the
Adams spectral sequence at a computational level. The key point is to build up
to the C2-equivariant computations gradually, through C-motivic and R-motivic
intermediate steps. One example of the kind of payoff for this work are
computations of new values of notoriously difficult Mahowald invariants.
Finally, the project will study the effective slice spectral sequence,
especially in R-motivic homotopy theory but also over arbitrary fields. This
spectral sequence is a motivic replacement for the Adams-Novikov spectral
sequence. The R-motivic calculation is more accessible, while the arbitrary
fields involve interesting arithmetic. Inspired by the motivic effective slice
filtration, the project will also attempt to study a new C2-equivariant
filtration that ought to be useful for studying C2-equivariant stable homotopy
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.