* 1904131
* Mechanistic Investigation of CO activation by Nitrogenase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Yilin Hu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 525,000.00

Developing sustainable sources of carbon fuels while confronting the
accumulation of carbon wastes (CO and CO2) from the combustion of carbon fuels
are competing global challenges. With this award, the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Markus Ribbe
and Professor Yilin Hu from the University of California, Irvine, to investigate
the detailed chemical mechanism for how the nitrogenase enzyme reduces CO and
CO2 to form larger hydrocarbon compounds. The knowledge acquired through this
research informs the design of novel catalysts that recycle carbon wastes into
usable fuels, thereby simultaneously combating energy- and environment-related
problems. This project provides multidisciplinary education and training across
a broad range of experimental and computational techniques to postgraduate
researchers, and graduate and undergraduate students. Research and education are
integrated through research opportunities across all education levels and
through incorporation of microbial biotechnology into classroom teaching.
Various outreach events and programs are developed, including Science Saturdays
at UC Irvine, to engage middle school students, including those from
underrepresented minority communities, to learn about global energy and
environmental problems, and potential biotechnological solutions to these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inability to generate distinct substrate- or
intermediate-bound states has remained a major roadblock for mechanistic
investigations of nitrogenase. This proposal utilizes a novel approach to
uncouple the binding of CO or CO-derived intermediates from the subsequent
turnover, thereby providing a unique tool for the generation of successive
snapshots along the reaction pathway of CO reduction via controlled delivery of
electron(s)/proton(s) to CO or CO-derived species. A strategic combination of
chemical, biochemical and spectroscopic approaches will then be used to analyze
these defined snapshots in hopes of (1) obtaining insights into the C1 pathway
that converts CO to CH4; (2) defining the C1 conformation for the binding and
coupling of the second CO; and (3) identifying the mechanism of carbon chain
extension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.