* 1904122
* Nanochemical Control of Crystal Structure and Heterostructuring in Metal Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Raymond Schaak, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,489.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal sulfides and related compounds
are useful materials for a wide range of applications, including solar cells,
thermoelectric refrigerators, displays, data storage, and catalysis. To advance
these and other applications, it is important to be able to design and make
materials in ways that allow precise control over the features that define their
properties. In this project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the PI and his group
chemically manipulate nanoscale particles of metal sulfides and related
compounds to produce new materials in a rational and controllable way. To do
this, metal cations in the sulfide materials are replaced with other metal
cations under mild reaction conditions to change the composition without
significantly changing the arrangements of the atoms. New compounds can be
produced when all of the metal cations in a particle are replaced, which
provides an approach for rationally targeting a material that cannot be made by
established methods. By replacing only a fraction of the metal cations, the
particles that are formed contain both the original material and a new material,
joined together through an interface. By performing this partial replacement
reaction multiple times on the same particle, complex particles are produced
that have many different materials and interfaces. The PI and his group are
studying these complete and partial cation exchange reactions to better
understand the factors that contribute to the formation of targeted products so
that researchers can more efficiently design and make new materials that are
predicted to be useful, but that cannot be made easily using current knowledge.
The PI and his group use these reactions in undergraduate laboratories to
introduce students to new ways of thinking about designing and making materials
and also partner with faculty and students from local colleges through a
regional undergraduate research
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, which is supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, provides
new capabilities for the design and synthesis of metal chalcogenide
nanoparticles using cation exchange reactions. In these reactions, cations in a
colloidal metal chalcogenide nanoparticle are replaced by cations from solution
while maintaining the anion framework. Crystal structure can therefore be
preserved, and cation exchange reactions can be used to rationally target
metastable phases (through complete cation exchange) and complex
heterostructured nanoparticles (through sequential partial cation exchange). The
PI and his group study cation exchange reactions of metal chalcogenide
nanoparticles to understand how they proceed and can be controlled, to diversify
the scope and complexity of accessible systems, and to access new materials with
desired structures and properties. This is important for advancing the broad
application space of metal chalcogenide nanomaterials. In this project, studies
of model systems provide insights into how the crystal structure of a precursor
nanoparticle can be retained in the product after complete cation exchange,
revealing guidelines for rationally targeting metastable phases. Complementary
studies of sequential partial cation exchange reactions uncover useful design
rules for rationally synthesizing a library of heterostructured nanoparticles
containing many interfaces and materials. Striped nanorod superlattices
synthesized using these cation exchange reactions serve as a nanomodulated
platform for studying low-temperature diffusion and crystallization. Integration
of a nanocrystal cation exchange project into an undergraduate chemistry
laboratory is introducing students to modern aspects of solid-state,
nanomaterials, and inorganic reaction chemistry. Expansion of a regional
undergraduate research network partners the PI and his group with faculty and
students from local colleges who are also interested in metal chalcogenides and
related nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.