* 1904610
* Engineering deterministic electron correlations and topological states in site-controlled III-V quantum droplets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Gregory Snider, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2024
* USD 444,501.00

Nontechnical description: Todays computers are built using transistors
fabricated in the semiconductor silicon. Improvements in these kinds of
transistors are slowing, and will come to an end in the next few years. Quantum
computing is a new way of doing computation that breaks with the way computing
is currently done. This approach, using quantum mechanical elements called
qubits, requires new materials and approaches. These qubits and their
interactions are very fragile, so protection from quantum errors is critical in
creating a quantum computer. This project will investigate the formation of very
robust quantum mechanical elements (quantum gates) using an effect known as
topological protection. Topological protection implies using composite fermions
vortexes in a p-wave superconductor which obey non-Abelian quantum statistics
and are known as non-Abelian anyons. A physical realization of topological
quantum gate implies the use of solid-state platforms providing a set of
localized non-Abelian anyons combined with a "tweezer" to perform their braiding
and fusion, and a phase detector. The project involves a collaboration of groups
at the University of Notre Dame, the Tyndall National Institute in the Republic
of Ireland, and Queen's University Belfast in Northern Ireland, to develop and
investigate a new material system for a topological quantum gate, based on
In(Ga)P/GaInP quantum Hall puddles. The goal is to produce deterministic quantum
Hall puddles, containing a set of localized non-Abelian anyons, that can be used
in large scale quantum computing. This project also helps in the development of
human resources by providing research and training experience to undergraduate
and graduate students in the areas of materials processing and characterization,
nanofabrication and experimental measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: Protection from quantum errors is a critical point in the
realization of quantum computing. One line of research in the scientific
community is based on the expectation that strong protection for quantum
operations will occur in quantum computation systems based on qubits built from
topological states. An efficient platform for the realization of such fault
tolerant topological quantum computing could be built using strongly correlated
electron systems supporting the so-called Majorana zero modes (MZMs), having
non-Abelian quantum statistics. Such topological quantum states were first
detected in the quantum Hall effect, and they are represented by vortex
composite fermion quasiparticles, known as anyons, composed of magnetic flux
quanta attached to electrons/holes or defects in one and two-dimensional p-wave
superconductors. Several composite fermion systems are known which supports
MZMs, but routes to their implementation in a quantum processor are not well
defined, primarily due to difficulties in implementing the control of qubits
based on these quasiparticles. This international collaborative project aims to
develop and investigate a novel system to realize MZMs: a quantum Hall puddles.
Composite fermions were observed in preliminary experiments with quantum Hall
puddles using near-field scanning optical microscopy. This opens the possibility
for creating localized MZMs, with a number of non-trivial advantages, such as a
relatively high operating temperature, zero external magnetic fields, and
electrostatic "tweezers" to perform braiding and fusion. The goal is to produce
deterministic quantum Hall puddles to support "large scale" development of
localized MZMs using selective area epitaxy in the In(Ga)P/GaInP systems and
development of scanning charge probe techniques for their characterization.
Production of these quantum Hall puddles is an important step in the development
of a scalable approach to quantum computers. The grown structures are studied by
using structural characterization, optical spectroscopy, and nanoelectronic
charge measurements, and used to fabricate candidate quantum
gates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.