* 1904156
* RAPID: Investigating School District Resilience and the Impact of Hurricane Exposure on Student Outcomes
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Sarah Fuller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 06/30/2020
* USD 199,865.00

North Carolina has experienced 11 major disasters due to hurricanes or tropical
storms over the past 20 years. Moreover, one tropical cyclone has hit the state
every two years since 1851. Although natural disasters are frequent, efforts to
understand and support public schools' responses to such disasters are rare.
This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project is an exploratory mixed methods
study investigating the impact of vulnerability and resilience in the recovery
of North Carolina schools affected by both Hurricanes Florence (2018) and
Matthew (2016). Specifically, the study assesses whether schools that were
impacted by both storms used organizational learning strategies to recover
faster than schools that were impacted by either Hurricane Florence or Matthew
alone. The project pursues three research questions: (1) What characteristics
predict school district resilience? (2) How does prior disaster experience
aid/hinder a resilient recovery? (3) Do students in resilient districts show
less learning loss or rebound from learning loss more
quickly?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed methods project will involve
interviews, focus groups and surveys with school and district personnel in a
purposive sample of 15 districts across North Carolina that were heavily
impacted by both storms and those that were affected by only one. These
qualitative data will be used to derive markers of resilience that will then be
used in quantitative analyses. Quantitative comparisons of state-wide data on
student outcomes (e.g., achievement, attendance) will also be made across three
kinds of districts: those that were affected by both storms, those that were
affected by only one storm and those that were not affected at all. Quantitative
data will be taken from an existing longitudinal database that includes
individual student characteristics, attendance, suspensions and academic
performance for all students in North Carolina. The purposive sampling of 15
districts in North Carolina allows for a novel comparison of impact, recovery
and organizational learning across two disasters and over time. Disasters can
create an opportunity for organizational change leading to greater resiliency in
future crises; however, little extant research has focused on whether and how
schools recover and remain resilient in the aftermath of natural disasters, such
as hurricanes. This project can benefit schools in crisis by providing lessons
learned and a roadmap for action to schools that are singularly and repeatedly
impacted by natural disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.