* 1904042
* Collaborative Research: Correlating Optoelectronic Properties with Defects in One-Dimensional Perovskite Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Yize Stephanie Li, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 186,996.00

Recent research has witnessed rapid advances in metal halide perovskite
materials for applications in solar cells, light-emitting diodes,
photodetectors, lasers, and scintillators for spectroscopic gamma-ray detection
and/or X-ray imaging due to their superior optoelectronic properties. Defects in
perovskites can limit the transport of charge carriers and change the carrier
concentrations. The ability to understand and recognize defects in perovskites
is the key to control the performance in perovskite-based devices. This
collaborative research aims to relate optoelectronic properties with defects in
one-dimensional perovskite nanocrystals. These nanocrystals can be exploited
either individually or as building blocks in the assembly of nanostructured
materials and devices. These devices would be used in energy and biomedical
applications, including optoelectronics, photonics, sensors, catalysis,
nanotechnology, and biotechnology, among other emerging areas. As such, it
transitions fundamental scientific discoveries into useful technologies that
benefit society. This project offers opportunities for underrepresented female
and minority undergraduate students as well as high school teachers and students
to participate in nanomaterials research at both Georgia Tech and California
State University-Bakersfield. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In one-dimensional (1D)
metal halide perovskites, defects, if present, are expected to exert a
pronounced influence on the carrier transport behaviors and thus the electronic
and optoelectronic properties. It is therefore of crucial importance to
identify, understand, control, and possibly utilize defects in perovskite
crystals. This collaborative research between Georgia Tech and California State
University-Bakersfield seeks to craft 1D perovskite nanocrystals with precisely
controlled dimensions, scrutinize their dimension-dependent optical properties,
and correlate the resulting optoelectronic properties of these perovskite
nanocrystals with defects via directly imaging defects and local transport
barriers under optical excitations by capitalizing on a contactless dielectric
force microscopy technique. The systematic investigation into the optical
properties and defect characteristics of these monodisperse 1D perovskite
nanocrystals enables the development of high-quality perovskite nanomaterials
with desired optoelectronic properties and minimal deleterious defects, thereby
rendering their use in a gamut of optoelectronic devices with improved
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.