* 1904365
* Reconfigurable Polymer Interfaces for Dynamic Interactions and Differentiation of Soft Colloids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Sergiy Minko, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 451,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenomena derived from the
exposure of surfaces of polymeric materials to their environment or in contact
with other materials are relevant to many practical applications. Dynamically
changing polymer interfaces are an important class of materials that adapt their
properties upon external stimuli according to a preprogrammed scenario. This
project aims for the development and study of specially designed polymer
interfaces which, in response to stimuli, could attract and repel microscopic
objects such as colloids, liquid droplets, particles, vesicles, viruses, or
biological cells. Dynamic switching between repulsion and attraction will be
adjusted and used for selection, differentiation, and isolation of the
particulates. Such dynamic interfaces could be able to extract and remove traces
of particles of toxic and hazardous materials, soil particles, oil droplets,
bacteria, and viruses from various media such as drinking water, blood, food,
and surfaces of commodity and specialty materials and devices. On the other
side, such dynamic interfaces would be able to differentiate and extract
valuable particulates if they are very diluted in mixtures with other
ingredients, for example sediments containing noble and rare metals, some types
of human stem cells and other biological samples, and samples of soils in
agricultural fields and in space missions. The major challenge being addressed
in the project is to understand the complex dynamic mechanisms of the
interaction of functional polymer interfaces with various particulates
possessing different properties and then to apply the obtained knowledge for
proper design of the reconfigurable dynamic interfaces. This project also
provides a mechanism to educate a new generation of professionals capable of
creative and transformative thinking. Advanced polymer science research is
attracting many talented young men and women of different backgrounds and
training levels, including high school, undergraduate, graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars, who care and feel responsible for the development of a
strong and healthy national economy, clean and sustainable environment, and
societal prosperity. This project will serve the purpose of developing their
skills and experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions with polymer interfaces via
adsorption-desorption mechanisms are limited by the quasi-irreversible
adsorption character of polymers, i.e., approaching the equilibrium is hampered
by very slow desorption kinetics due to a high activation free energy of the
detachment of all adsorbed segments at once. These properties are revealed as
strong and quasi-irreversible adsorption of colloidal particulates, liquid
droplets, vesicles, proteins, microbes, etc. on the surface of various
materials. Whereas this inherent property of polymeric interfaces is
advantageous for adhesive applications, this adhesion hysteresis causes
complications for affinity-based discrimination of various particulates in
complex mixtures for numerous applications. This project aims to develop a novel
mechanism of surface differentiation and selective transport of soft colloids
owing to dynamic polymeric surfaces with specially designed functionality,
microstructure, and dynamic response. This mechanism will be realized by
exploring dynamically oscillating polymer interfaces made of distinctive
attractive, adhesive, and repulsive micro-domains of microstructured polymer
brushes that undergo temperature-driven phase transitions. The adhesive domains
will have covalently bound functional motifs that target complementary motifs on
the surface of soft colloids of interest. The 2D-interfaces will be designed
with anisotropic patterns of microdomains. The different microdomains will have
variable dimensions and surface concentration of the specific motifs. A
traveling temperature gradient will be applied to facilitate directed transport
of soft colloids. The key challenges of the study consist in developing a
fundamental understanding of the dynamic interaction of the microstructured
polymer-brush interfaces with the soft colloids having different dimensions,
elasticity, and composition of surface functional groups, as well as relaxation
times. The attachment-detachment dynamic equilibrium controlled by osmotic
pressure of swollen repulsive domains, deformation of soft particles, entropic
penalty of stretched adhesive domains, and adhesion energy of complimentary
motifs will be analyzed in specially designed experiments using soft lipid or
block-copolymer vesicles and compared with results of computer simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.