* 1904420
* I-Corps: Burning fat by nanoparticles for obesity treatment (FatBuringNanoTM)
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Shu Wang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to prevent
and treat obesity and its related diseases using adipose stromal stem cell
(ASC)-targeted nanoparticle (NP)-based drug delivery technology. Obesity is a
major public health problem in the US and worldwide. More than one third of US
adults are obese, and more than two thirds are either overweight or obese.
Obesity is a major risk factor for developing heart disease, stroke, diabetes,
fatty liver diseases and other metabolic disorders. The estimated yearly medical
care costs of obesity are more than $145 billion in the US. Currently available
anti-obesity medical therapies have many severe issues, hence, better approaches
to combat obesity are greatly needed. The ASC-targeted NP-based delivery
technology is to deliver bioactive agents/drugs to ASCs in subcutaneous adipose
tissue, inducing excessive glucose and fat burn off, thus combating obesity and
its related complications with high efficacy and minimum side effects. Our
technology can improve human health and the quality of life while dramatically
reducing medical care costs, ultimately lessening the negative societal and
economic impact of obesity. In addition, a doctoral student will gain intensive
and rigorous training and experience in innovation and entrepreneurship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will explore the market potential of
a technology involving the use of ASC-targeted NP-based device for the
prevention and treatment of obesity with high efficacy and low side effects.
ASCs are stem cells found in the adipose tissues. ASCs can be differentiated
into many different types of cells that aid in tissue repair, regenerative
medicine, obesity and other disease therapy. We aim to induce ASCs
differentiation into beige adipocytes in the subcutaneous white adipose tissue
for combating obesity. Different from fat-storage white adipocytes, beige
adipocytes burn excessive fat and glucose. ASC-targeted NP-based device can
deliver bioactive agents/drugs to subcutaneous ASCs and subsequently induce them
differentiation into beige adipocytes, resulting in body weight and fat loss and
improved metabolic health. This local (transdermal device) and targeted (ASC-
targeted NPs) delivery technology bypasses the liver and other tissues, thus
minimizing administration frequency, enhancing compliance, and most importantly,
maximizing overall treatment efficacy while decreasing side effects. This
I-Corps project aims to evaluate the market opportunity of the FatBurningNanoTM
technology and help establish product-market fit through upcoming customer
interviews. The feedback from these activities will facilitate product
development, and its ultimate commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.