* 1904159
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the contribution of alpine glacier meltwater to mountain-block recharge using microbiological markers and environmental isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Trinity Hamilton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 191,532.00

Glaciers occur in mountains across the globe. Water from melting glaciers is
important to humans and other organisms. Some of this water goes directly to
streams while some will flow deep into the ground and refill groundwater. It is
not known how much melt-water goes directly to streams versus to groundwater.
This project uses water chemistry and biological data to determine where the
water goes when a glacier melts. The project examines water from glaciers on Mt.
Hood in Oregon and from glaciers in Glacier National Park in Montana. This
project is training graduate students and multiple undergraduate students. The
results are presented at scientific meetings and to water managers. The results
are also available to the public via pamphlets and news articles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than ninety percent of the Earth's alpine glaciers
are in retreat and many of these glaciers will melt completely within this
century. Very little research has been conducted on the impacts of alpine
glacial meltwater to recharge and flow within the mountain block. This project
seeks to identify the contribution of alpine glacial meltwater to mountain
recharge relative to seasonal snow and rain using chemical and biological
approaches. This research tests the following hypotheses: 1) The glacial
environment selects for unique biota resulting in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
fingerprints in alpine glacial meltwater that are distinct from seasonal snow
and rain; 2) Alpine glacial meltwater is a significant source of mountain
recharge and sustains perennial flow to local and regional-scale springs located
down-gradient of alpine glaciers. This research assesses the novel application
of DNA as a tracer for mountain recharge and increases the ability to detect
recharge from alpine glaciers located in different geologic and geographic
settings. This study trains graduate students and multiple undergraduate
researchers and engages with water managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.