* 1904918
* The Nanoscale Effects of Intrinsic and Externally-Applied Strain on Charge Density Wave States
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Michael Boyer, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 427,074.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Charge density wave states occur in numerous
materials where, below a certain "transition" temperature, there is a periodic
lattice distortion, and a periodic variation in electron density is established
across the material. The electronic properties of the material are altered from
the material's original, undistorted state. Charge density wave-hosting
materials have been targeted for potential use in electronic devices (such as
switches, ion field-effect transistors, and logic circuits). However, there is
currently an incomplete understanding as to 1) the origin of charge density wave
states, as well as 2) how these states coexist/interact with other
technologically-important material properties such as superconductivity or
magnetism. Strain engineering is an emerging field in which the application of
strain to materials is used to manipulate their optical, electronic, and
structural properties. In this project, controlled strain is applied to
materials hosting charge density wave states, so as to compress, stretch, or
shear the materials, leading to changes in their properties. Scanning tunneling
microscopy, a technique which can detail electronic and structural changes in a
material on the atomic scale, is used to, simultaneously, detail the evolution
of charge density wave states under, both, varying strain and temperature
conditions. An overarching goal of the project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the physics governing these compounds. An understanding of how
to effectively manipulate their properties in a controlled fashion, is essential
for optimizing their performance in devices. This project enhances the education
of undergraduate- and graduate-student participants who are developing essential
skills with applications in research, industry, and beyond. In addition, mini-
classes using experimental techniques such as scanning tunneling microscopy,
atomic force microscopy, and scanning electron microscopy, are being developed
and incorporated into established, STEM-focused local outreach programs. In
particular, these classes will expose precollege students to cutting-edge
experimental techniques, providing a unique experience and opportunity for these
students to become interested and engaged in STEM
fields&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Charge density wave
(CDW) states are prevalent in condensed matter systems where they are often
found to coexist with other orders. The nature of the interplay of CDW states
with quantum orders, such as superconductivity and magnetism, particularly on
the nanoscale, is complex and not well-understood. In addition, CDW states can
have differing and not always well-established origins, further complicating
this understanding. Studies of CDW-hosting compounds demonstrate that strain can
alter an array of CDW properties, including changing the transition temperature,
altering electronic and structural periodicities of the CDW state, and changing
the associated electronic band gap. The overarching goals of this NSF project
are to understand 1) how strain drives these CDW changes on the atomic-scale,
and 2) how to manipulate these changes in a controlled fashion using externally-
applied strain. To do this, temperature-dependent scanning tunneling microscopy
is used to probe the nanoscale structural and electronic properties of charge
density wave states, their formation, their manipulation, and their interplay
with coexisting quantum orders, under quantifiable and varied strained
conditions. In order to study fundamental differences strain has on CDW states
arising from differing origins (for example, Fermi surface nesting versus
momentum-dependent electron-phonon coupling), compounds from three well-known,
distinct, CDW-hosting families are studied: the blue bronzes, transition metal
dichalcogenides, and the rare-earth tellurides. This project supports the
research education of graduate and undergraduate students through their
participation in all aspects of the project. Furthermore, in an effort to extend
science education to precollege students who are historically underrepresented
in the sciences (precollege girls and students from the many lower-income
households in the local community), the principal investigator is developing
mini-classes on "probing material properties" which utilizes Clark facilities to
expose area students to the basics of materials research. These classes will be
held in connection with established, STEM-focused outreach collaborations
involving local area middle and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.