* 1904577
* High Resolution Tools for Structural Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ryan Julian, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 470,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Ryan Julian and his group at the University of
California - Riverside are developing methods to improve our ability to
determine the structure of proteins - key actors in biology for diverse and
important functions that include serving as factories for energy and
communications within and among cells. The Julian lab is developing new methods
that can reveal the distance between different parts of a protein molecule,
providing high resolution structures which contribute to understanding how
proteins function and how their function might be manipulated at a molecular
level. The primary tool used is mass spectrometry - a rapid technique that can
be used with minuscule amounts of sample. Enhanced capabilities for structure
determination by mass spectrometry are accelerating our understanding of crucial
biological actors. A diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students are
carrying out this research and receiving valuable training that will prepare
them to push the boundaries of science and technology forward in the future. Dr.
Julian and his team are also engaged in outreach efforts targeting high school
students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Julian group is
developing new approaches to determining high resolution protein structures
using energy transfer and covalent crosslinking between specific residues in
order to establish multiple, well-defined distance constraints that can be used
in conjunction with calculations to yield atomically-defined gas-phase
structures. The energy-transfer approach has several key advantages for
determination of high resolution structure, including: 1) direct probing of
protein substructure, allowing the determination of multiple distance
constraints in a single protein; 2) use of native residues for the donor and
acceptor, allowing for the installation of any required amino acids by standard
site-directed mutagenesis; and 3) extremely selective photochemical cleavage of
bonds affording high sensitivity and unambiguous interpretation of the results.
Utilizing the speed and sensitivity of mass spectrometry, gas-phase structural
biology can tackle proteins not amenable to x-ray crystallography or nuclear
magnetic resonance. This research complements and expands the information
available from more widely used, lower-resolution approaches. The new methods
can be conducted on unmodified, commercially available instruments, increasing
the accessibility of high-resolution measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.