* 1904886
* Phosphoinositide Domains and Gradients in Asymmetric Lipid Bilayers: Physical Properties and Protein Recognition
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Arne Gericke, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2023
* USD 509,677.00

Lipids are a class of biomolecules that affect or even control virtually all
processes that occur on cellular membranes. They are very important for cell
physiology and human biology. Biological membranes are bilayers of lipids. The
two parts of the bilayer have different overall lipid composition as well as
different lateral composition. Each part contains domains that have distinct
lipid compositions and physical properties. Different proteins are attracted to
these domains. As a result, lipids and proteins form supramolecular structures
that are platforms for a large number of important cellular functions, most
notably cell signaling. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program
in the Chemistry Division and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences are funding Dr. Arne Gericke from
Worcester Polytechnic Institute to investigate the domains in biological
membrane mimics. More specifically, the Gericke research group investigates
whether the domains situated in the two opposing bilayers line up ("register")
with each other and if so, whether the two domains situated in register
physically affect each other. Undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students
participate in the research. The undergraduate students have the opportunity to
participate in a 10-week summer research experience at the Technical University
Dortmund, Germany. Dr. Gericke continues to develop and teach a summer camp for
middle school students that introduces the students to the unique properties of
water as the foundation for all life, to the properties of detergents and
lipids, and to the unique and important properties of biological membranes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phosphoinositide (PIPs) lipids affect an extraordinary
variety of protein functions. The specificity of PIP-mediated signaling is
rooted in the chemical properties of the lipid's headgroup, which mediates
specific interactions with distinct protein motifs. Temporal control of
signaling is provided by kinases and phosphatases that phosphorylate or
dephosphorylate PIPs. The spatial control of PIP-mediated signaling stems from
the non-uniform lateral distribution of PIPs in the cell membrane, which gives
rise to PIP-enriched domains and gradients. Rafts, which are liquid-ordered
domains enriched in sphingolipid and cholesterol, are found in the outer leaflet
of the plasma membrane and affect signaling events on the inner leaflet. Many
PIP-mediated signaling events have been associated with lipid rafts; however,
given the chemical nature of PIPs, they are expected to partition into fluid
membrane patches rather than rafts. Aim 1 addresses this long-standing conundrum
by fabricating asymmetric lipid bilayers that exhibit a lipid-raft mixture on
the outer leaflet and PIP-containing lipid mixtures on the inner leaflet. Dr.
Gericke's group uses these asymmetric lipid bilayers to determine the conditions
that result in domain registration. Aim 2 explores how three peripheral membrane
proteins, MARCKS, PTEN, and Akt, interact with three types of PIP domains (fluid
PIP/cholesterol, liquid-ordered PIP/cholesterol, and PIP/cholesterol in contact
with a raft domain in the opposing leaflet). The MARCKS interactions with PIPs
are non-specific, purely electrostatic, PTEN binds
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate, and the Akt protein has a pocket to which
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate binds. Lipid gradients are crucial for
important cellular processes, including cytokinesis and directed cell movement.
While cell-based studies have highlighted the importance of lipid gradients for
cellular function, the physiochemical underpinnings of lipid gradients have not
been addressed. Dr. Gericke's group has developed a microfluidic lipid gradient
generator to systematically study how lipid gradients interact and/or protein
gradients in the aqueous phase above the lipid bilayer create and maintain lipid
gradients. In aim 3, Dr. Gericke investigates how opposing gradients of PI3K and
PTEN create lipid gradients and the effect of pre-existing domains on gradient
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.