* 1904650
* Advancing the Performance and Capabilities of Direct Arylation Polymerization (DArP)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Barry Thompson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2023
* USD 342,669.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Dr. Barry C. Thompson from the University
of Southern California to develop green and energy efficient methods to produce
semiconducting polymers. This existing class of plastic-electronic materials has
shown great promise for use in organic solar cells and light emitting diodes, as
well as several sensory applications in which light is converted to electrical
current. In this work, semiconducting polymers are prepared using catalysts
based on inexpensive and abundant elements such as copper and nickel. These
metals are utilized to lower the energy barrier associated with polymerization
processes, making it easier to convert starting materials to desired products.
Consequently, their use improves the sustainability of semiconducting polymers
and enables new reactivity and properties in the polymers. The new processes
associated with this award provide means to assemble the repeating monomer units
along main polymer chains in several different ways giving rise not only to
linear chains composed of identical repeating units, but also chains in which
those repeating units are different and arranged in controlled and predictable
ways. Consequently, access to such advanced architectures in these polymers
could lead to improvements in their applications, specifically the efficiency by
which they convert sunlight into electricity. The work enables outstanding
training for undergraduate and graduate students in polymer chemistry, extending
to students hosted at the University of Southern California from Cerritos
Community College. The broad impact through the development of a graduate
student exchange program with Ludwig Maximillians University in Munich, Germany
is very important for helping to expose students to the broader scope of
international research and collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
focused on the development of alternative synthetic routes to direct arylation
polymerization catalyzed by copper and nickel complexes for the synthesis of
conjugated, semiconducting polymers. Special emphasis is also placed on the use
of green and environmentally friendly solvents. The capabilities of direct
arylation polymerization are extended by focusing toward a transition from step-
growth to chain-growth, which enables access to more advanced architectures such
as block and gradient copolymers. Studies related to the ability of direct
arylation polymerization to effect controlled living polymerization are a
significant step forward in this area of research because it would enable
control over the molecular weight and polymer polydispersity. An additional
direction involves exploration of more sustainable oxidants for the related
dehydrogenative polymerization process that avoids monomer halogenation and the
use of stoichiometric amounts of silver oxidants. The use of earth-abundant
copper and nickel catalysts to access conjugated polymers via this work is
important and has the potential to significantly reduce the cost and complexity
of existing procedures for conjugated polymer synthesis, which are generally not
atom efficient, require harsh reaction conditions, toxic solvents, and create
significant amounts of waste products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.