* 1904596
* Interface and matrix effects on light-switchable solid-state spin transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Daniel Talham, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 496,632.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary.&lt;br/&gt;Using light to induce motion on a
macroscopic scale is sometimes referred to as the direct conversion of light to
work and is expected to lead to new technologies in areas ranging from
artificial muscles to light energy harvesting to wireless machines. Spin
transition solids are a class of materials known to change volume when exposed
to certain stimuli, including light. This volume change alone can be used to
cause motion, but the effects are greatly amplified by combining the spin
transition solid in a composite with other materials. This project, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, explores the fundamental
materials chemistry questions associated with light induced volume changes when
spin transition solids are combined in a matrix with other materials to form a
composite. Theoretical models predict how the spin transition should change in a
matrix, but experiments to verify these predictions are currently lacking, and
the magnitude of matrix effects have not been quantified. Researchers at the
University of Florida develop new synthetic methods to place well-defined
particles of the spin transition solid in matrices of different materials
enabling quantitative measurements of how the volume change associated with the
spin transition is transmitted to and amplified by the supporting matrix. The
project utilizes national scientific user facilities including the Advanced
Photon Source at Argonne National Labs and the NSLS II at Brookhaven National
Labs, and provides students training in these advanced technologies. Results of
the project will enable better design of the next generation of materials used
for directly converting light to work. The relationship of this project to these
developing technologies is highlighted in a planned exhibit themed Creating
Motion with Light, to be displayed at local education and public outreach
forums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;The significant
volume change accompanying alterations in metal-ligand bonding during a solid-
state spin transition opens the prospect of harvesting these effects for
mechanical actuator technology. These emerging applications require the spin
transition material to physically couple to other material components, yet the
material interface can influence the characteristics of a spin transition,
especially at high surface to volume ratios characteristic of the nanoscale or
mesoscale. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program at NSF, quantifies matrix or interface attributes and their influence on
spin transitions in mesoscale particles. Experimentally, the charge transfer
induced spin transition (CTIST) of rubidium cobalthexacyanoferrate as the light-
switchable core with isostructural but chemically distinct cyanometallate shells
as surrounding matrix are studied. Theoretical models predict the elastic
properties of the core are the key determinants of the order and kinetics of the
phase transition. These properties can be affected by the stiffness of the
shell, the relative lattice constants of the core and shell, and the shell
thickness; all are parameters that can be synthetically altered. Light-induced
and temperature-dependent phase behavior is monitored with X-ray diffraction and
magnetometry to provide activation energies and information about the order and
cooperativity of the transition as components are changed. The elastic
properties are measured using nuclear inelastic scattering (NIS) and X-ray
diffraction under pressure, and they are correlated with the phase change
behavior to quantify the matrix effects. In parallel, the scope extends to
chemically dissimilar matrices. These studies inform the subject area of light-
induced mechanical actuation, potential applications of which are the use of
light to directly perform work and new light energy harvesting schemes. The
relationship of this project to these developing technologies is highlighted in
a planned exhibit themed Creating Motion with Light, to be displayed at local
education and public outreach forums. The research tasks are designed to be
platforms for graduate and undergraduate student education, providing technical
expertise and knowledge along with general skills needed to be competitive in
materials chemistry related high-technology
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.