* 1904876
* Collaborative Research: Electronic and Geometric Structure of n-Glyme Assembled Metal Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Kenneth Knappenberger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Metal nanoparticles can be just a few nanometers in size and contain just tens
to hundreds of metal atoms. When the nanoparticles are isolated from one
another, exposure to light typically results in heating of the particle, which
then dissipates energy into the surrounding solvent. However, connect two
particles together and that light absorption can be converted into a bright
luminescence. With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Christopher
Ackerson (Colorado State University), Christine Aikens (Kansas State
University), and Kenneth Knappenberger (Pennsylvania State University) are
working to understand the mechanism of this light emission. The team combines
precision nanoparticle synthesis and characterization with cutting-edge
theoretical calculations and experimental spectroscopy to determine the unique
luminescence properties of these systems. Their discoveries could improve
bioimaging and impact emerging quantum information technologies. The project
also provides a unique multi-disciplinary environment for student training, and
outreach activities to K-12 students are introducing underrepresented students
to scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary thrusts of this
proposal are to determine how ligand substitution affects the geometric and
electronic structure of quantum-confined gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) and their
assemblies, and to understand the influence of these properties on electronic
relaxation dynamics and photoluminescence yields. The team is also developing an
understanding of how the properties of AuNC monomers impact electronically
coupled dimers and extended structures. The proposed research features
structurally precise monolayer-protected gold clusters and progresses to include
n-glyme-bridged multimers. The specific objectives include: 1) to determine the
compatible ligands for which glyme molecules can be incorporated into the AuNC
passivation shell, and to understand the range of clusters that can be assembled
using glyme-driven chemistry; 2) to describe the nature of the interaction --
both electronically and geometrically -- of glyme with AuNC monomers and larger
assemblies; and 3) to describe how the properties described in 1 and 2 affect
state-resolved carrier dynamics of AuNC monomers, inter-cluster electronic
coupling and transfer, and photoluminescence emission. These goals are being
achieved by combining colloidal AuNC synthesis and purification, computational-
based predictions, and experimental electron dynamics research. The proposed
efforts include plans to provide student education at the graduate and
undergraduate levels in three pillars of nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.