* 1904053
* Conference Proposal: Third International Symposium on Nanoporous Materials by Alloy Corrosion
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2019
* Joshua Snyder, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

The award will provide funding in support of participation by U.S. graduate
students, post-doctoral scholars, and early-career researchers at the Third
International Symposium on Nanoporous Materials by Alloy Corrosion on February
24-28, 2019 in Philadelphia, PA. The presentations and discussion/collaboration
fostered at the symposium will highlight new aspects of nanoporous materials
synthesis and properties, as well as develop the guiding principles that will
outline future directions for the field in applications such as catalysis, fuel
cells, plasmonic devices, and sensors. The symposium will provide a rare
opportunity to bring together a diverse group of industrial and academic
researchers in a common setting under conditions that will promote research
collaboration and identification of new technological opportunities for
nanoporous materials. Key outcomes will be a journal article describing future
directions for the field, and education of young researchers about career
opportunities related to nanoporous materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoporous
metals and nanoporous materials, in general, span many fields of basic science
and they see utility in a broad range of applications. Full realization of the
useful properties of nanoporous materials and development of synthesis
strategies that facilitate control of those properties would create substantial
impact over a broad range of applications. To this end, the conference will
facilitate information sharing and collaboration that would not be possible
outside of the meeting. One of the keys to the impact of this meeting is the
targeted involvement of graduate students and early career scientists. The
combination of young scientist talks, nightly poster sessions, and a communal
atmosphere between established scientists and young graduate students will have
an important and lasting impact on the future careers of the younger
attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.