* 1904537
* Collaborative Research: Thermodynamics and Ion Transport in Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Block Copolymer Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Bruce Garetz, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,000.00

NONTECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life is increasingly intertwined
with electrochemical energy storage, mainly in the form of lithium batteries.
They are integral to cellphones, laptops, scooters, electric vehicles, homes,
solar installations, and even airplanes. But these basic devices have potential
safety hazards because they carry within a highly flammable liquid that has led
to explosions and fires. Building an intrinsically safe rechargeable lithium
battery remains an unmet challenge, particularly in the development of a
nonflammable electrolyte (the material that allows the flow of electrical charge
in the battery) to replace the flammable organic liquid electrolyte in current
lithium batteries. Polymer electrolytes offer a promising alternative to the
flammable liquid. All previous studies have considered polymers made from
organic building blocks. The proposed work begins with a novel approach: the
synthesis of a hybrid polymer that comprises both organic and inorganic building
blocks. The polymer spontaneously forms 10-nanometer-wide alternating organic
and inorganic layers (a human hair is 100,000 nanometers wide). This material
had very low flammability. The organic layers conduct the lithium ions while the
inorganic layers provide mechanical rigidity to the polymer electrolyte, a
property that is necessary to keep the two battery electrodes from touching and
short-circuiting the battery. The planned work examines the relationship between
layer formation and lithium-ion motion through the composite electrolyte. The
PIs collaborating on this project will also be working on diversity-related
initiatives on the UC Berkeley campus, on organizing public lectures on
scientific subjects aimed at high school students in Brooklyn, and on providing
multidisciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate students at their
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work focuses on mixtures of
hybrid organic-inorganic block copolymers and a lithium salt. Functionalized
polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) particles are covalently bonded to
the inorganic block; the organic block is polyethylene oxide (PEO). The hybrid
block copolymers (PEO-POSS) will be synthesized using nitroxide-mediated radical
polymerization with functionalized PEO as the macro-initiator. Early results
indicate that the phase behavior of pure PEO-POSS block copolymers is as
expected: increasing temperature leads to an order-to-disorder transition. In
contrast, salt-containing PEO-POSS mixtures exhibit a disorder-to-order
transition with increasing temperature. The effect of block ratio, chain length,
and POSS functionality will be studied by a combination of depolarized light
scattering, X-ray scattering, and electron tomography. Measurements will be made
over a wide range of block copolymer compositions, salt concentration, and
annealing conditions. The effect of morphology on ion transport will be measured
by ac impedance spectroscopy. The intellectual merit of the proposed work will
be the study of the thermodynamic interactions and ion transport in an emerging
class of hybrid nanostructured polymers comprising fully organic polymers and
polymers with covalently-bonded inorganic nanoparticles; the present
quantitative understanding of these properties is largely restricted to all-
organic chains. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.