* 1904584
* Attaining Configuration and Ligand Field Control over the Singly Occupied Molecular Orbital (SOMO)/Fermi Gap in Molecular Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) Films
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Claudio Verani, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 475,000.00

Surfactants are molecules that contain water-soluble and water-insoluble
regions. When added to water, surfactants form well-organized films as thin as a
single molecule, and this film can be transferred onto a solid surface.
Surfactant molecules can be designed to incorporate metal centers to form a new
and advanced class of metallosurfactants that can be tailored to respond to
specific electrical stimuli. With funding from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program of the NSF Division of Chemistry,
Professor Claudio Verani and his research group at Wayne State University in
Detroit are studying how to design and obtain new responsive metallosurfactants,
and how to tune the properties of these metallosurfactants to respond to
specific stimuli. The team also considers how to use these metallosurfactants to
form responsive films on solid surfaces. This research is fundamental to
concepts such as directional electron transport needed in quantum computing and
stimuli-responsive materials. The outreach goals foster the dissemination of
cutting edge scientific knowledge, graduate and undergraduate education and
research, and the diffusion of scientific ideas to broader audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Verani and collaborators are studying the
synthesis, redox, electronic, and interfacial behavior of metallosurfactants,
both in solution and as Langmuir-Blodgett monolayer films deposited onto
electroactive surfaces. This interdisciplinary project aims to study the
modulation of the Singly Occupied Molecular Orbital (SOMO)/Fermi gap on
metallosurfactant films based on metal ions with distinct 3d0, 3d1, 3d2, 3d3,
and 3d4 electronic configurations. The team also develops push/pull asymmetric
metallosurfactants to study the relationship between orbital distortion and
directional electron transport, and generates methodology to enable a new class
of "on demand" ionic metallosurfactants obtained through the exchange of
counterions by charged surfactants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.