* 1904302
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Secure Work in the Worker-Cooperative Sector
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Katherine Tait, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2020
* USD 12,067.00

This project will study the expanding worker cooperative sector in New York
City. Three research questions will be investigated: 1) how relevant
stakeholders conceive of and view worker ownership; 2) how municipal investment
in the worker cooperative sector affects the worker cooperative movement; and 3)
the effects of worker ownership on labor security. Through this research, issues
facing workers and their communities, including the importance communities have
for workers' economic well-being, will be understood better. Understanding of
how workers' autonomous efforts may change when external actors become involved
in promoting those efforts also will be increased. This, in turn, will inform
our knowledge of how policies at local, regional, and national levels may be
developed to support the creation of secure
employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will proceed in two phases. The first
phase will involve semi-structured interviews with different actors throughout
the field of cooperative organizations in New York City, observations of
cooperative sector events, and archival research. Those interviewed will include
worker-owners from a purposive sample of worker cooperatives, community economic
development professionals, leaders of cooperative federations and advocacy
organizations, and local political representatives. In the second phase, two
relevant two surveys will be analyzed, the 2017 Worker Co-op Census and three
work-related modules of the General Social Survey. The products of this
research, including a report on the New York worker-cooperative sector and
presentations at cooperative-sector conferences and community economic
development events, will be accessible to a diverse audience including
community-based economic development organizations, economic development
policymakers at the local, regional and national levels, workers across labor-
market sectors and skill levels, and academics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.