* 1904130
* Hyperbolic Manifolds and Their Moduli Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* AUTUMN KENT, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2022
* USD 331,999.00

In mathematics one is often faced with the problem of understanding a given
geometric object. Surprisingly often, it is advantageous to deform the geometry
of this object in order to better understand it. That is, one may understand
something geometric by understanding how one may change it. The prototypical
example of this is Riemann's moduli space of curves, which is a space each of
whose points represents a two-dimensional object called a Riemann surface. This
space captures all of the ways one may deform these surfaces. The proposed
research will explore the geometry of this space, its analogs in spaces of
deformations of certain three-dimensional spaces called hyperbolic manifolds,
and their interrelationships. It also contains suitable sub-projects for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project falls into two parts: the
deformation theory of hyperbolic three-manifolds; and the study of geometric and
algebraic properties of subgroups of mapping class groups of surfaces, their
associated surface bundles, and profinite completions. The first is principally
concerned with understanding a certain function called the skinning map, which
was discovered and studied by Thurston in his work on the geometrization of
three-manifolds, and which measures the effects of deformations of hyperbolic
three-manifolds. A better understanding of this function sheds light on the
geometry of three-manifolds and its relation to topology. In particular, the PI
will continue an ongoing project with collaborators Bromberg and Minsky to
establish effective bounds on the diameter of this map and its relation to the
notion of renormalized volume. The second part is concerned with the study of
the geometry of subgroups of mapping class groups and their relation to the
geometry of four-manifolds in collaboration with Leininger. The second part will
also continue the PI's work in profinite aspects of mapping class groups, with a
view toward Ivanov's congruence subgroup problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.