* 1904031
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Navigating and Negotiating Multiple Energy Futures and Infrastructures
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Thomas Beamish, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2020
* USD 13,582.00

The development of new sources of energy coupled with the dramatic decline in
their costs are creating new opportunities and challenges in United States
society. This change represents more than a technological shift because it
impacts employment and economic organization in several parts of our country.
Energy transport infrastructures play a key role in the design and re-design of
energy systems by making it possible to scale up such systems, thus more fully
and efficiently using new energy sources. Because of these several changes,
public conversations about the best ways to access new energy sources provide
important information regarding the implications of change in energy sources,
particularly the issues of transporting new energy sources to consumers. This
project will analyze these public conversations to assess their dynamics as well
as their economic and social impacts. Analysis of these cases will help us to
understand how these values and visions of the future can become materially
embedded through the decisions made around which infrastructures are built.
Findings from the project will inform how transitions in the energy industry
evolve and are managed by specific communities and by our society more
generally, thus informing policymakers at several levels who are responsible for
policy governing energy creation, regulation and usage.

This project investigates the public and policy conversations surrounding three
energy related infrastructure proposals that cover energy transportation. This
project relies on a multi-methods approach combining 65 semi-structured in-depth
interviews of key stakeholders, content analysis of over 30 local and national
newspapers, and key policy and archival materials from regulatory agencies,
industry partners, and social movement organizations. Interviews will focus on
collecting descriptive accounting and stakeholder perceptions of the events,
formal review processes, and subsequent conversations around each proposed
project in order to analyze why and how each project was evaluated, discussed,
and how competing visions of energy creation and usage were resolved and
evolved. Through media content analysis, the project will understand how each
project was regionally framed and therefore how these media frames converged
with or deviated from those advocated by individual stakeholders and stakeholder
groups, across time and the energy cases. The archival document content analysis
will shed light on how the federal and state regulatory structures and policy
regimes have shaped each discussion. Through this comparative case study of
energy infrastructure projects, this project will construct the emerging
conversations around and evaluations of the different energy regimes present in
our society today. Findings will inform sociological theories regarding energy
usage, community transformation, and social change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.