* 1904377
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Analysis of Social Dynamics in New Suburbs
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Ann Morning, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 15,929.00

Suburban areas in the United States are becoming increasingly diverse. Despite
this development, our understandings of social dynamics in local communities are
based on research in urban centers. This project will examine the implications
of diversifying suburbs for social integration, inequality, and inclusion. The
project will address the following questions: What are the social dynamics in
diverse suburbs? How do people in such contexts experience and think about
social diversity, and what implications does this have for social inequality?
This project will point to both challenges and opportunities of social inclusion
in diverse suburbs and detail the ways in which inequality creation and
maintenance occur differently in these spaces than in traditionally-studied
urban contexts. Findings from the project will suggest what policies and
practices will be most useful in creating and maintaining inclusive spaces and
institutions in diverse suburban settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
investigates residents' understandings of diversity in a diverse suburb and the
community dynamics that result from these understandings. In-depth interviews
with residents of a diverse suburb will assess how everyday experiences shape
understandings of diversity and how, in turn, these individual understandings
create community-level conversations, norms, and political arrangements that
affect the extent to which suburbs are characterized by social inequality. The
project uses qualitative analysis of three contexts: a socially diverse suburb;
a diverse urban community; and a non-diverse suburban community located
proximate to the diverse suburb. Fieldwork will substantially focus on the
diverse suburb and will include several strategies. The project will conduct
approximately 115 in-depth interviews with a diverse sample of adult residents
to gauge residents' experiences with and understandings of diversity and social
inequality. In addition, interviews with local government, school district, and
political officials will illuminate how diversity is addressed by local
governments and school districts. The project also incorporates ethnographic
observation of political campaigns, government events, and public life over a
period of two years at this site. To evaluate these findings, the project will
interview an additional 50 residents of the two additional sites. Assessing how
residents of these sites that vary in both diversity and urban/suburban
designation understand diversity will permit comparative understanding of the
social dynamics present in diverse, suburban contexts. The project will analyze
the data using inductive, iterative coding in MAXQDA. Findings from the project
will inform sociological theories regarding inter-group relations,
urban/suburban residence, and the dynamics of social
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.