* 1904466
* Collaborative Research: Study of the Connections between Ordering, Dynamics and Glass Forming Ability in Metallic Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Nicholas Mauro, St. Norbert College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 229,325.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallic glasses, which were only
discovered about a half-century ago, have the potential to become transformative
materials. However, two things are needed before this can happen - an improved
understanding of which metallic liquids can be made into glasses and an ability
to tailor these glasses to meet specific demands. There is evidence that the
properties of metallic liquids near their melting temperatures are important for
reaching these goals. Near the melting temperature, the shear viscosity (a
measure of how easily a liquid flows) shows a change in how it increases with
decreasing temperature. There is experimental evidence that this change is
linked to changes in the atomic structure of the liquid. One goal of this
research is to develop a deeper understanding of these processes at high
temperature. A second goal is to combine this knowledge with measurements of the
structures of the liquids and the crystal phases that can form from them to
develop a model that predicts metallic glass formation. The new insight that
will result from these studies will be of broad interest to the academic and
industrial glass science community. A third goal is to develop a model of
collaborative research that connects communities in different regions and of
different sizes. This collaborative research effort between a small Liberal Arts
College and a larger R1 University will work to combat national reductions in
students seeking training in STEM fields in both communities. Undergraduate and
graduate students will participate in research at academic institutions and at
national laboratories, giving them valuable experience for deciding on their
future educational and career paths. At the same time, the collaboration will
develop a model for broad community engagement that uses modern technology to
open up access routes for underserved communities to cutting-edge science and
science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While metallic glasses have the potential to be
transformative materials, an improved ability to identify and develop new
glasses to meet changing demands is critically important. Studies suggest that
the properties of the high temperature liquids are indicators of glass
formation. Of particular importance is a structurally induced crossover in the
properties of the shear viscosity of metallic alloy liquids at a temperature TA,
which is near the liquidus temperature. Evidence suggests that the processes
that begin at TA ultimately lead to the glass transition at lower temperatures.
Predictions of the glass transition temperature based on the fragility of the
liquid (determined from the shear viscosity) and the thermal expansion
coefficient at TA are in good agreement with experimental data for the glasses
studied. This research is focused on gaining a deeper understanding of the
crossover at TA and developing a better predictor for glass formation that is
based on fundamental properties of the liquid and the crystal phases that form
from it. The experimental research will focus on quasi-elastic and inelastic
neutron and high energy X-ray scattering studies of containerless-processed
liquids and measurements of their viscosity and density as a function of
temperature. Molecular dynamics studies will be used to guide these studies and
to interpret the data obtained. The new insights developed in this proposal will
be of interest to those interested in metallic alloy development as well as the
broader glass community, including those working on silicate and chalcogenide
glasses. These activities mirror a broad approach for accelerated materials
development that is a national priority. The research collaboration between a
Liberal Arts College and a R1 University will play an important role in the
training of both undergraduate and graduate students in academia and at national
laboratories, where they will learn cutting edge X-ray and neutron scattering
techniques and computer modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.