* 1904545
* RUI-Collaborative Research-Electrokinetic Transport and Electric Field Control of Ion Motion through the Interior of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mark Ellison, Ursinus College
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,217.00

Dr. Mark Ellison of the Department of Chemistry, Ursinus College and Dr. Michael
S. Strano of the Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) are supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Division of Chemistry to study the motion of
ions and molecules through the interior of carbon nanotubes. Flow of material at
these dimensions is quite different from our everyday experience, so this
research is expected to improve our understanding of how these ions and
molecules are transported through tubes that are not much bigger in diameter
than the objects themselves. The work is initially focused on the transport of
amino acids and neurotransmitters, including acetylcholine and dopamine through
the nanotubes. At a later stage, the nanotubes are outfitted with tiny gold
electrodes to control the rate of flow through the tubes using an electric
signal. If successful, the project is likely to impact the development of
biosensing, medical testing, and electronic nanodevices. It is also likely to
improve our understanding of the motion of biologically important molecules in
biological channels and synthetic nanopores such as in the human brain. During
the course of conducting this research, a diverse group of undergraduate
students as well as female high school students are afforded a research
experience at Ursinus College. In addition, the students benefit from visits to
MIT to prepare nanotube devices and conduct experiments with the help of MIT
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the
fundamental processes of the transport of small ions and molecules through
single wall nanotubes (SWNTs). Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is used to
deposit SWNTs on silicon wafers and the devices are equipped with electrodes to
conduct the needed ion current measurements. This, combined with SEM and Raman
spectroscopy measurements, provides the necessary data to characterize the
devices and to provide information on the mechanisms involved in the transport
of ionic and molecular species through the nanotubes. The Ursinus undergraduate
students travel to MIT to use equipment and instruments such as a chemical vapor
deposition oven, scanning electron microscope, and a Raman microscope to
construct the SWNT devices. The devices are brought back to Ursinus to conduct
the voltage clamp measurements of ion transport. The work is initially focused
on the transport of amino acids and neurotransmitters, including acetylcholine
and dopamine, through the nanotubes. At a later stage, the nanotubes are
outfitted with gold electrodes to gate and control the rate of flow through the
tubes by an electric signal. The experiments are designed to provide the data
needed to improve our understanding of ion and molecule transport through SWCNT
nanopores and to explore the use of SWCNTs as conduits for the delivery of amino
acids and neurotransmitters to specific targets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.