* 1904939
* Redox chemical-fueled dissipative self-assembly of active materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Zhibin Guan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 465,000.00

Living systems rely on the energy-fueled assembly of biological building blocks
such as proteins to enable vital biological functions including cellular
transport, cell migration, division, and shape change. These self-assembly
processes in Nature have inspired the design of synthetic systems driven by
chemical fuels. The research group of Professor Zhibin Guan at the University of
California, Irvine (UCI), aims to develop a general and biocompatible strategy
for the self-assembly of active materials that mimic biologically-active
materials. Towards this goal, his group conducts research to gain a better
understanding of the processes of chemically-fueled assemblies. The research
group also seeks to uncover general rules that enable predictive design of self-
assembled materials. Such materials may have properties that include being
adaptive, self-healing, and autonomous, offering the opportunity to seamlessly
interface man-made technologies and biological systems. Students at all academic
levels, including minority and women students, participating in this project
gain broad training and experience in chemical synthesis, materials chemistry
and materials physical property studies. In addition, Professor Guan works with
the UCI Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA) Program to develop
a module that focuses on dynamic materials for a K-12 chemistry/materials
science outreach effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissipative self-assembly is an
out-of-equilibrium process in which consumption of a chemical fuel drives the
self-assembly of materials. In living organisms, the transient self-assembly of
actin networks and microtubules fueled by adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and
guanosine triphosphate (GTP) is at the heart of many cellular processes. While
such self-assembly is common in Nature, relatively few synthetic systems of
chemical-fueled dissipative assembly have been developed. The general toxicity
of the chemical fuels and harsh conditions used in current man-made designs also
limit their applications. To address these issues, Professor Guan's research
group investigates new mild, biocompatible chemical reactions to control the
self-assembly of active materials. In the first aim of this project, the
reaction kinetics, redox chemical networks, and emergent properties of a model
system are carefully investigated to understand and improve control of the
assembly process. The second aim focuses on demonstrating the scope of the
approach developed by applying this strategy to various precursors (e.g.,
cysteine-containing peptides). The last aim seeks to develop a novel approach
that is based on photoredox chemistry to fuel an active assembly
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.