* 1904351
* Investigation of (Photo) Electrocatalytic Conversion of N2 to NH3 under Ambient Conditions Using Hybrid Hollow Plasmonic Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 05/31/2024
* USD 430,346.00

Ammonia is one of the widely produced chemicals in the world. It is used in
agricultural fertilizer, energy, and in the pharmaceutical industry. The current
method for producing ammonia involves heating the reactants to very high
temperatures and at high pressures, which requires large amounts of energy. With
support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Mostafa El-Sayed at the Georgia Institute
of Technology and his students are exploring a photo-electrochemical approach
that would produce ammonia from nitrogen and water at atmospheric pressure and
room temperature. Their approach makes use of hybrid nanoparticles that are
10,000 times smaller than a grain of salt. Each particle consists of a plasmonic
nanoparticle, surrounded by a semiconductor shell and catalytic metal. Exposure
to light excites the electrons in the nanoparticle. These electrons are then
transferred to the semiconductor and the catalyst, where the chemical conversion
to ammonia occurs. The team's discoveries could extend beyond ammonia synthesis
and impact the broader field of nanocatalysis, which is widely used in chemical
production, sustainable energy, and materials chemistry. The project is training
the next generation of scientists and is engaging students at historically black
colleges and universities (HBCUs) in the Atlanta metropolitan area. Professor
El-Sayed and his group also showcase their research through lab tours and public
presentations at STEM career fairs and local schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various metal (e.g., Au, Pd, and Ru) nanocages, hybrid
double shell (e.g., Ag-Au, Au-Pd, Au-Ru) nanocages, and Au nanorattles where a
solid Au plasmonic nanoparticle is placed inside the hollow nanocatalyst are
synthesized. The conversion of nitrogen (N2) to ammonia (NH3) under ambient
conditions is then explored using these nanocatalysts in a (photo)
electrochemical system, which measures the reaction rate and catalytic
efficiency. In-situ surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy and atomic force
microscopy are performed to study the full reaction mechanism during
electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction. Transition catalytic metals (e.g.,
Ru, Pd) are utilized as dopants, co-catalysts, and plasmon enhancers with
semiconductor and plasmonic metals (Au) to study their effects on the charge
carrier recombination and the dynamics of electron injection using ultrafast
pump-probe spectroscopy. These experiments help to design an active photo-
electrocatalyst with longer recombination time, therefore facilitating the
photo-electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction. The group's extensive
experience in nanoparticle synthesis, bench scale photo-electrochemical testing
and state of the art spectroscopy is complemented by theoretical studies to gain
a fundamental understanding of photo-electrochemical nitrogen fixation processes
that enable nitrogen-based fertilizer production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.