* 1904097
* Collaborative Research: Nanoscale Quantitative Probing of Phase Transition in Correlated Rare-Earth Nickelates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* David Landau, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 344,998.00

Materials that undergo sharp transitions in their conductivity upon external
stimulus represent an emerging class of semiconductors. These materials could
affect future computing technologies and opto-electronic devices. Understanding
the microscopic nature of the transitions is important to model their behavior.
In this project, the PIs will collaboratively explore the role of atomic scale
defects introduced by doping in controlling the conductivity and how it varies
spatially within the material. This will be accomplished by combination of high-
spatial resolution scanning probe microscopy that is sensitive to conductivity
at the nanoscale and theoretical modeling of electrical conduction in the sample
containing varying concentrations of such defects. In addition to research, the
PIs will participate in educational and outreach activities including engaging
high school students from diverse backgrounds in the Atlanta area to participate
in physics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perovskite nickelates
undergo insulator-metal transitions that can be modulated by external stimuli
such as temperature, pressure as well as growth protocols. Microscopic
understanding of the phase transition with emphasis on scanning probe techniques
will be accomplished by using integrated high-resolution experimental nanoscale
near-field imaging and spectroscopy techniques covering infrared to THz,
theoretical calculations and Monte Carlo Simulations. The research will impact
electronic and optical materials engineering and devices, fundamental physics,
and materials science. The results will enable fundamental quantitative
understanding of the first order phase transition of correlated oxides at high-
spatial resolution and will have a significant impact on future electronics and
photonics, sensing, neuromorphic devices. The research and integrated education
plan will promote undergraduate and graduate materials and nano-optoelectronic
education in the Athens/Atlanta area. The work throughout this research will
provide participating students, including those from underrepresented groups,
with advanced multidisciplinary skills to tackle challenging condensed
matter/materials physics problems. The project will include development of new
courses, undergraduate research and advising and provide travel fellowships for
students from other institutions to attend Workshops. The PIs will integrate
research into outreach activities for high school physics teacher(s)/students'
education and training as well as community outreach that targets African
immigrant students/families and African American youth in the Athens/Atlanta
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.