* 1904407
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Law Enforcement Recruitment and Training and Their Effects
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Samantha Simon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2021
* USD 15,999.00

In this project, the relationship of recruitment and training to the subsequent
responses of organizational personnel is investigated with specific reference to
the recruitment and training of law enforcement personnel and the use of force.
Three principal questions are addressed: (1) How do law enforcement departments
decide whom to hire? (2) How are law enforcement officers trained to use force?
(3) What do the recruitment strategies and training practices reveal about how
law enforcement departments conceptualize demographic characteristics and force?
Recruitment and training are understudied components of the use of force by law
enforcement personnel. By focusing on recruitment and training, this study will
increase scholarly understanding of their importance in explaining the critical
behavior of organizational personnel. It will help scholars, law enforcement
departments, and other stakeholders better understand how organizational change
may occur. Its findings also will provide important insights into the
development of new approaches to recruitment and training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment and training in law enforcement departments
are researched in this project using the methods of ethnography and interviews.
The ethnographic activities include attendance at recruiting and hiring events,
observation of classroom instruction, and participation in training activities
including scenario-based training. The 40 interviewees include recruits in
training, personnel in training units, personnel in recruiting and hiring units,
and law enforcement personnel engaged in regular duties. Interviews follow a
semi-structured format, in which the interviewees are asked open-ended questions
about their background, their career decision, the hiring and training process,
and their opinions concerning the use of force and related issues. Analysis and
comparison of the responses, combined with the ethnographic observation, allow
the development of theoretical insight into the effects of recruitment and
training on subsequent use of force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.