* 1904576
* Current-Driven Nonequilibrium Electrodynamics and Thermodynamics in Quantum Materials at the Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Mengkun Liu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Many materials can make the transition from
nonconducting (insulator) to conducting (metal) through applied pressure,
temperature, or photoexcitation. In certain quantum material systems, this
insulator to metal transition can be achieved using very modest electric current
or voltage, making potential applications to fast electrical switch, energy-
efficient memory or transistor devices possible. To understand the mechanism of
current or voltage induced switching, however, is nontrivial. Among many
practical obstacles, one major setback is the inability to distinguish between
the current-driven nonthermal state and a 'trivial' heat-induced high-
temperature phase. Moreover, inhomogeneous strain, defects, and chemical doping
add complications, especially when samples approach submicron scale, which is
common in modern nano-electronic devices. This research project aims to develop
new techniques and establish a coordinated microscopic mapping of the optical
and thermal properties of quantum materials during conductivity switching
induced by electric current. More specifically, this research provides a
quantitative description of the current-driven local variations in optical
dielectric function, temperature, and thermal conductivity at characteristic
length scales ranging from nanometers to microns, using state-of-the-art
scanning probe microscopy and spectroscopy. Based on systematic studies of
representative quantum materials such as correlated transition metal oxides with
3d or 4d orbitals, the Principle Investigator will establish an integrated
research and education program to explore nonequilibrium states at the nanoscale
over a broad infrared to terahertz frequency range. This research also provides
sophisticated training to young researchers and a future generation of
scientists in a broad range of knowledge. This includes various types of
microscopy, spectroscopy, and nanofabrication
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt; Quantum
materials host a surprisingly diverse set of phase changes when their electrons
or lattice are perturbed by various stimuli. By combining the scattering-type
scanning near-field optical microscope and scanning thermal microscope into one
integrated apparatus, this research studies the current-induced nonequilibrium
insulator-to-metal phase transitions in representative quantum materials (e.g.
Ca2-xSrxRuO4). The research team will create an experimental routine to
distinguish between current-driven and thermal or strain induced phases in bulk
single crystals or epitaxial thin films. Dielectric constant, critical current
density, nanoscale electrical and heat current transport can be systematically
investigated with a spatial resolution smaller than 50 nm. Near-field
experiments can be aided with theoretical effort (Boltzman theory) to study
nonlocal phenoemon in the proximity of the electrodes at the nanoscale. This
work establishes a rigorous procedure to scrutinize the thermal and nonthermal
current-driven phase transition in quantum materials. The nanoscale optical and
thermal imaging investigation in controlled experimental environments provides a
unique platform to systematically study current induced mesoscopic phase
transition, separation, electron-lattice correlations and nonlocal effects. The
methodology is widely applicable, and the dielectric constant extraction program
can be extremely beneficial for the optics community. Research in this area will
not only profoundly broaden the fundamental knowledge of topics including Mott
physics in transition metal oxides and nonlocal heat transport in nanodevices
but will also open new routes to control the intrinsic electronic properties
with electric means at the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.