* 1904530
* The Metabolism and Signaling of Oxidized Lipids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Gregory Tochtrop, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 572,596.00

The cell membranes contain molecules called lipids that can be oxidized either
by reactions catalyzed by enzymes or by reactions that take place in the absence
of enzymes and lead to lipid peroxides. Lipid peroxides undergo subsequent
reactions that lead to lipid peroxidation (LPO) products. With this award, the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr.
Gregory Tochtrop to investigate how LPO products are metabolized in living
systems, and further, how they can turn on and off key genes involved in their
own metabolism. The results of this research provide insight into both the
formation and transformation of LPO products. This work will allow for the
training of students in interdisciplinary chemical biology that will include
chemical synthesis, protein purification, enzymology, metabolic biochemistry,
and the use of model systems to study metabolism. This project also includes the
development of a "Careers in Chemistry" seminar series for undergraduates and
graduate students in which the students explore different career opportunities
and the implementation of an innovative approach to raise mental health
awareness of graduate students during the
orientation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While LPO products have been known for some
time, this work represents a new theme in the field wherein the existence of LPO
products is tightly regulated not through enzymatic production, but rather
through catabolic control. The central argument of this proposal is that both
the formation and elimination of LPO products are controlled processes and the
pathways responsible for both the formation and elimination of LPO products are
regulated through a unique combination of metabolism and gene regulation. The
proposed experimental plan carefully defines the metabolic pathways that break
down LPO products and the signaling pathways that allow LPO products to control
the transcription of genes. More specifically, the research seeks to advance the
understanding of LPO biology by (1) defining the fates of the LPO products
derived from linoleic acid, and (2) studying the ability of LPO products to
signal through the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors transcription
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.