* 1904954
* Unveiling the Enigmatic Biosynthetic Machinery of the Azinomycins
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Coran Watanabe, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 09/30/2022
* USD 579,704.00

Azinomycins are natural products from microbes that target DNA (the genetic
basis of all life) and have demonstrated anti-tumor and anti-bacterial
activities. The National Science Foundation, Chemistry of Life Processes Program
in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Coran M. H. Watanabe from Texas A&amp;M
University to determine how nature constructs the azinomycins. These studies
characterize the functions and structures of the proteins that catalyze the
unique biochemical steps involved in generating the chemical features of the
azinomycins that are important for their biological activity. The knowledge
gained from this research paves the way for future engineering of genes to
synthesize azinomycins within a tumor cell to treat cancer. This project enables
graduate and undergraduate students, and postdoctoral trainees to develop broad
skills in chemical biology and biotechnology. Moreover, this research is
integrated into a class that teaches how bioactive agents are derived from the
environment. Students in this class collect soil samples, which are then assayed
for natural products that show antibiotic activity. In addition, local
elementary, middle, and high school students learn about natural products and
microbes in their lives through tailored lectures, demonstrations, and
laboratory experiences. Finally, as opportunities arise, Dr. Watanabe
participates in events such as the American Cancer Society Relay for Life Events
to inform the general public about cancer research and the daily work-related
activities of a research active faculty member. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
azinomycins are architecturally fascinating natural products. The natural
product is densely functionalized with a naphtoate, epoxide, enol, and
azabicyclic ring system. The basic skeletal framework of the molecule is
generated through a polyketide synthase/nonribosomal peptide synthetase
(PKS/NRPS) pathway, while the aziridino[1,2-a]pyrollidine moiety is alkaloid
derived. From an enzymological perspective, this natural product represents a
treasure trove of unusual biosynthetic transformations to be mined and paves the
way for chemoenzymatic/synthetic biology efforts. The goals of this project are
to functionally reconstitute and characterize enzymes of the azinomycin
biosynthetic pathway, and begin to develop ways to manipulate the pathway. The
objectives towards these goals include 1) characterizing the enzymatic mechanism
for biosynthesis of the naphthoate moiety of the azinomycins and analyze the
structure-activity relationships of structurally and functionally related
analogs of this mioety, 2) exploring the chemistry of the epoxide unit, and 3)
functionally characterizing the enzymes for the biosynthesis of the azabicycle
moiety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.