* 1904686
* Quantitative Chiral Analysis by Chiral Tag Rotational Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Brooks Pate, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Brooks Pate and his research group at the University of
Virginia are addressing challenges associated with the quantitative analysis of
samples containing molecules not superimposable on their mirror image: i.e.
"chiral" molecules, analogous to a person's right and left hand. The chemistry
and interactions of chiral molecules - including many pharmaceuticals and most
natural biomolecules - can depend sensitively on their chirality or
"handedness." For example, the different chiral forms of a drug can have
radically different efficacy and side reactions, despite their otherwise similar
structure and properties. As a result, analysis of chirality is critically
important, although it is generally a difficult, time-consuming, and often
costly part of drug development and manufacture. The Pate group is pioneering
new methods for rapid chiral analysis. The work exposes undergraduate and
graduate students to state-of-the-art analysis methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
specific focus of this work is to develop a chemical measurement technique that
can perform quantitative analysis of the stereoisomers of a molecule with
multiple chiral centers. The problem is challenging because it entails both
diastereomers (isomers with distinct molecular geometries) and the non-
superimposable mirror images of each diastereomer (enantiomers). Conventionally,
different spectroscopic and/or chromatographic techniques are needed to perform
both diastereomer and enantiomer analysis. The Pate group is developing a much
simpler approach based on rotational spectroscopy using chiral tags - small
molecules with chiral centers attached non-covalently to the target analyte(s).
Accurate quantum chemistry calculations make it possible to determine the base
enantiomer responsible for each spectrum recorded in the measurement. The ratio
of enantiomers is determined by changes in spectral intensity observed when the
measurement is performed using racemic and enantiopure samples of the chiral
tag. In addition to proof-of-principle measurements to validate the concept, the
team is exploring chemical ideas for designing chiral tag molecules that can
improve analysis speed, reliability, and scope of
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.