* 1904436
* Spectroelectrochemistry of Redox-Active Colloidal Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 589,824.00

It is now possible to grow crystals from many different semiconductors that are
just a few nanometers in size, or about 100,000 times smaller than a strand of
hair. At these very small sizes, semiconductor nanocrystals take on novel
physical and chemical properties that can be adjusted by changing their size,
shape, and chemical composition, making them attractive for use in many next-
generation photonic and energy technologies. Although they hold great promise,
these nanocrystals also present unique challenges. For example, as one charges a
nanocrystal up by adding electrons, it can change color and new chemical
reactions can take place at its surface. With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor
Daniel Gamelin of the University of Washington is studying how electrons that
are transferred into (and out of) semiconductor nanocrystals alter their
physical properties and chemical reactivity. Working with his students,
Professor Gamelin is developing new experimental methods that enable them to
precisely alter the nanocrystal charge while monitoring changes in their
physico-chemical properties. Their discoveries could have important implications
for new technologies in energy conversion, energy storage, and efficient energy
usage. The project is also providing advanced interdisciplinary education and
training for students, preparing them to be future leaders in science,
engineering, technology innovation, and education. Integration of research and
education is emphasized through involvement of undergraduates in the project,
incorporation of project concepts into the UW undergraduate laboratory
curriculum, and outreach activities at Seattle K-12 schools and community STEM
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite extensive studies and progress in
controlling the formation of high-quality colloidal reduced or oxidized
semiconductor nanocrystals over recent years, the redox properties of colloidal
nanocrystals remain poorly understood, particularly in the multiple-carrier
regime relevant to charge-tunable plasmonics, high-density charge storage, or
multi-electron catalysis. This project targets the development and application
of new methods for measuring, controlling, and understanding the properties of
redox-active colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals emphasizing
spectroelectrochemical probes of nanoscale chemical transformations. The goal is
to elucidate the redox reactivities and associated physico-chemical properties
of such nanocrystals that possess excess delocalized electrons or holes.
Specific nanocrystal research foci include: metal-coupled electron-transfer
reactions relevant to charge-tunable plasmonics, soluble supercapacitors
relevant to energy storage, and band-edge potentials of nanostructures relevant
to photochemistry and electron transfer. All of these are anticipated to play
central roles in future nanocrystal technologies. Spectroelectrochemical
potentiometry has been identified as a particularly powerful and quantitative
probe of the redox properties of free-standing colloidal semiconductor NCs, and
it is enabling unique in situ monitoring of nanocrystal redox manipulations and
composition transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.