* 1904261
* A Conference to Support Revisions to the Standards for Technological Literacy
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Marie Hoepfl, International Technology and Engineering Educators Association
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2021
* USD 92,645.00

Nearly two decades ago, the Standards for Technological Literacy: Content for
the Study of Technology identified what a technologically literate student
should know and be able to do. When originally published in 2000, the
technological literacy standards established content guidelines and benchmarks
for learning across the K-12 spectrum for technology and engineering education
programs in the United States and beyond. The Standards for Technological
Literacy have served as the basis for decision making and educational planning
across a wide spectrum of school programs, districts, state departments of
education, teacher certification exams, and national curriculum development
efforts. The document has been translated into Finnish, Mandarin, Japanese, and
German, and has provided the basis for ITEEA's Engineering by Design (EbD)
curriculum model, which is at the core of professional development efforts for
K-12 technology and engineering teachers across the U.S. and in several other
nations. However, the technologically designed world and the knowledge required
to be productive in it continues to rapidly change. Educational leaders realized
that what students should know and be able to do is different today,
particularly in subjects like technology and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Technology and Engineering Education
Association (ITEEA) and the Council on Technology and Engineering Teacher
Education (CTETE) will convene a Standards for Technological Literacy (STL)
Revision Conference to create an updated standards document, with a target
publication date of early 2020. The STL Revision Conference will build upon
preparatory activities initiated in 2018 by ITEEA and CTETE members to propose
revisions to the Standards. A revision leadership team has been convened, and a
thirty-member review team will be recruited for the conference. The review team
will be comprised of classroom teachers, district or state supervisors, both
two-year and four-year college faculty, and industry representatives. A Draft
Executive Summary of the revised standards document will be posted on the ITEEA
website for public comment, and a final version of the revised standards will be
published and disseminated at the 2020 ITEEA conference and made available on
the website. The revised STL document will be promoted through the Technology
and Engineering Teacher publication as well as other ITEEA news sources and
other STEM-focused outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.