* 1904465
* Collaborative research: Rates and Mechanisms of Biofouling and Mineral Scaling on Zwitterionic Amphiphilic Copolymer Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Ayse Asatekin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 155,966.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry supports Professors Ayse Asatekin from Tufts University, and Yandi Hu
and Debora Rodrigues from University of Houston to investigate mechanisms of
mineral scaling and biofouling on a new family of materials previously
demonstrated to exhibit promising resistance to organic fouling. Fouling, or the
deposition of unwanted materials on surfaces, is a severe problem in many
applications where surfaces are in contact with seawater, affecting ship hulls,
heat exchangers, and membranes. Therefore, there is an urgent need for
developing materials that resist fouling when exposed to various environmental
streams. Fouling can arise from the deposition of various components in water,
including organic compounds, microorganisms, or inorganic minerals. This project
focuses on a new family of materials having exceptional resistance to organic
fouling. The main objective of this research is to determine if these materials
also resist biofouling (i.e. adhesion of microorganisms) and mineral scaling
(i.e. deposition of inorganic salts or minerals), understand how their chemical
structure affects these different types of fouling processes, and eventually
develop design rules for surfaces that resist multiple types of fouling. The
research is conducted by a diverse team of graduate and undergraduate students
in labs with a track record of recruiting and training members of
underrepresented groups, and is incorporated into several university courses and
K-12 outreach activities targeted at girls and underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates processes of biofouling and
mineral scaling on amphiphilic copolymers of zwitterionic and hydrophobic
monomers, termed zwitterionic amphiphilic copolymers (ZACs), which can exhibit
unprecedented resistance to organic fouling. The team is synthesizing ZACs with
a range of monomer chemistries, hydrophobicities, and surface charges. Upon
coating onto substrates, these materials are screened for organic fouling
resistance. Promising ZACs are investigated in terms of the mechanisms and rates
of gypsum scaling and biofouling. Scaling studies employ state-of-the-art
techniques for in situ quantification of the heterogeneous nucleation of gypsum
minerals onto surfaces as well as their aggregation and deposition. This project
also develops a quantitative PCR array approach to identify the microbial
genetic pathways of biofouling on ZAC coated surfaces. At the same time,
advanced microscopic techniques are used to identify the unique properties of
ZACs and connect them with initial microbial cell attachment rates and biofilm
growth rates. Synergistic effects of biofouling and scaling are also considered.
These results are compiled and correlated with ZAC chemistry (zwitterionic and
hydrophobic groups), surface energy, surface charge, and other criteria. This
work is expected to lead to a fundamental understanding of mechanisms and ZAC
surface chemistry properties associated to organic fouling, biofouling, and
scaling. The team's multidisciplinary and complementary expertise enables
rational design of novel advanced materials to allow new scientific and
transformative findings across disciplines of environmental chemistry, chemical
and environmental engineering, environmental microbiology, and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.