* 1904364
* Collaborative Research: Comparative Studies of Pleated beta-Sheet and Rippled beta-Sheet Peptide Nanofibrils
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Cristiano Dias, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 282,492.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Dr. Bradley L. Nilsson from University of
Rochester and Dr. Cristiano Dias from New Jersey Institute of Technology to
study the structure and molecular driving forces promoting the assembly of beta-
sheet peptides. Peptides are naturally occurring biological molecules that are
found in all living organisms. In cells, they perform many biological functions,
for example acting as hormones. Beta-sheets are a common structure found in
peptide assemblies associated with many human diseases, most notable of which is
Alzheimer's disease. In this work, co-assembly of two peptides that are mirror
images of one another is studied using complementary experimental and
computational techniques. These efforts may provide critical insight into the
molecular-scale interactions that dictate the assembly of both natural and
artificial beta-sheets. The this research could simplify and guide efforts to
rationally design and synthesize the next generation of nanomaterials with
peptides that are precisely organized. Outreach activities associated with this
work includes an inquiry based mini-course on hydrogels called "To Gel or Not To
Gel: The Science of Slime" which is conducted at both institutions.
Additionally, the two research teams host high school interns for six weeks
during the summer to provide mentoring and increase interest in scientific
research and chemical sciences in general. This work may provide significant
societal benefits because it has the potential to provide insight into disease
mechanisms that involve beta-sheet self-assembly, such as in Alzheimer's disease
and amyloidosis in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on
obtaining fundamental understanding of the structure and molecular forces
driving the co-assembly of L- and D-peptides sequences into rippled beta-sheet
nanofibrils. This enables the rational design of new peptide sequences that can
form rippled beta-sheet nanofibril systems. In the first objective,
complementary experimental and theoretical methods are used to characterize the
comparative structures of pleated beta-sheet and rippled beta-sheet nanofibrils.
The second objective exploits theory in the computationally-directed assessment
and design of rippled beta-sheet nanofibrils from L- and D-peptide sequences.
The knowledge obtained may be applicable not only to these specific materials,
but also to understanding the role of beta-sheet structures in amyloid self-
assembly and in protein folding in general. This work may provide significant
societal benefits because it has the potential to provide insight into disease
mechanisms that involve beta-sheet self-assembly, such as in Alzheimer's disease
and amyloidosis in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.