* 1904791
* Organoborane Polymers in Catalysis and Supramolecular Materials Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Frieder Jaekle, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 593,719.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Frieder Jaekle of the Department
of Chemistry at Rutgers University-Newark to explore catalytic properties of a
new class of polymers that contain the chemical element boron. Artificial
polymers are plastic materials consisting of many repeating molecules that are
joined together by carbon-carbon bonds. Polymers benefit our society in many
different ways (e.g., light-weight, easy to manufacture, and durable) and so
they have become a part of everyday life. An important goal in the field of
polymer science is to generate plastic materials that can be readily recycled -
and this includes reshaping the materials during heat or pressure treatments.
This work addresses a unique class of polymers associated with boron starting
materials, instead of the usual carbon-based polymers. Boron polymers provide
excellent building blocks for construction of 'smart' materials that change
their original properties when exposed to external stimuli such as light, heat,
pressure or chemical compounds. They may provide plastics that are more
recyclable than current carbon-based materials. The project contributes to the
training of a diverse group of students in a highly interdisciplinary research
environment. Dr. Jaekle and his group participate in high school outreach
activities and efforts at maintaining and expanding access to a polymer and
nanomaterials characterization facility at Rutgers-Newark
(PolyRUN).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is preparing new organoborane
polymers, studying their properties, and pursuing diverse applications. In the
first goal, polymeric Lewis acids and 'frustrated' Lewis pairs (FLPs) are
developed as supported catalysts. Tailor-made and sterically hindered, yet
highly electron-deficient, triarylboranes are modified with polymerizable groups
and subjected to copolymerization with monomers that feature Lewis base groups
and/or substituents that facilitate polymer recovery. The copolymers are
investigated in metal-free catalysis reactions such as hydrogenation and
hydrosilylation of imines, aldehydes and ketones. The second goal of this work
focuses on the preparation of polymers with less sterically hindered
organoboranes as building blocks for supramolecular materials. When combined
with Lewis base-functionalized polymers, these blocks reversibly form classical
Lewis pairs as crosslinks of transient polymer networks. The last goal
concentrates on the mechanochromic and stimuli-responsive properties of
organoborane polymers and the synthesis of B-N analogs of polystyrene (azaborine
polymers). The chemistry in this work is highly transformative with a strong
potential to lead to novel materials with new functions and a breadth of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.