* 1904797
* RUI: Combining Experiments and Simulations to Optimize Biomolecular Ionic Liquids for Protein Stabilization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Chun Wu, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic liquids (ILs) are liquid salts
that could be used as selective protein-stabilization biomaterials if they can
be designed with the right molecular properties. This project will study ILs
based on biological molecules and their effects on a specific protein system.
The system is the azurin-nitrite reductase complex involved in soil bacterial
denitrification. Denitrification is the process of converting nitrate into
atmospheric nitrogen, and usually requires a complex protein system in soil
bacteria. If the azurin-nitrite reductase system can be selectively stabilized
with IL-based biomaterials it can be used for removing nitrate contamination
from polluted environments. The biological molecule-based ILs could be designed
with the right competing molecular interactions for protein stabilization if
these interactions are understood. This project will use experiments to quantify
the effects of ILs on the azurin and nitrite reductase protein structures,
stabilities, and functionalities. Molecular dynamics simulations will attempt to
reproduce the experimental results and thereby uncover the fundamental
interactions between ILs and proteins that are needed for protein stabilization.
The project will use this insight to design new ILs and IL-inspired biomaterials
in an iterative manner. The project will train undergraduate students on a
cross-disciplinary project involving biochemistry, physical chemistry, and
computational simulations. The results will be useful for designing future IL-
based biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic liquids (ILs) have potential applications in
which the right cation-anion combination can selectively stabilize proteins for
industrial and biotechnological applications. Novel biomolecule-based ILs could
be used as versatile biocompatible materials for protein engineering. This RUI
project will combine biophysical spectroscopic experiments with computer
simulations to study ILs with cationic tetramethylguanidinium (TMG) and
different biomolecular anions (e.g., amino acids) and their effects on protein
structures, stabilities, and activities. The competing interactions in TMG-
biomolecule ILs (protein-TMG, anion-protein, and TMG-biomolecule) can be tuned
to destabilize some proteins and stabilize others. The target protein system is
the azurin-nitrite reductase (azurin/NiR) complex involved in denitrification,
which could be stabilized for engineered environmental bioremediation. The
project will quantify the effects of novel TMG-biomolecule ILs interacting with
target proteins to better model and design IL-based biomaterials. The project
will prepare different TMG-based ILs, add ILs to the proteins (expressed and
purified in the lab) in aqueous solution, quantify the effects of the ILs on
protein structures and stabilities using optical spectroscopy and mass
spectrometry techniques, assay enzyme activities in ILs, and use molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations to interpret experimental results and develop models
to predict new ILs for future study. The new ILs and new insights will
potentially advance the current understanding of ILs and IL-based biomaterials
for biotechnology applications, including enzyme modulation, drug delivery,
antibiotic enhancement, biomass processing, and biomaterials self-assembly. The
proposal contains a plan for maximizing the STEM educational impact of the
research project beyond the technical results. This plan will benefit Rowan
University undergraduate students as well as South Jersey high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.