* 1904394
* Collaborative Research: Real-Time Iteration Governor for Constrained Nonlinear Model Predictive Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ilya Kolmanovsky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 06/30/2024
* USD 292,634.00

Model predictive control is considered as a desirable candidate for high
performance control of industrial processes and for safe and efficient operation
of autonomous systems. Despite its remarkable success in the chemical process
control industry, the successful transition of model predictive control into
time-and-safety-critical applications is limited by the computational challenges
faced in its real-time implementation. This research project lays the
theoretical foundations for a new real-time implementation strategy that will
significantly reduce the runtime of model predictive control, increase its
overall reliability, and extend its applicability to the automotive and
aerospace domains.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Traditional model predictive control is
implemented by fully solving an optimal control problem at every time step. This
research project focuses on an alternative scheme where the solution to the
optimal control problem is tracked with a bounded error over multiple time
steps. By treating the numerical solver as a dynamic system that evolves in
parallel to the controlled plant, the project will identify sufficient
conditions for asymptotic stability and constraint satisfaction using Input-to-
State Stability arguments. Recursive stability and constraint satisfaction will
then be ensured by introducing the Real-Time Iteration Governor, which is an
add-on supervision layer that suitably manipulates the reference of the model
predictive controller so that the solution to the optimal control problem can be
tracked with an acceptably small error. These theoretical contributions will be
supplemented by dedicated numerical algorithms and analog circuits that take
full advantage of running at a faster timescale with respect to the rate of
change of the optimal control problem. The proposed framework will also address
nonconvex constraints by using the Real-Time Iteration Governor to progressively
steer the numerical solver away from undesirable local minima. Finally, to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the Real-Time Iteration Governor and its
supporting theory, the proposed framework will be applied to practical
engineering challenges, which include the autonomous navigation of small
spacecraft in close proximity to asteroids, the development of efficient control
algorithms for self-driving cars, and the implementation of constrained
coordination strategies for unmanned aerial vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.