* 1904221
* Quantum Phase Transition in Superconducting Nanowires and Films
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Andrey Rogachev, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical abstract. &lt;br/&gt; When a material or a quantum object is
cooled to ZERO temperature and is acted upon, say by pressure and magnetic
field, it can transform from one state of matter to another, for example, from
ferromagnetic state to non-magnetic state. Such transformations are termed
quantum phase transitions (QPT); they are widespread in nature and,
surprisingly, can have universal behavior in very diverse objects, such as
nuclei, stars, and ordinary materials found on Earth. Still, many important
characteristics of QPTs are not well-understood. The subject of this research,
nanowires and thin films, undergo superconductor – normal metal QPT under the
action of magnetic field or by size reduction. The team carefully studies these
transformations with the goal to uncover both the universal character of QPT,
but also specific microscopic processes that govern the transition in
superconducting systems. Besides posing interesting fundamental questions,
superconducting nanowires have immediate application in detectors used for
astronomical observation and secure quantum communication. The research team
collaborates with Faint Photonics Group of National Institute of Standards and
Technology to improve these detectors and utilize new physical principles in
detectors’ design. On a broader scale, students working on the project receive
excellent training in high precision electrical instrumentation and
nanofabrication. The PI has joined the University of Utah ACCESS Program that
offers approximately 40 freshman female undergraduate students every year an
excellent opportunity in education and research. As a part of that program, the
PI serves as a research advisor to students. The PI and his students serve as
volunteer judges at Utah Science Olympiads and Undergraduate Research
Symposiums. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt; The PI’s
research addresses several outstanding problems in the field of nanoscale
superconductivity and QPT. (i) The experimentally-observed suppression of
critical temperature in superconducting nanowires is 100-times stronger than the
prediction of existing theories. To resolve this problem, the team studies the
effect of geometrical confinement on Tc (by transport measurements), on the
superconducting gap (by tunneling measurement), and the superfluid density (by
kinetic inductance measurements) in series of MoGe and Al nanowires with width
down to 10 nm. The combined body of data is used for a theory revision. (ii) To
uncover microscopic processes governing QPT in nanowires and films, the team
carries out tunneling and transport measurements in the critical regime of
magnetic-field-driven and size-driven transitions in MoGe and Nb films and
wires. One of the goals is to understand how size-induced disorder can act as a
Cooper pair breaker. (iii) A series of nanowires with the intentionally built-in
strong disorder are fabricated with the expectation that they will be dominated
by bosonic processes and display illusive Bose-insulator state. (iv) The team
carries wide-band, high-frequency studies of nanowires to resolve individual
phase slip events and characterize their statistics. These statistics are
expected to reveal interaction between phase slips and “train”
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.