* 1904321
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Institutionalizing Standards in Clinical Genome Editing
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,10/31/2020
* Marion Fourcade, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 10/31/2020
* USD 15,199.00

This project investigates the process by which regulatory guidelines and
standards of practice are developed: How do best practices and standard
operating protocols become institutionalized into formal policies, guidelines
and norms? It does so for the technology of genome editing, specifically for the
case of the DNA editing tool CRISPR and the technological breakthrough it
represents. To address social and ethical implications raised by these
technologies, scientists have convened open conference forums, but academic and
industry scientists largely make decisions about the direction of research, the
standards of efficacy and measurement, and the safety of clinical protocols
behind closed doors. Findings will contribute to the training of scientists and
decision-making concerning science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data concerning
determination of guidelines and standards of practice will be gathered through
interviews, participant observation, and archival research at the Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) of the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and at the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) in the Department of Commerce. The project's methodology builds on the
conventions of laboratory studies by using the extended-case method of
ethnography, which relies on comparative data and multi-site participant
observation to trace decentralized processes. By describing the process by which
regulatory guidelines are produced by stakeholders at strategic sites of
institutionalization, this project contributes to the sociology of science and
technology, organizations and political sociology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.