* 1904701
* Solid-State Oxides and Oxide-Fluorides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kenneth Poeppelmeier, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 988,219.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lasers were discovered in 1960 by
scientists at Bell Laboratories. A year after the initial discovery, a group of
researchers demonstrated that the high electric fields produced by a laser pulse
converted the light passing through a quartz crystal from one color to another
(red to green) via a nonlinear optical (NLO) process called second-harmonic
generation. Since then, NLO materials like quartz have played a key role in
advancing frontiers in laser science. NLO activity and other exciting properties
are allowed in materials where inversion symmetry in broken, which are known as
noncentrosymmetric (NCS) solids. Through this project, which is supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, Prof. Poeppelmeier's group
at Northwestern University advances the understanding how chemistry can be used
to create materials with broken inversion symmetry and connect atomic structure
to properties. A variety of synthetic approaches are used to control the
alignment of the building blocks that make up a crystal structure. Their growth
of large, high-quality crystals of NCS materials enables detailed investigation
of the connection between atomic structure and properties in NCS materials. The
research is carried out by undergraduate and graduate students, who in the
process of this project are trained in state-of-the-art solid state chemistry.
Additionally, the students are encouraged to participate in a myriad of outreach
activities that the PI himself is involved
in.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in laser technology have led to a
significant increase in the application of laser systems in areas ranging from
eye surgery to particle acceleration. Emerging laser technologies require high-
performance materials that can efficiently convert the frequency of laser
radiation through nonlinear optical (NLO) processes, such as second-harmonic
generation and parametric amplification. The NLO properties necessary for
applications in tunable laser systems, as well as other technologically useful
properties such as piezoelectricity, ferroelectricity, and pyroelectricity, are
available in crystalline materials lacking inversion symmetry, known as
noncentrosymmetric (NCS) solids. This project, which is supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, develops targeted synthesis
methods for NCS materials using hydrothermal, solvothermal, and solid-state
methods to control the alignment of anionic basic building units such that
useful properties can be realized. These synthetic efforts are guided by
chemical knowledge as well as machine learning methods that elucidate important
trends from large amounts of experimental data. The growth of large, high-
quality crystals enables structural characterization with single crystal and
powder x-ray diffraction along with NLO and other property measurements to
determine structure-property relationships. Examination of the syntheses,
structures, and properties of NCS materials is expected to lead to discovery of
new NCS materials and new strategies for future NCS materials
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.