* 1904742
* Collaborative Research: Bridging the Gap Between Particle-Scale Thermal Transport and Device-scale Predictions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Jesse Capecelatro, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 239,350.00

Understanding how heat is transported in gas-particle mixtures is critical to
improving the performance, efficiency and reliability of clean energy
technologies and predicting environmental flows. The conversion of coal and
biomass into useful fuel, thermal storage by particulate material, and particle-
based solar receivers, all represent promising technologies that rely heavily on
heat transfer in multiphase systems. Current tools used in industry and academia
rely on simplistic models for average reaction rates as well as heat transfer
coefficients that are known to vary by several orders of magnitude. This project
introduces a new modeling approach that will enable researchers to address the
huge range of challenges associated with heat transfer through gas-particle
mixtures. For a broader educational impact, a toy version of a fluidized bed
will be built with beads sprayed with thermochromic liquid crystals that change
color with temperature. This will be presented at local schools to illustrate
fundamental concepts of fluid-particle interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, researchers from Michigan, Iowa State, and Minnesota collaborate
to develop a new paradigm in multiphase heat transfer modeling. The aim is to
bridge the gap between particle-scale thermal processes and device-scale
predictions. A consistent modeling framework is formulated that scales from a
well-accepted physics-based model to a larger scale of interest. Current
approaches typically ensemble-average data obtained from the microscale physics
directly, without taking into account local variations on scales resolvable by
the simulation framework. The proposed effort will connect the spatially-
averaged, large-scale representation to two-phase statistics obtained from
particle-resolved numerical simulations. A previously overlooked ergodic
consistency requirement will be enforced so that the numerical solution
converges to the ensemble-averaged two-fluid equations in the limit of large
filter width. Model validation will be based on simultaneous multi-camera
imaging at different scales, and a novel application of Voronoi tessellation to
quantify clustering in dense suspensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.