* 1904908
* I-Corps:  Shaker Shield: An Innovative Technology for Inhabitant Protection in High Seismic Risk Areas
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Cheng Zhu, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is its ability
to provide a new paradigm of protection from earthquakes and flash floods
through an inflatable, portable and high-strength shielding device. This
innovative technology can be adopted by various users including individual
property owners, companies, non-profit organizations, and decision makers who
are in the need of seismic and flooding hazard mitigation at regional and global
scales. The inhabitant-centered research and development will enhance hazard
preparedness levels and reduce potential casualties and financial losses. The
commercial impact of this technology is expected to be significant because
existing technologies are prohibitively expensive and less scalable for broader
applications. Technical progress made in the I-Corps program, as well as the
information to be collected through interactions with potential customers,
industrial manufactures, hazard mitigation teams, and hazard assessment
companies, will enable the team to expedite the translation of the proposed
technology to the market. The design, testing and prototyping of the technology
and the manufacturing process will involve training of students at both graduate
and undergraduate levels in a multidisciplinary research and educational
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on a shielding
device that is composed of high-strength proprietary, laminated urethane fabric
and allows rapid deployment to its full capacity in the time frame of seconds
for seismic and flooding hazard mitigation. Inflated units are connected
following specifically designed series and parallel connections to prevent
partial deflection-induced collapse and failure of the shield. Computational
predication and experimental testing of lab-scale shield components with various
geometries and loading scenarios show comparable deformation and stress
responses. The intellectual merit of the project stems from its (a) Creative
dual-functional approach that addresses inhabitant-oriented protection from
seismic and flooding hazards, (b) Application of advanced computational
technologies in shield integrity and performance assessment, (c) High
flexibility in accommodating various constructions types and occupancy densities
with minimum investment, and (d) High potential to create new knowledge
regarding the optimal design and fabrication of inflatable structures for multi-
hazard mitigation. By revealing correlations between physical properties and
system responses, this technology will yield insights into the complexities of
multi-hazard mitigation and fill in existing blanks in the hazard mitigation and
emergency management market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.