* 1904061
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: When Social Isolation Leads to Loneliness
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Long Doan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 15,991.00

In this project, the situational factors that intensify or inhibit feelings of
loneliness while alone are investigated and individual differences (e.g.,
introversion) that modify this process are identified. Despite the significant
effect loneliness can have on health, there is still much that is unknown about
its causes. Specifically, little is known about when social isolation will (and
will not) evoke feelings of loneliness. For example, throughout the day, people
typically move in and out of social isolation--perhaps an individual eats
breakfast with his or her partner and then drives to work, alone. It is unclear
from existing research if we should expect this person to feel any lonelier
during this solitary drive than he or she felt while eating. Identifying the
situational and individual risk-factors for loneliness may have wide-ranging
benefits. This project has the potential to advance national health and welfare
by indicating how people can maximize the benefit of their social behavior, as
well as by strengthening behavioral interventions to reduce feelings of
loneliness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project, data will be collected from
approximately 700 participants sampled from a demographically diverse group of
online workers. Each participant will complete a survey and multiple time
diaries using a web-based platform. In the time diaries, participants will
report about their daily experiences in chunks of time oriented around
"activities" (e.g., sleeping, driving to work, eating lunch) and they will
record other information regarding these blocks of time (e.g., who they were
with and the emotions they experienced). This time diary will capture moments of
social isolation, feelings of loneliness during such isolation, and the
contextual details expected to intensify or inhibit feelings of loneliness. The
importance of these contextual details will be identified via appropriate
statistical analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.