* 1904397
* Exploring the contributions of multiple physical forces towards the self-assembly of complex macroions in solution
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Tianbo Liu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 460,000.00

Many biological molecules, such as proteins and DNA, contain many charged
(ionic) groups of the same kind. A phenomenon observed in these molecules is
that they can associate with each other in water despite the fact that
positively-charge groups repel other positively-charged groups (or negative
charges repel negative charges). Professor Tianbo Liu of the University of Akron
designs and studies complex charged molecules that are large and water-soluble,
and that attract each other even when they carry the same charge (positive or
negative). Through an investigation of how different kinds of inter-molecular
forces cooperate and compete with each other in solution, the Liu group gains a
better understanding of how such ions attract one another. The conclusions are
expected to be applicable to many other solution systems, and instructive for
understanding biological solutions. The project contributes fundamentally to
many science disciplines including physical chemistry, supramolecular chemistry,
biochemistry, and materials sciences. In addition, the ability to manipulate the
strengths and the effects of different inter-molecular forces would enable the
design of novel self-assembled structures for applications in nanotechnology or
biotechnology. This project provides research training to high school,
undergraduate and graduate students, preparing them for further education or
careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Between simple ionic solutions
(e.g., sodium chloride) and the suspensions of bulky colloidal particles, there
exists a region of macroions - nanoscaled soluble ions. Supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program, Professor Liu expands
his research project from the study of purely hydrophilic macroions, dominated
by electrostatic interactions in polar solvents, to more complicated macroions
with other forces (hydrophobic, cation-pi, pi-pi, etc.) also being present. The
cooperation and competition of various intermolecular forces in such macroionic
solutions are expected to demonstrate rich assembly phenomena. There are three
main objectives in this project. First, the project aims to understand the
effect of functionalization of macroions with organic groups on the properties
of such ions in polar solvents. Secondly, dumbbell-shaped macroions with
polymerizable hydrophobic linkers are designed, synthesized, then assembled into
single-layered hollow, spherical "blackberry-like" structures. Polymerization of
the linkers is expected to create stable, porous nanocontainers. Finally, the
effects of aromatic groups on the counterion distribution around the macroions
and how it leads to various controllable assembly structures are
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.