* 1904095
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Religious Expression at Work
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Krista Brumley, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2021
* USD 15,617.00

Member of religious groups sometimes perceive and experience hostility and
discrimination at work. It is important to understand the complexities of such
work experiences because the workplace is a primary setting in which social
group assimilation and integration occur. Work also is the primary vehicle
through which most people realize social opportunity and upward mobility. Some
workers make their religious affiliations visible through clothing and/or other
aspects of personal appearance. This project examines how the visibility of
religious identities affects professional women and men in the workplace. This
project has three goals. First, the project will examine gendered differences in
religious expression within the workplace. Second, it will determine how those
who signify religious expression at work navigate career advancement. Third, it
will explore the strategies such workers use to accommodate/challenge workplace
expectations that may be affected by their religious expression. Findings from
this research will help policy makers and employers create public policy and
constructive workplace practices to address inequalities and discrimination
based upon religious expression at work. As such, findings are relevant to
enforcement of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 that prohibits
discrimination at many workplaces based on characteristics such as race,
religion and sex. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses 60 qualitative
interviews to compare three sets of employees in professional jobs: 20 women who
signify religious affiliation at work, 20 women who do not signify religious
affiliation at work, and 20 men who signify religious affiliation at work.
Respondents will be drawn from a variety of professional fields, and identified
through a combination of personal contacts and snowball sampling. Interview
questions include educational background, age, marital status, average hours
worked, income, and work history. Additional questions will probe for reasons
behind their decisions to either signify or not signify religious identity at
work. Interview data will be subjected to open coding to derive themes present
in the data using NVIVO to manage transcripts and data analysis. Findings will
inform sociological theory related to religious expression at work, as well as
gender differences in workplace treatment among
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.