* 1904071
* Dissecting the Molecular Mechanisms of the Histone Acetyltransferase/Cyclic Adenosine Monophosphate Binding Protein Interactome Using Protein-Observed Fluorine NMR
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* William Pomerantz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 426,000.00

Proteins in biological systems communicate in a type of "chemical braille",
where molecular-scale bumps and grooves of one protein molecule is read by the
physical interaction of another protein. Detailed understanding of the
molecular-level communications of these protein-protein interactions is
necessary to determine the fundamental rules governing both normal and abnormal
cellular function. The ability to both characterize and manipulate these
interactions at the molecular level has proven challenging. The Pomerantz
laboratory at the University of Minnesota works to understanding the chemical
details of protein-protein interactions, with the long-term goal of developing
ways to stop protein-protein communications that result in harmful cellular
functions. To achieve this goal, novel fluorine-based "probe" protein molecules
report on difficult-to-detect protein-protein interactions due to their
intrinsic responsiveness in differing chemical environments. Research efforts
are integrated with educational activities through course-based undergraduate
research experiences (CUREs) designed to increase student success and increase
retention in science-technology-engineering-mathematics career paths. Broadened
impact of the research project occurs through collaborations with Gustavus
Adolphus College, as well as an educational bootcamp that expands undergraduate
student exposure to chemical biology research and mentoring by the Pomerantz
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemistry of Life Process Program in the Division
of Chemistry at the NSF is funding Dr. William Pomerantz from the University of
Minnesota- Twin Cities for development of fluorine nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (NMR) methods for detecting, quantifying, and defining novel modes
of interactions at transcription factor protein-protein interfaces, including
those that involve epigenetic regulatory proteins. The long-term research goals
of the Pomerantz team are to develop chemical tools to probe the biological
roles of transcription factor protein interactions with specific interest in
epigenetic gene regulation. This research combines fluorine-19 NMR approaches
developed in the Pomerantz lab with additional biophysical methods to
characterize native and synthetic ligand binding interactions. This research
provides a detailed understanding of the role of aromatic amino acids involved
in the protein allosteric network for regulating the KIX protein-protein
interaction domain of CREB binding protein (CBP). A recent discovery of the
Pomerantz team is the identification of a new protein interaction site on the
KIX domain targeted by synthetic small molecules. A key fundamental question to
be addressed is the nature of the interaction for other proteins with the newly
discovered small-molecule binding site. The Pomerantz team structurally
characterizes this site by NMR and uses photo-crosslinking and proteomic methods
to evaluate if other proteins occupy this binding site for allosterically
regulating KIX function. They evaluate potential domain-domain interactions when
studied first as separate domains and ultimately the full-length construct. The
research aims are integrated with an educational objective of creating course-
based undergraduate research experiences, which result from authentic
undergraduate chemistry student research experiences afforded by the study of
protein-ligand interactions with fluorine-19 NMR
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.