* 1904865
* Catalytic Protein Bioconjugation with Boronic Acid Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Zachary Ball, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2022
* USD 531,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Zachary Ball from Rice University to investigate new
ways to chemically change the structure, function, and use of natural proteins.
In nature, proteins are built from 22 amino acids and they adopt structures that
have diverse functions. If proteins could adopt structures unknown in natural
biological systems, they may display new functions or new self-assembling
properties. However, the synthesis of new man-made proteins remains challenging.
The project focuses on the synthesis of new starting materials that can control
the man-made protein structure, and thus function. The synthetic methods produce
new, general solutions for understanding protein structure thus, the project
falls under the NSF Big Idea Understanding the Rules of Life. The project
integrates outreach efforts to high school students and teachers. Both groups
learn about, and participate in, chemical research in the Ball laboratories. The
teachers are also given the opportunity to develop new teaching tools that
incorporate chemical research and discovery and thus, ensure the broad
dissemination of the value and excitement of modern chemical research to young
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The selective chemical manipulation of proteins
remains challenging. This project combines transition-metal catalysts with
boronic acid reagents of diverse structure and reactivity to develop a suite of
methods for the photo-controlled capture, manipulation, and regulation of
natural proteins. Variation of the structure of both the metal catalyst and the
boronic acid is a powerful synthetic tool that allows the development of diverse
and complementary bioconjugation methods. The research exploits the unique and
remarkable reactivity of pyroglutamate, which is a naturally-occurring and
readily-encoded posttranslational modification of the N-terminus of some
proteins, in metal-catalyzed reactions with boronic acid reagents. These studies
develop fundamental concepts for single-step construction of complex protein
conjugates and for testing new and useful selectivity
paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.