* 1904847
* Single Particle Spectroscopy and Microscopy of Doped Colloidal Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Todd Krauss, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 473,455.00

Semiconductor nanocrystals are small, crystalline particles that contain only
hundreds to thousands of atoms. At these small sizes, new optical and electronic
properties emerge, which can be adjusted by changing the particle's size and
shape. These properties can also be manipulated by swapping just a few atoms in
the crystal lattice with atoms of another element, or dopant. The precise
control over the number and placement of these dopant atoms within a nanocrystal
is challenging. With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Todd Krauss and his
students at the University of Rochester are using sophisticated microscopy
methods to correlate the number and position of dopants in a single nanocrystal
with their luminescent and electronic properties. Their discoveries could have
important implications for designing nanocrystals used in emerging technologies
that range from solar energy conversion to quantum information systems. The
project is also training the next generation of scientists in the development
and application of advanced experimental physical chemistry methods. The team is
introducing the project research to the public and fostering an enthusiasm for
scientific discovery through outreach efforts at the Rochester Museum and
Science Center and other public venues.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is
developing the detailed understanding of nanocrystal doping and doping
mechanisms needed to synthesize nanocrystals and nanocrystal assemblies with
improved chemical and photophysical properties. Studies of silver cation
(Ag+)-doped cadmium selenide (CdSe) nanocrystals and nanoplatelets are
uncovering the specific chemical mechanisms occurring during the doping process.
State-of-the-art electrostatic force microscopy measurements in combination with
simultaneous measurements of photoluminescence from a single nanocrystal reveal
how impurity atoms change the electronic and optical properties of the intrinsic
nanoparticle. The project is also investigating the optical properties of tin
telluride (SnTe) nanocrystals. This emerging direct-bandgap material could be
used as an environmentally friendly alternative to current materials in
infrared-based technologies. However, the basic properties of the SnTe excited
state (e.g. electronic, excitonic, or plasmonic) remain unknown. Steady-state
and time-resolved spectroscopies are used in conjunction with high-resolution
electron microscopies to correlate photophysical observations with material
composition to develop a detailed picture of the SnTe excited
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.