* 1904236
* Dynamic control and self-assembly of ortho-phenylene foldamers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Christopher Hartley, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 470,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry is funding Dr. C. Scott Hartley from Miami
University to develop molecules that replicate and ultimately complement the
remarkable capabilities of naturally occurring macromolecules. For a very long
time, synthetic chemists have struggled to prepare molecules of comparable size
and complexity to proteins and nucleic acids. It takes the human body anywhere
between 20 seconds to a couple of minutes to make a protein. In contrast,
preparing and assembling hundreds of amino acids into a long chain of the same
protein would take a chemist days to months, if it is even possible at all.
Further, designing new structurally-complex systems based on biochemical
building blocks is extremely challenging. This project avoids tedious synthetic
paths by taking advantage of the assembly of smaller and more-easily prepared
molecules. The results from this award are expected to provide fundamental
answers about the nature, dynamics and interactions between structurally complex
molecules, which are of relevance to developing artificial systems with similar
capabilities to large biological molecules. While the target compounds are not
necessarily chemically equivalent to biomacromolecules, their behavior in
relevant processes such as folding and recognition is similar. The broader
impacts of this work include the development of laboratory modules for
introductory organic chemistry courses, undergraduate involvement in research,
and participation in a consortium of Ohio universities aimed at supporting
underrepresented minority students in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work is focused on the investigation of the dynamic control and self-assembly of
ortho-phenylene foldamers. In developing these foldamers, the capabilities of
biomacromolecules, such as molecular recognition, catalysis, and responsive
behavior (molecular "machinery"), can potentially be replicated, providing
access to complex processes through simple and non-tedious molecular design.
Several studies are carried out in order to achieve this goal, involving the
development of fluorinated o-phenylenes, controlling dynamic systems with
switchable twist and long-range conformational communication, and structure-
property effects for the assembly of twisted macrocycles. The use of fluorine
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy is particularly interesting because this
technique is simple and yet offers an impactful method for elucidating the
folding behavior of these ortho-phenylene systems. Conceptually, this work is
expected to provide fundamental answers in the context of the foldamer field,
conformational dynamics, and the synthesis of complex
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.