* 1904121
* Dead Sea Water Workshop 2019: Separations and transport in nanomaterials and confined nanochannels
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Aleksandr Noy, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2022
* USD 10,200.00

This award will provide partial travel support for 13 U.S.-based postdoctoral
researchers and graduate students to attend the 2019 Dead Sea Water Workshop in
Ein Gide, Israel on February 4-7, 2019. The first offering of this thematic
meeting will be devoted to discussions on recent developments and emerging
trends in nanofluidic phenomena and materials, including separation and
transport phenomena in nanoscale channels and pores. The meeting intends to
achieve three main objectives: (1) to educate students on water scarcity and
current challenges facing society; (2) to disseminate the latest research
results on the physics of transport at the nanoscale; and (3) to grow a research
community concerned with developing and utilizing new materials and phenomena
for next-generation water-purification devices. The discussion-rich format of
the meeting, alongside the engaging lineup of invited speakers, will provide a
vibrant and enriching experience for professional development. The workshop
location provides a unique opportunity for students and scientists to explore an
operating wastewater treatment facility that is actively piloting water reuse
technologies. Additionally, enabling U.S.-based researchers to interact with
Israeli counterparts serves to build and strengthen international research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Dead Sea Workshop organizing committee
is comprised of both American and Israeli researchers, and invited speakers from
the U.S. and Europe feature prominently in the program. The workshop will
feature 10 technical sessions, two poster sessions, an organized pilot facility
tour, and abundant unstructured discussion periods to catalyze new collaborative
relationships and research ideas. The 2019 Dead Sea Water Workshop will focus,
specifically, on the following topics: (1) fundamentals of fluid flow and
confinement on water transport in nanochannels and nanostructures; (2) phase
transitions and equilibria in nanoscale pores and channels; (3) mechanism of ion
transport and ion selectivity in nanoscale pores; (4) theory and modeling
approaches for understanding nanofluidic and electrosorption phenomena; and (5)
carbon and related nanomaterials for novel membrane technologies and
electrochemical separations. The topic of the new meeting is unique amongst
existing conferences and workshops that more broadly focus on membrane science.
Furthermore, the style of the workshop will encourage meaningful interactions
between junior and senior researchers and provides opportunities for in-depth
discussion and professional development. The award of travel subsidies is
expected to attract young, diverse scientists to a meeting they may not
otherwise be able to attend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.