* 1904424
* Quantitative Label-Free Investigations of Biorecognition
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Joel Harris, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 493,450.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Joel Harris and his research group at the University of
Utah are developing a new microscopy technique to investigate the mechanisms of
reactions involving biological molecules employed in therapeutic applications
and clinical diagnostics. The measurements are carried out on surfaces that
mimic the structure of cell membranes, so that the response can be related to
the action of these molecules in biologically- and clinically-relevant systems.
In most investigations of this type, emission of light from a dye label is used
to monitor the reactions of the biological molecules of interest. In some
instances the dye label can interfere with the interactions of interest. The
approach being developed by the Harris group avoids the need for the label, and
therefore the associated complications. The fundamental information derived from
these investigations should advance understanding and development of new
biologically-derived pharmaceuticals (biologics) and more selective clinical
diagnostic assays. The group is also extending the tools to studies related to
cultural heritage science, and communicating the science to a broad audience
through outreach to a local fine arts museum. The program is training graduate
students, undergraduates, and postdoctoral associates in microscopy and
bioanalytical chemistry, topics that are relevant to advancing U.S. science and
technology. Additional science education and outreach comes through development
of Chemistry-under-the-Microscope exercises in undergraduate chemistry
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The measurement innovation in this project is the
application of confocal-Raman microscopy to measure biorecognition reactions
within individual porous particles modified with lipid bilayers. Raman
spectroscopy is a label-free method that can report the structure and
interactions of proteins. A major limitation of Raman is the low sensitivity
resulting from small scattering cross sections. In this work, this limitation is
overcome by enhancing the surface area that can be interrogated within a small
detection volume through use of porous silica particle supports. The internal
surfaces of these particles are modified with lipid bilayers and used as
substrates for investigating biorecognition reactions relevant to protein-lipid
interactions and bioassay applications. With calibration using internal
standards, confocal Raman microscopy can provide both structural information and
assessment of absolute surface coverages for biomolecules involved in
interfacial reactions. This research is generating new understanding of
biomolecule association, stoichiometry, and structure that govern peptide-lipid
membrane interactions and protein biorecognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.