* 1904406
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Low-Level Misdemeanor Courts Regulate Populations
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Becky Pettit, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 15,999.00

In this project, the practices through which misdemeanor courts manage and
regulate populations are investigated. Specifically, this project studies
whether and how the courts may restrict and monitor people and whether that
varies according to people?s social position. It also investigates how
defendants may react to and resist this regulation. This study will contribute
to sociological research on and understanding of social control by focusing in
its examination of misdemeanor justice not on how courts regulate but on those
who are experiencing regulation. Findings from this project promise to better
the general welfare of the population and society by illuminating ways to
improve the delivery of misdemeanor justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, misdemeanor court management and regulation of populations will be
researched through ethnographic methods and interviews. These will include
participant observation of at least 12 misdemeanor courtrooms and interviews
with court defendants, prosecutors, judges, and defense attorneys. Based on
theory and past findings about variables that affect court practices, such as
rural vs. urban settings, the courtrooms in this study will vary by size,
demographics, location, and other features. This will facilitate identifying the
characteristics that best explain courtroom practices and
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.