* 1904527
* CZ RCN: Expanding knowledge of the Earth's Critical Zone: connecting data to models
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Kamini Singha, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,698.00

The "Critical Zone" of the Earth includes the portion of the planet from the
atmosphere through groundwater. Important characteristics of the Critical Zone
are buried within it: how does the ground beneath our feet vary, how has it
developed over time, and, how can we predict changes that may occur across time
and space. Addressing these questions will affect how we manage the projected
increase in demand for food, energy, and water that will accompany the growth in
human population to 9 billion people by 2050. This project is a Research
Coordination Network (RCN) that will bring together scientific expertise and
students to explore these topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
coordination network (RCN) is intended to synthesize data and models to
investigate a key research question: How has the structure of the Critical Zone
evolved in the past and how will it respond to future perturbations resulting
from increasingly intensive human activities? Quantifying the depth of Critical-
Zone processes is important because it connects multiple areas of investigation:
water storage, weathering, biogeochemical fluxes, and societal needs. Coupling
models to data is difficult, since different research domains define the
Critical Zone by changes in conditions that are hard to reconcile. Quantifying
the gradient in properties that may define the lower boundary of the Critical
Zone requires an injection of new ideas, methods, and people from across
disciplines. This RCN is built around the following four topics: 1) synthesis
efforts that help guide the coming decade of research on Critical-Zone
architecture; 2) exploration of a diverse set of complimentary approaches for
identifying the lower boundary of the Critical Zone and its influence on
processes; 3) training of scientists in multidisciplinary data collection and
modeling approaches; and 4) pathways to develop the next generation of Critical-
Zone models. This RCN will involve at least 100 scientists, including early-
career faculty, postdoctoral associates, and graduate students. Participants
will be recruited from underrepresented ethnic, socio-economic, ability, and
sexual identity groups. In addition to large and small meetings of the
participants, this RCN will offer workshops at annual meetings and through
webinars that focus on networking, diversifying research skills, and proposal
development that will benefit a wider cross-section of early-career
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.