* 1904385
* Symmetry Breaking in Non-Hermitian Plasmonic Lattices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* George Schatz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2023
* USD 619,896.00

The Nobel Prize in Physics in 2016 was awarded to David J. Thouless, F. Duncan
M. Haldane, and J. Michael Kosterlitz for theoretical discoveries of topological
phase transitions and topological phases of matter. The term topology here
refers to a property that remains intact when an object is stretched, twisted,
or deformed. Topological materials that have previously been developed include
topological insulators and topological photonic materials; such materials have
potential to transform next-generation electronics and computers. The proposed
experimental and theoretical work will focus on realizing topological plasmonic
materials involving arrays of metal particles that may offer unprecedented
functionality in a range of optoelectronic devices. Outreach efforts will
integrate nanophotonics research advances into the classroom for freshman
students and working with national organizations to promote science based on
personal stories and public writing pieces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological
photonics is an emerging area for realizing symmetry-protected properties at
infrared and microwave wavelengths based on dielectric and magnetic materials
but has had little connection to plasmonic materials. Hence, the effects of
losses on properties such as topologically protected edges states are unknown.
Moreover, recent advances in photonics theory suggest that such technologically
interesting optical modes could be possible, and a major focus of this project
is to determine whether topological edge states can be predicted using non-
Hermitian models and realized experimentally in hybrid plasmonic lattices at
visible wavelengths. The objectives include: (1) fabricating topological
lattices based on deformed honeycomb lattices and investigating optical modes
using non-Hermitian models and electrodynamics calculations that include higher
multipoles; (2) realizing mechanically tunable topological lattices and
establishing effects of distortions on switchable properties between trivial and
topological states; (3) testing whether nanoparticle clusters that exhibit
magnetic plasmon responses can support topological states; and (4) investigating
whether plasmonic lattices with patterned regions of gain and tunable coupling
strength can break parity-time symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.