* 1904518
* Controlling silicone polyHIPE materials properties with triblock copolymer surfactants: A route to bottom-up synthesis of metamaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Neil Ayres, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 340,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metamaterials are human-made
materials that possess extraordinary physical properties and have been proposed
for use as sound barriers, creating super-lenses of remarkable resolution,
making invisibility cloaks, and other emerging areas. The objective of this
research is to generate new, tailorable, metamaterials in ways that can be
easily scaled up and do not rely on complex and expensive approaches.
Specifically, this work will produce porous polysilicone materials and generate
fundamental understanding of how the structure of polymers used to prepare the
porous materials can control their performance as soft metamaterials. In
addition to the expected positive impact on metamaterials research, the findings
from this work will also benefit scientists studying porous materials used for
biomedical and regenerative medicine applications and new silicone materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is also a great need for a diverse, globally engaged
U.S. workforce possessing world-class skills. This workforce is expected to
enhance U.S. leadership in research and education and strengthen national
economic competitiveness. The activities in this proposal will include
international collaborative research opportunities between the University of
Cincinnati and the University of Bordeaux. This will include a trip to France
for two undergraduate students from the University of Cincinnati to participate
in hands-on research experiences with experts on metamaterials. The
effectiveness of the international experiences will be evaluated each year and
the results disseminated though conference presentations and scientific
papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fabrication of metamaterials is largely
achieved by top-down lithography approaches, which are difficult to scale-up.
Alternatively, a bottom-up strategy to make optical and acoustic metamaterials
is possible using silicone polymerized high-internal-phase emulsions
(polyHIPEs). The objective of this research is to generate new, tailorable,
metamaterials. The central hypothesis tested in this project is that the
structure and functionality of block copolymer surfactants control the stability
and properties of water-in-silicone emulsions and thus the resulting polyHIPEs,
and hence the final metamaterials properties. The central hypothesis will be
tested by pursuing the following specific aims: Aim 1: Determine how the
porosity, storage moduli, and damping of silicone polyHIPEs control the speed of
sound within the material as a result of the structure of water-in-silicone
emulsions. Aim 2: Prepare polymer cross-linkers as surfactants for water-in-
silicone emulsions to maintain porosity and compressibility of silicone
polyHIPEs and stabilize gold nanoparticles within the polyHIPE. Accomplishment
of these Aims is expected to establish how amphiphilic block polymer surfactant
chemistry can be used to prepare new porous silicone polyHIPE materials. This is
timely and important, as it could afford tunable, simple, and relatively cheap
acoustic metamaterials for applications in imaging, cloaking, and long-
wavelength noise reduction. The graduate and undergraduate students engaged in
this research will be trained in polymer chemistry, materials synthesis and
characterization, and will participate in international collaborative
research.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.