* 1904164
* Shear Strength and Phase Transformations in Transition Metals and their Diborides under Terapascal Pressures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 382,563.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition metals (such as iron,
manganese, copper and lesser known elements rhenium and osmium) and their alloys
are widely used in aerospace, biomedical, and nuclear industries while
transition metal diborides (one atom transition metal and 2 atoms of boron) have
potential applications as high-strength structural materials under extreme
conditions of stress, temperature, and corrosive environments. The application
of high pressure on transition metals and their diborides is expected to yield
novel structural modifications with desirable mechanical properties. The phase
transformation studies and shear strength measurements on materials under high-
pressures will be carried out using an innovative diamond anvil technology
coupled to an x-ray synchrotron source. The computational calculations will use
the state-of-the-art supercomputing facilities to predict stable crystal
structures and their elastic properties and shear strength. This study will map
out the crystalline phases and their shear strength with varying pressure with a
goal of novel material synthesis that can be retained at ambient conditions for
industrial applications. The project participants will receive extensive
research and curriculum training in computational materials research and at the
premier national facilities employing x-ray synchrotron radiation leading to a
pipeline of trained scientific workforce in academia, national laboratories and
industry. University of Alabama at Birmingham in partnership with the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities in the southeastern region will
jointly undertake efforts in broadening participation of underrepresented groups
at all levels in the science and engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of phase transformations and shear strength
measurements under high-pressures not only provides key-insights into mechanical
properties under pressure but also provides a pathway to synthesizing novel
materials under extreme conditions. The study of materials under extreme
conditions has seen rapid progress recently with the attainment of near
Terapascal (1 TPa = 1000 GPa) static pressures using toroidal single crystal
diamond anvils and by employing two-stage nanocrystalline diamond micro-anvils.
In addition, density functional theory has been applied to compute stable
crystal structures and their elastic constants at high pressure for direct
comparison with the experimental data on elastic moduli and shear strength under
ultrahigh pressures. University of Alabama at Birmingham will perform phase
transformations and shear strength measurements on rhenium (Re), osmium (Os),
and their diborides ReB2 and OsB2 under both hydrostatic (helium pressure
medium) and non-hydrostatic (no pressure medium) conditions. The ReB2 and OsB2
have high hardness values at ambient conditions in the range of 22-37 GPa and
their shear strength variation with pressure is of considerable interest. The
TPa pressure range is expected to cause significant electron transfer within the
conduction band and possibly cause core-overlap leading to novel structural
modifications with desirable mechanical properties. This study would provide
crystal structure data and shear strength data for this unique electronic state
of transition metals and their diborides under extreme conditions for direct
comparison with the density functional calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.