* 1904325
* Charge Transfer in Oxide Semiconductors from a Defect's Point of View
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Mary Ellen Zvanut, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 413,508.00

Nontechnical description: All of today's electronic gadgets, from cell phones to
LEDs, are based on a class of materials called semiconductors. From single
element materials like Si, which initiated the computer revolution, to multi-
element materials like GaN, which ushered in the lighting revolution,
semiconductors form the heart of electronic technology today. A subset of
electronic materials known as oxide semiconductors have traditionally been used
as gas sensors and optical windows. However, recent studies demonstrate the
potential of oxides for electronic device applications as well. For instance,
they can relatively easily be made into large sized crystals, a key factor for
bulk device manufacturing. On the other hand, controlling the conductivity,
which is essential for a successful electronic material, is not so easy.
Therefore, the bulk of the research activities focus on investigating the source
and mechanisms of the conductivity inherent to the potentially exciting family
of oxide semiconductors. In part, the high conductivity of as-grown oxides
crystals is determined by various types of defects. Better understanding of the
nature, evolution and interaction of the defects in these materials, help
determine the appropriate steps needed to control the defects and, therefore,
the resulting conductivity. By participating in this research, undergraduate and
graduate students benefit from long-time collaboration with experts in the field
located at, for instance, the Naval Research Laboratory and various industrial
manufacturing facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The
relationship between the conductivity of as-grown oxide semiconductors and the
numerous defects plaguing the material is an ongoing debate. The research
project aims to minimize the debate by investigating the oxides utilizing a
technique which can simultaneously identify the defects and their effect on
conductivity. Specifically, the work investigates the link between charge
transfer among point defects and the inherent conductivity in a subset of oxide
semiconductors most pertinent to electronic applications, i.e. tin oxide, indium
oxide and gallium oxide. The method employed, time-dependent photo-induced
electron paramagnetic resonance (photo-EPR), combines the power of magnetic
resonance with time evolution of an optical response to monitor charge transfer
among defects uniquely identified by EPR. The analysis of the time-dependent
data depends on a model developed from knowledge of the various impurities in
the material as well as the crystal structure. Therefore, samples are
characterized with techniques such as secondary ion mass spectrometry for
impurity content and x-ray diffraction for crystal structure. Armed with the
basic information provided by the characterization techniques, a unique model is
developed and the EPR data are interpreted in terms of charge transfer
parameters such as defect levels and thermal barriers. Significantly, because
time-dependent photo-EPR probes a specific defect, the parameters may be
directly assigned to that specific defect. Thus, the ultimate outcome of the
work is the association of an identified defect with charge transfer parameters
unique to that defect. The knowledge obtained is then used to tune growth
conditions for desired conductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.