* 1904171
* I-Corps Teams:  Opto-plasmonic Photodetectors for Low-Cost Tele/Data Communications Beyond 5G
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Bahram Nabet, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potentials of this I-Corps project include
realization of ultra-fast optical receivers for applications in tele and data
communication networks and centers both as in backbone infrastructure, and in
end-user usage. This project provides unique technological advancements that
circumvent traditional limits in speed of operation and in energy usage by
taming the collective response of clouds of electrons in response to excitation
- known as opto-plasmonic devices (OPD) - resulting in much more sensitive, high
speed, and low power-consumption devices which convert optical signals to
electrical ones, performing a crucial step in information transport. This
reduces the energy cost-per-bit of information, helping Photonics Integrated
Circuit (PIC) technology to become mainstream for general public use in
applications such as in affordable ultra-high-speed Internet, high-capacity
Internet-of-Things (IoT), and energy-saving cloud data storage and processing.
Notably, this project contributes to the technological leadership of the US in
the multi-billion dollar global communications markets, by generating advanced
technical know-how and intellectual property, holding the key in manufacturing
of new OPDs. Successful completion of this project results in a business
opportunity for several sustainable jobs for electrical and optical engineers
with potential for exponential growth in line with increasing demand for data
communication.

This I-Corps project produces market-ready high-speed photodetector technology
based on Indium Phosphide material system that are i) capable of operation in
tele/data communication rates of more than 200 Gbits/sec, which is six times
faster than state-of-the-art, and ii) compatible with Silicon Photonics
technology through a heterogeneous integration with silicon. Specifically, this
product solves a bottleneck in high-speed operation of Silicon Photonics
Integrated Circuits that rely on Germanium-based photodetectors as their optical
receiver. For this product to be commercially ready, research and development
plan includes major milestones of a) producing a stand-alone side-illuminated
InP-based high speed photodetector compatible with optical communication
wavelengths, and b) integration of the developed InP-based optical receiver into
a Si-Photonics integrated circuit. Prototyping work will be done using NSF-
supporting fabrication facilities, but volume production feasibility will be
demonstrated by utilizing a fab-less model and using existing silicon foundry
services across the United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.