* 1904768
* Sustainable Polymers from Native Silicon
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Stephen Miller, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 563,813.00

With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Stephen A. Miller of University of Florida
is building sustainable polymers from silica (silicon oxide and sand) and
organic molecules derived from renewable biomass feedstocks. Commodity plastics
in today's society are largely derived from fossil fuels and contain as much as
80 percent of carbon. This is inconsistent with the elemental composition of
earth's crust which contains only 0.02 percent carbon. This work focuses on the
use of silica, which comprises nearly 60 percent of the terrestrial environment,
to prepare large-scale polymers. Targeted polymerization strategies include
multiple additions of silicon/oxygen based building blocks to form extended
polymer chains with the content of silicon and oxygen ranging between 38 and 60
percent. This novel class of polymers yields materials with new properties and
provides opportunities for tuning these polymers toward easy environmental
degradation. The research associated with this award provides a solid training
ground for the next generation of scientists. The project prepares the students
for a world which follows the principles of sustainability. This research
embraces various sustainability metrics. The inclusion of inexpensive silica
into commodity plastics could accelerate the growth of sustainable polymers and
widen the variety of materials applications. Professor Miller and his research
team continue their strong commitment to training and mentoring of undergraduate
students, many of whom are members of underrepresented groups in chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the direct conversion of native
silica and biobased diols to discrete alkylorthosilicate monomers. The silica
depolymerization strategy specifically avoids costly redox chemistry and is
optimized with improved phase transfer catalysts, in combination with elevated
temperature, microwaves, or sonication. Direct monomer polymerization or
alkylorthosilicate metathesis polymerization (ASMP) renders polyesters,
polycarbonates, polyacetals, polyamides, and polyimides with a silicon+oxygen
content ranging between 38 and 60 percent. Preparation and characterization of
these novel polyalkylorthosilicates reveal insight into fundamental polymer
structure/property relationships, along with improved understanding of how to
manipulate the silicon-oxygen bond, which is enigmatic despite its ubiquity in
the earth's crust. The synthesized polyalkylorthosilicates possess new material
properties, including those impacted by the very strong silicon-oxygen bond.
Additionally, confining the silicon-oxygen bond to a ring is expected to improve
the glass transition temperature into the range of high-temperature packaging
plastics. While molecular alkylorthosilicates are hydrolyzed over the course of
hours, the hydrolysis of this functional group embedded in relatively
hydrophobic polymers is predicted to be slower and tunable. Systematic studies
associated with rates, pathways, and degradation products during
polyalkylorthosilicate hydrolysis could enable facile environmental
degradation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.