* 1904793
* Collaborative Research: Atomic-Scale Hybrids, Tuning the IR Dielectric Function through Superlattice Design
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Joshua Caldwell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2022
* USD 241,451.00

Non-Technical Description: The infrared spectral range offers a wealth of
technological opportunities, including thermal imaging, ability to see through
dust or clouds, chemical identification for medical diagnostics and hazard
identification, to name a few. Unlike the visible spectral range where materials
such as glass provide exceptionally high performance at extremely low cost, the
infrared optical components are typically sensitive to water, opaque in the
visible, expensive and/or brittle. Thus, identifying alternative materials or
material platforms that can provide the basis of next generation infrared optics
and light sources is highly desired. Within the infrared, many polar materials,
such as silicon carbide, exhibit crystal vibrations that can be excited using
light. This provides opportunities to compress long-wavelength infrared light to
nanometer scale lengths, offering the potential to significantly reduce the size
of infrared optics. However, these crystal vibrations are material specific and
thus, finding the right material in the desired infrared frequency range is
challenging. This project investigates novel hybrid materials composed of
altering stacking thin layers with potential to modify their crystal vibrations
in an effort to change its corresponding infrared properties. The collaborative
research seeks to understand how these vibrations are influenced when the layer
thickness is reduced to atom-scale thicknesses, and involves a multidisciplinary
team of a material scientist, physicist and mechanical engineer to aid in
realizing designer infrared materials deemed 'crystalline hybrids'. The project
trains graduate and undergraduate students in semiconductor growth, infrared
spectroscopy and characterization and theoretical descriptions of complex
solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project seeks to
develop a new class of materials called Crystalline Hybrids (XHs) that offers
the promise for realizing user-defined infrared (IR) optical materials. These
novel materials can serve as the basis of next generation IR optical components,
sources and detector elements. A primary research goal of this collaborative
program is to discover theory-guided principles for the rational design of XHs
to meet a given application space. The XH approach seeks to modify polar optic
phonons within atomically thin layers comprising a multilayered superlattice.
Within these structures, the layer thicknesses will be less than the phonon
mean-free-path, resulting in quantum confinement and frequency tuning of the
vibrational state. Furthermore, the modified bonding at the multiple interfaces
within the superlattice structures introduce new interfacial phonons. These
modified phonon properties directly influence the infrared response of the
material, as it is optic phonons that dominate the IR behavior of polar
crystals. The research is focused on superlattices comprised of the near-lattice
matched III-V semiconductors InAs, GaSb and AlSb, which eliminate external
effects like strain and allow well-controlled experiments to be performed. The
project involves a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students who are
trained in the basics of semiconductor growth, IR spectroscopy, theory and
first-principles calculations of nanomaterials, enabling them to work at the
frontiers of nanophotonics research. The collaboration between material
scientists, physicists and engineers broadens the impact of this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.