* 1904966
* Engineering Catalyst Materials for Carbon Utilization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Feng Jiao, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 350,168.00

Combustion of fossil fuels produces carbon dioxide - a greenhouse gas having
little commercial value. Catalyzed electrochemical processes (electrocatalysis)
offer an opportunity to upgrade carbon dioxide to commercially important fuels
or chemical precursors. Copper stands out as an electrocatalyst for its ability
to convert carbon dioxide (and carbon monoxide) into chemical compounds that
contain several carbon atoms. This research project will build upon the
preliminary discovery that copper nanoparticles having a sheet-like structures
can efficiently promote the electrocatalytic reaction of carbon monoxide with
water to produce acetate ions. The studies will aim to refine the technique for
synthesizing copper nanosheet particles and investigate additional modifications
to the catalysts to improve their efficiency and selectivity for converting
carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide to a range of valuable chemicals. Efficient
conversions of greenhouse gases to useful chemicals will help to address key
sustainability and environmental challenges facing our nation. The research
project will also include educational and outreach activities in collaboration
with Delaware State University that will broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM, especially female and African American
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upgrading carbon dioxide to high-value multi-
carbon (C2+) products is one promising avenue for sustainable fuel and feedstock
production. Current state-of-the-art carbon dioxide electrocatalysts are able to
convert carbon dioxide to C1 products, such as carbon monoxide and formate ions,
with selectivities greater than 80%. There is a need for electrocatalysts that
can reduce carbon dioxide to more valuable multi-carbon chemicals with
appreciable selectivity. Among all the metals, copper attracts most attention
for this application due to its unique capability to produce a wide range of C2+
chemicals; however, such reactions suffer from poor selectivity. In order to
improve catalytic properties of copper, numerous attempts have been made to
control the morphology and structure of copper catalysts. Still the challenge
remains that it is technically challenging to prepare high-quality copper
nanomaterials that selectively expose specific facet(s). In preliminary studies,
the research team has successfully synthesized freestanding triangular
(111)-exposing copper nanosheets, and these materials are able to
electrochemically convert carbon monoxide into acetate ions with a Faradaic
efficiency of approximately 48%. The high observed acetate selectivity is
presumably due to the unique capability of the copper(111) facet to promote
acetate formation under the reaction conditions. The objectives of this research
project encompass three main thrusts: 1) establish a new synthetic route to
obtain high-quality copper(111) and copper(100) nanoscale materials, 2)
construct copper / metal oxide interfaces and single-atom sites based on the
copper model surfaces to understand carbon dioxide / carbon monoxide reduction
reaction mechanisms, and 3) investigate the stability of the synthesized
catalysts under electrochemical reaction conditions. The outcomes of these
efforts will (1) lead to new synthetic methods that can produce high-quality
copper nanostructures with well-defined exposed facets; (2) provide an
electrochemical approach to produce high-value multi-carbon chemicals using
carbon dioxide as the feedstock; (3) advance fundamental understandings of
structure-property relationships in copper-based electrocatalysts; (4) gain
important mechanistic insights into copper-catalyzed carbon dioxide / carbon
monoxide reduction reactions; and (5) demonstrate a catalyst design strategy
that might be extended to other important chemical reactions, such as dinitrogen
reduction to ammonia and methane partial oxidation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.