* 1904041
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Residential Outcomes for Families Receiving Housing Assistance
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Kyle Crowder, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 15,998.00

This study centers on a vital issue facing U.S. society today: how families use
limited financial resources to find and maintain suitable housing in desirable
neighborhoods when affordable housing is in short supply. This is important
since where people live matters for their health, education, and other outcomes.
Yet, affordable housing has arguably become less accessible over the past
several decades, as housing costs have risen substantially more than incomes.
This project tests emerging theories that emphasize that how households search
for new housing is both important for residential outcomes and influenced by the
conditions of where we have lived and our experiences there, the input and
location of our social networks, and our preferences, ideals, and expectations
for when and where to move. This study elucidates the links between past
residential and social conditions, residential preferences, expectations and
ideals (psychosocial factors), the housing search, and current residence.
Findings from this work will facilitate decisions that broaden access to homes
that meet residents' needs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project examines the
relationships among residential dynamics for Housing Choice Voucher program
participants living with children in a particular county. It employs information
from 50-55 qualitative in-depth interviews, longitudinal administrative data
from two local public housing authorities, and tract-level data from the U.S.
Census Bureau and a regional council. Interviews provide insight into
householders' residential histories, social networks, residential psychosocial
factors, housing search processes, and residential satisfaction. Quantitative
data offer additional background information to assess residential outcomes from
before and after a move, according to commonly used measures of household and
neighborhood socioeconomic context. Using the combination of qualitative and
quantitative data facilitates the comparison of outcomes according to standard
socioeconomic measures and participants' reported residential
satisfaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.