* 1904437
* Instrument Development: In Operando Capability for Benchtop X-ray Emission Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Gerald Seidler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 377,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging program, and partial
co-funding from the Chemical Catalysis program, Professors Seidler and Cossairt
of the University of Washington are working to develop a new x-ray spectrometer
to enable studies of chemical systems in special sample environments.
Specifically, they are developing analysis tools for characterization of
materials actively involved in chemical reactions, such as during the synthesis
of fuels from simple and abundant starting chemical species like water and
carbon dioxide. Their work will greatly expand access to x-ray spectrometry by
providing alternatives to specialized, large-scale light sources known as
synchrotrons. Significant educational benefits derive from creating a
multidisciplinary environment for the students involved and by incorporating
advanced x-ray spectroscopy into senior-level laboratory courses in both Physics
and Chemistry at the University of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray
absorption fine structure (XAFS) and high-resolution x-ray emission spectroscopy
(XES) are two advanced x-ray spectroscopies that have high impact across
chemistry, materials science, environmental science, geophysics, and several
other fields. However, their range of application is constrained by their
general reliance on synchrotron x-ray light sources. Professors Seidler and
Cossairt are developing a new lab-based spectrometer and source that can easily
couple to special sample environments, such as an electrocatalytic cell. By
enabling operando XES in the laboratory, this will pave the way for real-time
studies of element-specific electronic structure of reactants and intermediates
in many different types of chemical reactions, without a need for synchrotron
beamtime. Information gained from these operando studies will provide new
insight into the nature of element speciation during electrocatalytic processes,
providing deeper knowledge of the mechanisms by which fuel-forming reactions
occur and how catalytic sites might be altered to improve reaction trajectories
in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.