* 1904166
* CDS&amp;E: Adaptive Learning for Multivariate Calibration with Big Data Attributes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* John Kalivas, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Chemistry
Division, and partial co-funding from the Office of Investigative and Forensic
Sciences in the National Institute of Justice, Professor John Kalivas and his
group at Idaho State University are developing new methods of data analysis with
the target of solving complex calibration problems. Calibration is a
multidisciplinary problem. In chemistry it involves forming a mathematical
relationship between measured electronic signals derived from instrumental
measurements and information of interest in a sample, such as the nitrogen
content of plant leaves, percent fat in beef, or the blood glucose level. With
the growth of the amount of generated and shared data, there is a need for a
paradigm shift in calibration methods. The Kalivas group is devising means to
exploit historical calibration data to improve the utility of new chemical
measurements. A strategic feature of the approach is the development of new
mathematical tools enabling adaptation of field-based measurements to new
conditions and sample types without complex laboratory analyses, thereby
reducing analysis time and costs. Through participation in this work,
undergraduates from Idaho State University are learning state-of-the-art
calibration methods and becoming proficient at scientific research, including
dissemination. Because of the multidisciplinary nature of the project, outcomes
directly benefit industry and society with efficient algorithms for rapid and
accurate analysis of samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project exploits the
increasing availability of spectral databases to develop completely new
computational processes and accompany algorithms to address the growing need for
improved and simplified multivariate calibration. The fundamentals of the
inherent chemical and physical molecular interactions responsible for the
measured signal are considered along with instrument-specific issues
(conditions) to create new self- and cross-modeling data mining tools. Unlike
conventional global and local modeling, the method does not require optimization
of any tuning parameters. Additionally, reference values are not needed for
target sample conditions; the method is therefore considered to be semi-
supervised learning. A key goal of the project is to advance multivariate
calibration to a "big-data" level, developing efficient algorithms to reveal
useful information. Using reference databases, the data-mining algorithms
identify samples best matrix-matched to new samples (one or many). Results from
this project will advance multivariate calibration in a range of applications,
including process analytical technology for the pharmaceutical and chemical
industries, environmental and agriculture monitoring, and medical diagnostics.
With the improvements contributed by this project, these fields will be better
able to form and sustain calibrations on site, removing the need for complex
chemical analysis. All developed algorithms will be posted to the Kalivas web
site, allowing free access to potential users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.