* 1904887
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Tuning the Molecular Arrangement and Charge Storage Properties of Textured Graphene-Ionic Liquid Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* James Batteas, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2023
* USD 217,172.00

Non-technical summary &lt;br/&gt;With the ever-increasing need for electrical
power on demand, next generation energy storage devices (batteries and
supercapacitors) must be designed that can support higher energy densities than
current technologies. Therefore, new electrolyte and electrode materials must be
explored that allow for higher electrolyte packing densities. To improve
electrode/electrolyte interfaces, this project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, seeks
to understand how the structure of ionic liquids and their arrangement at
electrode interfaces may be tuned by precisely controlling electrode geometry on
the nanoscale. Single-layer graphene, a carbon-based material, just one-atom
thick, which can function as a conductive electrode that is highly flexible, is
used to created textured electrodes for this study. The research team
investigates the influence of the electrode morphology on the organization of
the ionic liquid electrolyte and how it impacts charge storage. In addition to
exploring these fundamental science questions, this project supports the
education and training of undergraduate and graduate students from diverse
backgrounds, at the intersection of materials and surface science, contributing
to the development of the energy sector work force in the U.S., by training
students in cross-cutting research in a coordinated collaborative environment
between the labs of the principle investigators at UIUC and TAMU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;With this grant, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, the principle investigators (Espinosa-Marzal at UIUC and
Batteas at TAMU) test the fundamental hypothesis that by controlling surface
morphology and substrate-induced charge doping, along with the chemical
composition of the ionic liquids, the local packing density of the liquid on
graphene can be precisely modulated. This in turn is expected to afford better
control over their charge storage properties. To fill the outlined knowledge
gap, the team pursues three major lines of research. New methods to prepare
graphene surfaces with precisely controlled charge doping and morphology from
the atomic to the nanoscale are developed. In addition, the effects of substrate
morphology and charge doping on the interfacial structure of ionic liquids and
on the characteristics of the electrical double layer are investigated by Atomic
Force Microscopy in an electrochemical cell. Furthermore, local and global
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy are used to relate the electrical double
layer to the differential capacitance of the textured interfaces. These studies
allow determining the relative contributions of graphene roughness, charge
doping and ionic liquid composition on the electrical double layer and its
capacitance. The knowledge gained from this project is expected to enable
control of the interfacial assembly of the liquids and stored charge through the
modulation of the graphene texture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.