* 1904962
* Lewis Pair Polymerization: Controlling Polymer Tacticity and Topology
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Eugene Chen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 09/30/2023
* USD 664,250.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Eugene Y. Chen of the Department
of Chemistry at Colorado State University is developing new synthetic routes for
the construction of industrially-important stereoregular polymeric materials.
Stereochemistry is an essential aspect of chemistry that generally focuses on
compounds in which carbon atoms are attached to four different groups. The
specific arrangement of the groups on a carbon gives rise to mirror images that
cannot be superimposed; These mirror images are called chiral molecules and they
occur in pairs. [Notably, human hands are also chiral because the left hand is a
mirror image of the right hand, but one cannot turn or move one of the hands to
look exactly the same as the other.] Chirality is property that dictates
biological, thermal and mechanical properties of compounds or materials. In the
case of polymers, which are large molecules made by linking a large number of
carbons together, the number of chiral possibilities can be very large. For
example, in a relatively small polymer consisting of only 30 carbon atoms, the
maximum number of unique chiral configurations is estimated at a billion. This
research develops sophisticated methodologies that control and fine tune the
number of chiral outcomes during the preparation of polymers, yielding a
completely new and previously unexplored class of plastic materials. The
activities associated with this award increase broadening participation and
enable training of undergraduate and graduate students in the industrially-
important field of polymer chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, a next
generation Lewis pair polymerization (LLP) system is developed that can control
the stereochemical outcomes and topologies of the resulting polymers, thereby
enabling facile access to advanced polymeric materials with different
tacticities or stereomicrostructures and cyclic topological structures. LLP
methodology relies on an interacting or frustrated Lewis pair (LP) and exploits
the synergy and cooperativity between the Lewis acidic and basic sites of LPs to
effect cooperative monomer activation as well as chain initiation, propagation,
termination and transfer events. The research includes synthetic, catalytic and
mechanistic approaches, coupled with synergistic theoretical and computational
methods. Investigated monomers include industrially-important polar vinyl
monomers and crotonic esters. The latter monomers provide access to unique
ditactic polymers which are currently unobtainable by other synthetic methods.
Additionally, topological and stereochemical control in the LPP of acrylic
monomers enables selective synthesis of cyclic acrylic polymers in chiral
helical or achiral forms. The research in this work is highly innovative and
transformative with the potential to significantly impact not only the field of
polymer chemistry, but also synthetic organic chemistry and catalysis in
general. Through carefully designed and planned activities, the research team
provides tangible solutions to the control of tacticity, which has been
traditionally one of the main weaknesses in modern synthetic polymer
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.