* 1904558
* Orthogonal Crosslinking for Protein Stabilization and Cytosolic Delivery
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,09/30/2023
* Qing Lin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 09/30/2023
* USD 426,000.00

Large quantities of proteins can readily be produced from bacteria and,
therefore, represent a sustainable source of biological catalysts and
therapeutics. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Qing Lin from the State University of New York
at Buffalo to develop a chemical modification to proteins that, when used with
light, increases their stability and their ability to enter cells. This chemical
biology strategy enables the design of protein-based catalysts with increased
resistance to structural disruptions from heat and chemicals. In addition, this
new modification enables the development of cell-penetrating small proteins
derived from antibodies (called nanobodies) for the diagnosis and treatment of
disease. The project provides interdisciplinary research opportunities to
undergraduate students, including some from the groups underrepresented in STEM
fields, through collaborations with the New York State Collegiate Science and
Technology Entry Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Site-specific incorporation of a
2-aryl-5-carboxytetrazole (ACT) linked amino acid into a protein allows the
creation of head-to-tail circular proteins through intramolecular photo-
crosslinking with a proximal nucleophilic residue. ACT-based orthogonal inter-
strand crosslinking is also explored in this project for the synthesis of
nanobodies that display positively charged surfaces to enhance cell-penetration.
The crosslinking efficiency and selectivity of the various constructs are
optimized through chemical synthesis. The effects of orthogonal crosslinking on
protein conformational stability and cytosolic uptake are assessed using
appropriate biological assays. These studies are expected to yield new insights
into the reactivity of photo-generated reactive species inside proteins, which
leads to designed proteins with novel structures and
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.