* 1904580
* CDS&amp;E: Fast Computational Methods for Quantum Simulation of 2D Spintronic and Electronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Jing Guo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 12/31/2023
* USD 338,057.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;New technologies such as artificial intelligence and the
Internet of Things have driven ever increasing demands for computer processing
and data storage. There is accordingly an imperative need to develop
semiconductor memory and computing devices based on new physical mechanisms and
materials for improved performance and power efficiency. Spintronics uses the
physical property of electron spin rather than charge, with implications in the
efficiency of data storage and transfer. Atomically thin two-dimensional (2D)
semiconductors are promising materials with unique physical properties. These
new phenomena and materials hold promise for developing new devices and
circuits. Computer-aided simulation and design have played an essential and
critical role in enabling modern electronics. Fast computational methods and
computer-aided design tools for the new classes of 2D spintronic and electronic
devices, however, have remain largely undeveloped. This hinders their adoption
in future computing and data storage technologies. To address this deficiency,
new simulation methods and novel computational techniques will be developed in
this project. These will enable fast quantum simulations and design of 2D
spintronic and electronic devices. The findings from the proposed effort will
have direct impact on research areas such as advanced device design, high-
performance computing, low-power electronics, new memory devices, and flexible
electronics. Simulation codes and tools will be developed and shared with the
research and education community, and students from high school to graduate
levels will be engaged in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are
to develop fast computational methods and approximations to significantly reduce
the computational complexity and improve the computational efficiency for
quantum simulation of 2D devices and to explore their applications and
limitations in simulation and design of 2D spintronic and electronic devices.
The proposed research activities include: (i) develop an unraveling technique
for 2D device simulations, which turns the coupled matrix equations in the non-
equilibrium Greens function simulations to uncoupled stochastic wave vector
equations, (ii) develop scalable, high-performance solutions to the quantum
transport equation by taking advantage of the massively parallel general purpose
graphics processing unit computational platform, (iii) efficiently treat the
transverse dimension of the 2D spintronic and electronic devices by exploiting
two approximate methods, (iv) develop a correlation function mixing method to
achieve fast and stable convergence, and (v) apply the above computational
methods to develop new simulation capabilities and tools for a test suite of
transition metal dichalcogenide and devices based on topological insulators
(TIs). The project develops the essential knowledge base for computational
methods in quantum device simulations, and paves the way toward computationally
efficient simulation tools for devices based on the physical properties unique
to 2D semiconductors and topological insulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.