* 1904531
* Non-Classical Mechanisms of Solution Crystallization Studied Using Colloidal Experiments and Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Peter Vekilov, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2023
* USD 470,781.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Crystallization is a widely-encountered phase
transition that affects many areas of science and technology. From concentrated
phases, crystals nucleate and grow through the addition of monomers, and are
well described by classical single-step processes. From dilute solutions,
however, the factors controlling crystallization remain hotly contested. This
lack of understanding hinders the production of single-crystal materials for
electronic and optical applications and the precipitation of chemicals and
pharmaceuticals, as two examples. It also poses a significant challenge for the
treatment of diseases that involve crystallization of proteins and large
molecules, including kidney stones, gout, and hemoglobin CC diseases. Whereas
crystals in solution often nucleate and grow using multi-step rather than
single-step pathways, the factors that determine the pathway used by a given
system are not well understood. This project develops experimental and
computational model systems consisting of micron-sized colloidal particles
suspended in liquids and identifies the pathways for crystal nucleation and
growth from solution as the interactions between the particles are varied. The
knowledge gained from these studies will provide the fundamental understanding
needed to control crystallization and self-assembly from solution. Educational
outreach efforts conveying these results and their importance for society to K –
12 students and the general public include activities at science camps at the
University of Houston and at science festivals held in downtown
Houston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Crystals in solution
are widely reported to nucleate and grow using multi-step pathways that deviate
from classical mechanisms, which involve single-step processes. Although many
examples of non-classical assembly have been reported, physical understanding of
the factors controlling the choice of nucleation and growth pathways remains
limited. The objective of this project is to deploy colloid-imaging experiments
and computational models to understand how intermolecular interactions dictate
the choice of classical (single-step) versus non-classical (multi-step)
nucleation and growth mechanisms for crystals in solution. The driving
hypothesis is that the shape of interaction potentials controls the choice of
pathways by which crystals nucleate and grow. The team tests this hypothesis in
analogues for molecules, suspensions of submicron colloidal particles, by
integrating complementary expertise in particle synthesis and confocal
microscopy, light scattering, and advanced simulation techniques to address two
specific aims: (1) identify the role of nonspecific interactions in the
transition from direct (classical) nucleation to multistep nucleation, by tuning
both long-range repulsive and short-range attractive interactions between
particles in experiment and simulation, and (2) investigate the effects of
particle interactions on mechanisms of non-classical growth, by characterizing
addition of clusters to crystals grown on a template or in solution. The
intellectual merit of this project is fundamental insight into how non-classical
nucleation and growth mechanisms affect the formation of ordered crystalline
assemblies in solution, which paves the way for the development of novel
strategies to rapidly and controllably assemble large-scale crystals and
generate well-controlled structures with precisely placed constituents. This
project also has significant broader impacts for society: crystallization
underlies myriad industrial and pathological processes. The project continues
the team’s ongoing efforts to broaden participation in science through mentored
research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students recruited from
the diverse study body at the University of Houston, a designated Hispanic-
Serving and an Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander-Serving
Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.