* 1904651
* RUI: Molecular Topology Directed Molecular Assembly Using Crystalline Quasiracemates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Kraig Wheeler, Whitworth University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 232,390.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many functions of solid
materials require particular molecules to selectively interact with each other.
This specific interaction between molecules often arises from a blend of both
strong and weak forces that control the orientation of the component building
blocks. While strong interactions have achieved considerable attention, chemical
features that produce less manageable motifs via less well defined or weak
contacts are also important to the overall molecular recognition process.
Molecular shape is one such feature. This program, directed by Professor Kraig
Wheeler and anchored by a research team of undergraduate students at Whitworth
University, creates target molecules that align to form crystals by using the
structural feature of molecular shape. A central aim of the research, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program within the Division of
Materials Research, is to develop diverse families of materials that exploit the
shape space of components that form predetermined assemblies. This basic
research may open the door for the future design of functional solids via
exploiting molecular properties of the building blocks. Through integration of
the research with undergraduate research training in synthesis, crystal growth,
structure determination, and video-assisted microscopy, students will be
prepared as scientists for careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Untangling the details
of molecular recognition continues to hold intense interest to a wide range of
science disciplines. The manner in which molecules organize into energetically
favorable solids often relates to complementary electrostatic non-bonded
contacts and best-fit scenarios. This research, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, focuses
on understanding structural boundaries of molecular shape to the molecular
recognition process by using the quasiracemate approach for constructing
bimolecular solid compounds. Chiral building blocks formulated from known
organic precursors will be synthesized via amino acid, carboxylamide, and
naphthyl derivatives. While the study of quasiracemic materials has now
progressed to an established science, the intimate details of assembling pairs
of quasienantiomers remains relatively unknown. This proposal explores how
increasing crystal lattice stabilization via charge-assisted non-bonded contacts
and an increased size of molecular framework effectively allows for greater
structural variation of the quasienantiomeric components. Lattice energy
calculations combined with crystallographic, video-assisted thermomicroscopy,
and calorimetric studies will be used to assess the ability of these materials
to form quasiracemic assemblies. The research group seeks a systematic
understanding of the definition of "isostructural" in the context of
quasiracemate formation that may prove useful for probing the topological
features responsible for molecular recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.