* 1904648
* Collaborative Research: Directing molecular assemblies into covalently bonded 2D organic materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Robert Bartynski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2024
* USD 381,489.00

Professors Robert Bartynski and Sylvie Rangan of Rutgers University New
Brunswick and Professor Elena Galoppini of Rutgers University Newark are
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
in the Division of Chemistry of the National Science Foundation to develop new
methods for the creation of carbon-based two-dimensional materials on metal
surfaces. Ordered arrays of custom designed molecular building blocks are
assembled on single crystal surfaces then subjected to an external stimulus,
such as heat, light, or energetic electrons, to link together neighboring
molecules creating an extended two-dimensional sheet material. The topology and
functionality of the sheet are controlled by judicious selection and placement
of the chemical building blocks prior to exposure to the external stimulus. The
resulting sheets hold the promise of displaying a wide variety of novel
properties and phenomena such as new forms of magnetism, conduction of
electricity with little or no resistance, and efficient emission or absorption
of light. Success of this research project opens the way to new applications of
two-dimensional materials in nano-electronics, sensors, solar cells, light-
emitting diodes, and other devices that require processability, tunability, high
performance, and properties that cannot be obtained with conventional materials.
During the course of conducting the project, the students involved are broadly
trained in a multidisciplinary science research environment and provided a
chance to interact with scientists in national laboratories. Undergraduate
students from under-represented minority groups are involved in the project and
high school students and teachers are mentored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project generates a "toolbox" for on-surface synthesis of two-dimensional (2D)
materials. Different bonding mechanisms that are relevant to on-surface
synthesis are explored and ways to create a hierarchy of surface reactions to
direct the formation of intermolecular C-C bonds between molecular units to
create new 2D organic systems are developed. The toolbox involves (a) the
development of specially designed molecular precursors with functional groups
placed at strategic positions, (b) the use of inter-molecular and/or intra-
molecular interactions between functional groups, as well as surface templating
effects on textured metals, to control the assembly of the molecular precursors
on single crystal surfaces. A particular emphasis is placed on the formation of
C-C bonds by dehydrogenation (elimination of H2), dehalogenation (elimination of
X2, X = Br, Cl, I) and dehydrofluorination (elimination of HF) reactions. The
nature of the resulting 2D structures are studied through an integrated
combination of surface science techniques, including scanning tunneling
microscopy, and the electronic properties are examined through a combination of
synchrotron-based electron spectroscopies, direct and inverse photoemission as
well as ab-initio theoretical methods&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.