* 1904843
* Nanowires from Layered van der Waals Crystals: Opportunities for Tuning Structure and Function in 1D-2D Hybrid Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Peter Sutter, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2024
* USD 520,000.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor nanowires are of
technological interest as a class of functional components for electronics,
light emission, energy conversion, or quantum computation, which can be mass-
produced with exceptionally high crystal quality by simple growth processes. To
date, research has almost exclusively focused on nanowires of traditional
semiconductor materials, such as silicon or germanium, in which the atoms are
tightly bonded to their neighbors in a three-dimensional crystal. This project,
which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF,
explores opportunities in tuning structure and properties that arise in
nanowires of layered semiconductors, in which atoms are tightly bonded in
atomically thin sheets that are in turn held together by much weaker forces.
Coordinated efforts in studying the synthesis of such layered nanowires and in
exploring their distinct electronic and optoelectronic properties aim to uncover
relationships between crystal structure, electronic structure and the flow of
electrical current, as well as light absorption and emission, which are import
for technological applications. In addition to the targeted technical advances,
the project provides far-reaching educational and training opportunities for the
involved graduate and undergraduate students. It includes dedicated outreach to
high-school students from rural areas that gives student-teacher teams the
opportunity to participate in hands-on activities related to the research. Under
the guidance of the researchers the students prepare new science learning
materials, which they bring back to their school to share their experience with
their peers and to help build excitement for careers in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive research on planar 2D and layered
chalcogenide semiconductors has been driven by outstanding electronic,
optoelectronic, mechanical and chemical properties of these materials. In
contrast, little attention has been paid to the possibility of combining the
concepts of vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) nanowire growth and van der Waals (vdW)
epitaxy to realize layered chalcogenide nanowires. The few existing studies have
treated those systems on an equal footing with conventional 3D-crystalline
nanowires without addressing the opportunities for materials design that arise
in vdW crystals. This project, which is supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program at NSF, explores the unique crystallographic degrees
of freedom of vdW nanowires and their control via tailored VLS growth processes.
Examples of distinct properties include layering along different directions,
facile materials integration due to lifted lattice matching requirements, and a
tendency toward spontaneous interlayer twist that adds up to an overall
chirality and whose magnitude is controlled by the wire diameter. Coordinated
growth and characterization of selected materials with focus on anisotropic
metal monochalcogenide semiconductors provide insight into the atomistic growth
mechanisms of vdW nanowires and heterostructures. Structure and morphology are
correlated to single-nanowire charge transport, and to optoelectronic properties
probed by cathodoluminescence spectroscopy at resolution below the exciton
radius to address the role of layer stacking and twist, confinement, excitonic
effects, as well as interfacial carrier transfers in
heterostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.