* 1904486
* Collaborative Research: Structure and Thermodynamics of Ionic Liquids at Solid Surfaces: the Return of Water
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Lei Li, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 241,093.00

Ionic liquids (ILs) have interesting physicochemical properties, including low
volatility, high thermal stability, high CO2 solubility and selectivity, and
unique solvation characteristics, making them promising candidates for
applications involving CO2 capture, catalysis, and dispersion of colloidal
particles. This collaborative project will combine experiments and molecular
simulations aiming to understand the role of interfacial water at the interface
between ILs and solid surfaces. The role of interfacial water on the
electrification of solid surfaces and the structure of interfacial ILs will be
investigated and its impact the CO2 adsorption at IL-solid interfaces will be
studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to investigate the
role of water on the interfacial structure of ILs and address the three-way
coupling among surface electrification, water adsorption and ion self-assembly
in the interfacial zone, which is crucial for resolving existing controversies
on the effect of water on solid-IL interfaces. A multi-faceted experimental
characterization (e.g., attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy, X-ray reflectivity, and neutron reflectivity) will be integrated
with computer simulations to obtain high-quality data and mechanistic insights
on the effect of water on the structure of solid-IL interfaces and gas
adsorption at these interfaces. This will help settle the controversies in the
literature and provide guidelines for applications such as CO2 capture. To
investigate how water affects the electrification of solid surfaces and the
structure of interfacial ILs, mica will be used as the solid surface to test the
hypotheses that water enables electrification of solid surfaces by effective
dissolution of surface ions and impacts self-assembly of ILs via water-IL
coupling. To investigate how water impacts the CO2 adsorption at IL-solid
interfaces, silica will be used as the solid surface because of its relevance to
applications including CO2 capture and catalysis. The insights gained from this
project may enable the tailoring of solid-IL interfaces and gas adsorption at
these interfaces by controlling the water content. In addition to training
graduate students and developing new courses, the investigators plan to offer
research opportunities to undergraduate students from underrepresented groups
and pursue outreach activities to K12 students in collaboration with the
Engineering Advancing Grade-school Education (ENGAGE) program at the University
of Pittsburgh and the Center for the Enhancement of Engineering Diversity (CEED)
at Virginia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.