* 1904868
* Azadipyrromethene Complexes as a Versatile Platform for Next Generation of Solution-Processable Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Genevieve Sauve, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 465,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Genevieve Sauve of the Department of
Chemistry at Case Western Reserve University is developing new synthetic
approaches for making semiconducting organic materials by incorporating metals.
Organic semiconductors are solids whose building blocks mainly consist of carbon
and hydrogen atoms, and at times nitrogen, sulfur and oxygen. Each carbon atom
in these materials is bonded to other carbons not only through single bonds, but
also with special bonds called pi-bonds. The alternating pi-bonds enables the
molecules (polymers) to conduct electrons. Just like traditional semiconductors
made with silicon, these materials can become conductive when one applies a
voltage (like in transistors) or shines light on them (like in photovoltaic
cells). The big advantage of organic semiconductors is that they can be printed,
just like ink, enabling inexpensive and scalable production of electronic
devices. In addition, organic semiconductors are plastic-like, producing
flexible and lightweight devices that could be used where rigid and heavy
silicon-based devices cannot. However, devices based on organic semiconductors
tend to have lower performance than devices based on traditional semiconductors.
In this research, highly innovative and creative chemical reactions are used to
improve the performance of organic semiconductors by using metals. The purpose
of adding metals to these materials is to provide additional control over not
only electrical conductivity, but also crystallinity and solution processing
properties. Materials prepared in this project are expected to impact the
printable electronic industry, providing portable devices and alternative ways
to convert solar energy to high value electricity. Students associated with this
project are exposed to interdisciplinary research and are prepared to be next
generation of scientists. Education and outreach activities posted on YouTube
target high school students and underrepresented groups as the videos
demonstration the real-life applications of pi-conjugated
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solution-processable organic semiconductors are
poised to revolutionize the electronic and printing industries, but to achieve
the most desirable properties, new creative approaches and synthetic strategies
are required. Conventional approaches to organic semiconductor design typically
rely on purely planar pi-conjugated systems whose opto-electronic properties are
tuned with the nature of the chemical backbone, functional groups and side-
chains. To access new functionalities, this project turns to hybrid
organic/inorganic coordination compounds, where coordination with main group or
transition metals provides an additional tool to tune the properties of pi-
conjugated systems, such as molecular shape, crystallinity and opto-electronic
properties. This research exploits azadipyrromethene complexes as a versatile
platform for development of the next generation of solution-processable hybrid
semiconductors. The research has the potential to impact the field of pi-
conjugated systems, dyes with visible NIR absorption and organic
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.