* 1904310
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Influence of Metal Binding on Electronic/Geometric Structure-Function Relationships in Photorespiration
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Kyle Lancaster, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2023
* USD 445,046.00

In this project funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professors Kyle M. Lancaster of the Cornell University and
Arnold J. Bloom of the University of California Davis evaluate the role of
differential metal binding, specifically magnesium versus manganese, on the
mechanisms and bioenergetics of photorespiration in which Rubisco, the most
prevalent protein on the planet, reacts with oxygen rather than with carbon
dioxide. This collaboration between a bioinorganic spectroscopist and a plant
physiologist seeks to provide new perspectives on the evolution of
photosynthesis and the relationships between plant carbon and nitrogen balances
under past, present, and future environmental conditions. Such information is
critical for maintaining food quality and ensuring world food security in the
coming decades. Professors Lancaster and Bloom disseminate this information
through articles in the online Encyclopedia of Earth, workshops at scientific
meetings, including some organized by Societies of scientists who are members of
groups underrepresented in STEM careers, and by writing and keeping up-to-date
printed and online textbooks used by students as well as by American and foreign
professionals whose work is related to environmental change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research involves application of a broad
range of spectroscopic, kinetics, and computational techniques to contrast
protein structure and plant metabolism when manganese or magnesium binds to the
enzymes that catalyze the first three chemical steps in the photorespiratory
pathway. The Mn2+-bound forms of Rubisco, malic enzyme, and phosphoglycolate
phosphatase are characterized by X-ray crystallography and by electron spin
resonance, X-ray absorption, and magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy. Both
isolated, intact chloroplasts as well as purified photorespiratory enzymes are
studied. The work with isolated chloroplasts involves ratiometric dye
measurements of magnesium and manganese concentrations, optode measurements of
O2 and CO2 consumption, and mass spectrometric assessment of photorespiratory
products. Work carried out on isolated enzymes involves measurement of electron
transfer kinetics from manganese Rubisco during oxygenation of
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate as well as investigation of potential physiologically
relevant electron transfer partners. The research tests the hypothesis that
photorespiration is not a wasteful process, but one that generates reductant to
support the conversion of nitrate and sulfate into amino acids. Therefore, C3
carbon fixation may be much more energy efficient than previously
assumed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.