* 1904591
* Facets of Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Paolo Aluffi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2020
* USD 27,000.00

The conference "Facets of Algebraic Geometry" will take place October 18-20,
2019 at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. The conference will focus on
recent developments and promising directions for future work in the rich
research areas of algebraic geometry near the interface with combinatorics. It
is well-known that many of the central objects of study in algebraic geometry
have intricate combinatorial structures. Furthermore, sophisticated tools from
algebraic geometry, intersection theory, and the cohomology of varieties have
led to deep results on purely combinatorial questions. The conference will bring
together early career and established senior mathematicians working in
combinatorial algebraic geometry. Preceding the main conference there will be a
day devoted to activities organized by and for young
mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics to be covered in the conference
include the structure of commutative algebraic groups; modern Schubert calculus,
including equivariant and non-equivariant quantum $K$-theory of homogeneous
spaces, and computational approaches via numerical methods; Chern class formulas
for degeneracy loci and applications of such formulas to virtual class
computations of syzygetic loci on moduli spaces of curves; intersection theory
on moduli spaces and cones of effective and basepoint free divisors on Hurwitz
spaces and moduli space of curves; and applications of algebraic geometry and
Hodge theory to matroids and combinatorial geometry. Each of these topics has
had significant breakthroughs in the past few years. The conference website is h
ttps://sites.google.com/view/facetsofalgebraicgeometry/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Th
is award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.