* 1904165
* Integrating System Physics with Sensor Data for Health Prognostics of Complex Engineered Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Xiao Liu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2022
* USD 454,465.00

This award will advance the Nation's economic welfare by improving the
reliability and energy-efficiency of modern Data Center (DC) operations. As
computational needs increase in the era of artificial intelligence (AI) and big
data, DCs are becoming larger consumers of energy and currently reflect 2
percent of the US energy market. Within the DC, the cooling systems make up
30-40 percent of the total energy consumption. Cooling system failures are
critical and cause interruptions on massive cloud/mobile services provided by
large corporations such as Microsoft, IBM, Amazon, Netflix, etc. This award will
investigate the integration of physics-based and data-driven methods for the
modeling and prognostics of complex systems as represented by DC cooling
systems. The project includes activities to broaden interest, especially among
underrepresented groups, in STEM fields including applied probability and
statistics, reliability engineering and data-analytics through hands-on
activities and internship opportunities provided by the industry collaborators.
Integrating research outcomes into education and support of graduate students
will nurture a pool of next-generation data scientists and engineers for the
northwest Arkansas and rural Virginia regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop and validate novel methods to enable the integration of
fundamental system physics and sensor monitoring data for the modeling and
prognostics of complex engineering systems. The project consists of three
connected research thrusts. Thrust 1 will establish a flexible two-layer
physical-statistical modeling framework which enables the integration of system
physics into the modeling and interpretation of sensor monitoring data. The
connection between Gaussian Process (GP) regression, dynamical models, and
Linear Time-Invariant (LTI) Stochastic Difference Equations (SDE) will be
established in order to exploit advantages in modeling, computation and
interpretation. Thrust 2 will develop a new class of multivariate stochastic
models to capture the complex dynamics and dependency among multiple system
health state variables. Thrust 3 will perform comprehensive validation, testing
and continuous improvement of the project's methods based on real datasets
provided by IBM, Arkansas High Performance Computing Center (AHPCC-UARK), and
Virginia Tech Advanced Research Computing facilities (ARC-VT). This research is
expected to lead to interpretable data-driven models, actionable engineering
insights and explainable operational decisions with tangible impacts on the
health prognostics of complex engineering systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.