* 1904521
* LSAMP BD: University of Texas at Dallas University of Texas System LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Juan Gonzalez, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,075,000.00

There is an increasing demand for a highly-skilled and diverse science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) workforce to maintain US
innovation and global competitiveness. To create such a workforce one of the
most important barriers that must be addressed is the severe under-
representation of minority students in STEM graduate education. The Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists universities and
colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their efforts by
significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully completing high
quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming STEM education
through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and experiences in
support of groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Bridge-to-Doctorate (BD) program at
the University of Texas at Dallas (UT Dallas), which is part of the University
of Texas System LSAMP, will address this critical issue by providing 12 incoming
PhD students from underrepresented minority (URM) groups with substantial
fellowships, mentoring and professional development activities to enable their
successful transition from undergraduate programs to complete a PhD in a STEM
field. The Fellows will undertake STEM research projects within the School of
Natural Sciences and Mathematics, the Erik Jonsson School of Engineering and
Computer Science, the School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences and the School of
Arts, Technology, and Emerging Communication. The BD Program at UT Dallas also
seeks to change the institutional culture by creating new support programs for
URM students, a new URM student recruitment and visitation weekend, faculty
mentoring resources, and improve the visibility highly-talented and motivated
URM students and alumni. Thus this program will not only benefit this cohort of
BD Fellows but also lead to increased numbers of URM students in STEM who
successfully complete their doctoral degrees at UT Dallas and successfully
transition into workforce in the long term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Texas at Dallas (UT Dallas), which is part of the University of
Texas (UT) LSAMP, Bridge-to-Doctorate (BD) Program will support underrepresented
minority (URM) students in completing doctoral degrees in STEM and will develop
best practices that increase success for these students. These best practices
will build on the experiences by our partner in the UT LSAMP. This BD Program
will contribute to the understanding of the doctoral and graduate education of
URM students. Throughout the program, formative, as well as summative, data will
be employed to determine which interventions, such as improved mentoring and
enrichment and professional development activities, enable students from URM
groups to successfully transition from undergraduate programs to the completion
of a PhD in a STEM field. It will also determine how these activities positively
impact the faculty mentors and advisors. These interventions will enable faculty
to identify and develop the mentoring skills needed to best support URM students
and to better understand the benefits and opportunities URM students bring to
STEM doctoral programs. This program will contribute to a diverse, innovative
and globally competitive workforce as envisioned by the America COMPETES Act and
related initiatives, such as those in the State of
Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.