* 1904901
* Establishing the Mechanoselective Adhesion of Microorganisms to Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Lauren Andrews, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 515,473.00

Indwelling medical devices, including catheters, are indispensable tools in
modern healthcare. However, over one-quarter of all healthcare-associated
infections in the United States are attributed to central line-associated
bloodstream infections and catheter-associated urinary tract infections. While
hydrogel coatings are typically applied to catheters to improve patient comfort
and lower the nonspecific adsorption of proteins and microorganisms, systematic
and fundamental studies that reveal why microbes initially adhere to solid
surfaces are lacking and could inform the development of biofouling resistant
materials. This project supports fundamental research into how mechanical
properties paired with the hydrophilicity of polymer gels impacts the initial
attachment of microorganisms. In addition to improving the functionality of
antifouling polymer coatings, understanding the materials-biology interface can
enable the design of a broad range of hydrogel-coated biomedical devices (i.e.,
catheters, implants, wound dressings, contact lenses). A key component of this
NSF-Biomaterials project is its aim to educate, provide research experiences,
and mentor a diverse workforce at the emerging interface of materials science
and synthetic biology. Numerous new research experiences for undergraduate and
graduate students, including engagement efforts aimed at women and
underrepresented populations, will result from this activity, including an
educational module for high school students called "Bacteria: Natural versus
Engineered".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to predict how biofilms
respond to substrate mechanics is an open question. This activity will establish
the native response of Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus to polymer
coatings by correlating microbial attachment to a library of materials with
varied structure-property relationships and high-throughput transcriptome
analysis of the attached cells. By systematically synthesizing polymer gels from
(i) hydrophilic poly(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate, (ii) hydrophobic polymer
polydimethylsiloxane, and (iii) tunable copolymer gels, we will identify how
biofilm-forming cells sense and respond to the gels' hydrophilicity and
stiffness in relevant regimes for biomaterial applications. Notably, we will
elucidate genetic targets for biofilm inhibition that control bacterial adhesion
and proliferation on our panel of gels by applying synthetic biology approaches
and genome-wide libraries for Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus strains
to perform quantitative genotype-phenotype mapping for cellular adhesion to
mechano-chemically diverse gel materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.