* 1904244
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: When Locals Adapt to Newcomers
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Joane Nagel, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 15,091.00

This project investigates the effects affluent newcomers have on poor
communities in a developing region when they become a newcomer community of
lifestyle migrants. Some are retirees who hope to stretch their pensions by
living in a cheaper location and some are younger people looking for adventure,
a slower pace of life, or cheaper cost of living in a beautiful place. Many open
businesses and employ household staff in an area where most locals work in the
tourism industry. Understanding these newcomers' relations with locals is
important because their role as entrepreneurs, bosses, and landowners could be
increasing differences in economic opportunities in a peaceful, democratic
region. This project advances the study of migration and mixing, gentrification
in rural communities, and retirement, specifically filling a gap in
understanding how privileged migrants affect local economies and social
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main sources of data for this project will
be interviews and ethnographic research. Forty-five interviews with lifestyle
migrants from two different outside regions will be conducted as well as 40
interviews with locals. The ethnographic component will consist of one year of
participant observation of migrant-run businesses and households, community
events, and social gatherings in five small towns. Snowball sampling will be
used for interviewee selection, and opportunistic sampling to determine where
participant observation will occur. The research questions addressed concern how
outsiders' advantageous economic position affects their influence and how the
economic and influence resources of lifestyle migrants affect
locals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.