* 1904431
* Designing sequential functionality into polypeptide side-chains to mimic complex biopolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Timothy Deming, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 11/30/2023
* USD 499,421.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prolific adhesive capabilities
of many marine organisms are well known. Each year a considerable amount of time
and money is spent worldwide on the removal of barnacles from fouled vessels and
other man-made structures exposed to the oceans. The adhesive proteins produced
by many permanently attached marine organisms are remarkable in that they can
function over wide temperature ranges, fluctuating salinity, humidity, and in
the tides, waves and currents of marine environments. In contrast, the success
of man-made adhesives in wet environments requires carefully cleaned surfaces
which often must also be chemically treated and/or partially dried. Marine
adhesives have also been explored for use as tissue glues in surgery and in
dentistry, yet they are expensive to produce and can cause immune reactions.
This project will develop simplified mimics of marine adhesives to identify the
key components and processes require for the design and synthesis of superior
adhesives for wet environments. The concepts developed in this proposal have
potential to be further utilized to prepare degradable, synthetic polypeptide
materials for downstream wet adhesion applications in areas such as medicine and
dentistry. This funding will also be used to recruit and train women and
underrepresented minority students in chemistry and materials research to
contribute strongly to the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance and complexity of the proteins
that are key polymeric components in marine mussel adhesives have received
considerable attention in the past few decades. In addition to substantial
efforts to study and decipher the biological processes, there has also been much
effort to replicate mussel adhesive proteins (MAPs) using synthetic polymers.
Synthetic polymers for wet adhesive applications offer potential advantages over
biologically sourced proteins in terms of scalable production at low cost,
absence of biological contaminants, and in some cases, improved properties for
applications in medicine or industry. Many of these polymers have focused
primarily on mimicking the 3,4-dehydroxyphenyl-L-alanine content of mussel
proteins, but have paid less attention to many other functional groups and
features of MAPs, such as hydrophobic and charged groups, as well as physical
and chemical changes resulting from shifts in solution pH and redox potential.
Although some efforts have attempted to mimic most if not all of these features
in synthetic polymers, this remains a challenging problem, especially with
respect to retaining amino acid sequence information and compositional
uniformity. In this project, a new approach is proposed to address this
challenge by mimicking MAP sequence information using uniform side-chain peptide
sequences attached to homopolypeptide scaffolds designed to contain additional
biomimetic functionality. The proposed studies aim to increase the level of
functional sophistication in synthetic polymers closer toward true mimicry of
the complexity found in multifunctional proteins. Knowledge gained from these
studies will also yield scalable synthetic methods and design rules that can be
applied to mimicry of other sequence specific protein materials. Outreach
objectives in this proposal will continue current efforts developed by the PI in
previous NSF-funded broader impacts in preparing women and underrepresented
minority students for the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.