* 1904025
* Generation of High-Power, High-Order Orbital Angular Momentum Laser Beams and Application in Atom Trapping
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Brian Anderson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2023
* USD 484,943.00

Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Laser beams carrying orbital angular
momentum are of great interest in both classical and quantum optics. Among these
beams, Laguerre-Gaussian modes are very unique for their intensity profiles
making them of particular interest in particle manipulation, optical
communications, detection, atom trapping and quantum applications. The current
generation methods of these beams have many limitations. This collaborative
research aims at the design, development and application of a novel high power,
tunable, orbital angular momentum laser source at hard-to-reach wavelengths. It
combines a novel vertical external cavity surface emitting laser design and
intra-cavity generation of high order orbital angular momentum beams. The
proposed laser source will be very efficient, compact and low cost, opening
doors to new applications. The lasers will then be used to conduct novel
experiments in the generation and study of ultra-cold atoms, atom trapping and
quantum turbulence. The broader impact of the research focuses on the education
and training of graduate and undergraduate students in the areas of lasers,
photonics and quantum physics. The research will seek to broaden participation
of women and underrepresented minorities through internship and summer REU
programs. &lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Lasers generating orbital angular
momentum beams including Laguerre-Gaussian beams are of great interest in
various fields of science and engineering. These beams have numerous
applications including particle manipulation, underwater and free-space optical
communications, imaging and detection. Watt-level, high-order Laguerre-Gaussian
beams in the visible band are particularly desirable in quantum optics and atom
trapping. Experiments using Watt-level high-order Laguerre-Gaussian beams are
proposed as traps for ultra-cold and Bose-condensed atoms and for experiments in
quantum turbulence. The current orbital angular momentum sources have
limitations in power, tunability, compactness or wavelength of operation,
thereby constraining their broad deployment. The goal of the research is to
develop a novel high-power, tunable laser source with targeted Laguerre-Gaussian
modes at hard-to-reach wavelengths. The approach is based on intracavity mode
conversion of Hermite-Gaussian and Laguerre-Gaussian modes in a two-color
Vertical External Cavity Surface Emitting Laser and efficient nonlinear
frequency conversion for the generation of higher-order Laguerre-Gaussian modes
in the visible and mid-IR wavelengths. The research merges concepts of
semiconductor laser engineering, nonlinear mode conversion, atomic molecular and
optical physics. The intellectual merits of this high-risk high-reward research
includes significant technical advancement in areas of semiconductor quantum
well design and growth, intracavity laser mode mixing and manipulation,
nonlinear optical materials, laser cavity design and applications in atom
trapping, cooling and quantum turbulence research and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.