* 1904170
* RUI: Polycationic Cage for Jacketed Covalent Organic Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Hasan Arslan, Bucknell University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 335,896.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing new porous materials is
increasingly vital in enabling technological advancement and meeting societal
needs ranging from clean water to next-generation batteries. Despite the
necessity for structures tailored to the target application, fundamental
challenges remain in preparing nanoporous materials at the same level of
precision achieved in small-molecule design. A relatively new class of
materials, called covalent organic frameworks, uses rigid molecular building-
blocks that self-assemble into predictable, crystalline porous architectures.
Planar starting molecules form two-dimensional (2D) polymer sheets that stack to
give lightweight materials with uniform, nanometer-sized pores and high surface
areas. While there is broad control over the individual sheet structure, there
has been little advancement in controlling the stacking between layers and the
corresponding material stability. This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, aims to
bridge a gap in the knowledge of covalent framework growth by controlling the
interlayer structure between the 2D sheets. Trapping framework building-blocks
in charged, cage-like host molecules disrupts the default interlayer stacking,
allowing for the formation of modular jacketed covalent frameworks. With this
award, the principle investigators and their groups study fundamental growth
mechanisms for this new type of covalent organic frameworks, which expands the
knowledge required to grow better next-generation materials. These new
materials, both ionic and porous, are expected to accelerate advancements in
separations, conductivity in electronic devices, and catalysis. This research is
undertaken with a diverse group of undergraduates and masters students at
Bucknell University, preparing them for future careers in the STEM fields, as
well as providing opportunities to engage with the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, explores
a supramolecular approach for noncovalent functionalization of two-dimensional
covalent organic frameworks (2D COFs). In the past decade, COFs have shown that
controllable crystalline organic structures are readily available through self-
assembly of rigid monomers via reversible linkage chemistries. Despite their
potential, 2D COFs are limited by their dependence on simple interlayer sheet
stacking, which prevents manipulation in the z-dimension and inhibits access to
interconnected pore networks. Introducing host-guest complexation between
positively charged cage molecules and planar COF monomers facilitates the design
of jacketed covalent organic frameworks (J-COFs). This platform of monomer
encapsulation introduces control over both material structure and
functionalization through counterion selection. In this project, the synthesis
and growth mechanism of J-COFs are characterized across known COF linkage
chemistries, such as boronate ester, imine, and hydrazone systems. Novel solid-
state properties deriving from structural incorporation of the cage species are
contrasted with standard 2D COFs. This project provides undergraduate and
masters students greater exposure to materials chemistry concepts, including
both research opportunities as well as direct engagement with local schools and
the Lewisburg Children's Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.