* 1904519
* Student Program of the Second Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AI), Ethics and Society (AIES 2019)
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2019
* Kristen Venable, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 06/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports the participation of a select group of US-based Ph. D.
students in the student program of the Second AAAI/ACM Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Ethics and Society (AIES 2019) which will take place in Honolulu,
HI on January 27th and 28th, 2019. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AIES was formed to
promote concrete planning and research in the present and future of AI,
examining the imperative that technologists talk not only to one another, but to
thinkers and experts across the humanities and social sciences as well. The AIES
conference is a valuable opportunity for students from a range of disciplines to
learn from AI experts across the disciplinary spectrum including computer
scientists, sociologists, philosophers, economists, and lawyers specializing in
privacy, human rights, and other relevant aspects of law. This exposure will
help enrich their understanding of the powers and perils of their own work. The
student track also serves as an important opportunity for "cohort-building"
among students in various humanities and social science disciplines, with
disparate knowledge bases and trainings but a common concern for the future of
AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.