* 1904386
* Functional Nanotubes from Self-Assembled Bis-Urea Macrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Linda Shimizu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2023
* USD 460,000.00

Nature employs self-assembly approaches to control the size and shape of
biological structures for performing specific functions. Examples include
protein channels and enzymes. A protein channel is formed by a protein that
folds into a hollow tubular structure and spans across a membrane to allow
passage of small molecules or ions from one side of a membrane to the other side
through the channel. An enzyme is a protein that folds into a 3-dimensional
structure to create a pocket of specific size and shape for binding and
converting target molecules into desired chemical products. Inspired by Nature,
Professor Linda Shimizu of the University of South Carolina makes small donut-
shaped molecules that assemble in high fidelity into straw like structures
called nanotubes. These nanotubes have tiny 1-dimensional channels of less than
a nanometer (about 1/1000 times of the width of a strand of hair) in diameter.
The Shimizu group conducts research to understand how gases and small molecules
are organized and move through these tiny channels. Her research group also uses
these nanotubes to restrict how molecules in these channels are oriented with
respect to one another, which alters how these trapped guests can react.
Fundamental knowledge to be gained from this research could have important
implications in separation technologies, flow reactors and the development of
new synthetic methods. The broad research approach provides a challenging and
interdisciplinary environment to train a diverse group of graduate students as
well as provides first research experiences for undergraduates and high school
students. In addition, this award supports a chemistry outreach program that
broadly promotes public interest in science by bringing chemists into South
Carolina K-12 classrooms of high minority enrollment middle schools and high
schools. These school visits are intended to showcase the scientific method,
highlight cutting edge research, and foster interest in chemistry and in the
natural sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work in Professor Linda Shimizu's
laboratory, supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program at the National Science Foundation, utilizes the controlled assembly of
bis-urea macrocycles to afford functional tubular assemblies to probe
fundamental questions. This research investigates structure-property
relationship of macrocycles and linear analogues that contain triphenylamines,
benzophenones, and other organic triplet sensitizers. After UV-irradiation,
these assemblies form radicals within the walls of the nanotubes. The quantity,
persistence and properties of these radicals are related to their structure and
organization. In this project, the Shimizu group 1) studies the assemblies to
understand the origin of the radical stability; 2) probes diffusion within the
nanochannels; 3) evaluates how radicals in the channel walls interact with
guests encapsulated within the channels; 4) evaluates the assemblies of triplet
sensitizers in oxygenated solutions to determine their efficiency at forming
reactive oxygen species; and 5) studies the ability of the nanoreactors to
facilitate photooxidations, photocycloadditions and photopolymerization
reactions in solution. The knowledge acquired should lead to new predictive
tools to determine when persistent radicals will form as well as afford a better
understanding of the effects of confinement on reactivity. These results should
lead to an increase in structural diversity of organic radicals, which are of
interest as molecular magnets, as probes in biological systems, for polarizing
agents and as radical initiators for polymerization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.