* 1904544
* Sustainable Recycling of Silicon Solar Modules
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Meng Tao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 309,036.00

A major obstacle on the horizon for sustainable solar technologies is life-cycle
management of solar modules. As module deployment expands rapidly, so will
module wastes. The International Renewable Energy Agency estimates that end-of-
life modules will total 78 million metric tons by 2050. With a successful
project, the proposed recycling technology will become technically scalable,
financially profitable, and environmentally sustainable for terawatt-scale
deployment of silicon modules. The project lays down the technical foundation
for a new recycling industry projected to be worth billions of dollars by 2050.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators have already demonstrated a two-step
recycling process to extract all the valuable, bulky, and toxic materials from
silicon modules including solar-grade silicon, silver, aluminum, glass, lead,
copper, and tin. In this project, the researchers will: 1) develop a more
simplified recycling process than the one already demonstrated; 2) improve the
silver recovery rate to over 95%; 3) identify a low-cost anode for metal
recovery by electrowinning; 4) verify that the recovered silicon meets the
specifications of solar-grade silicon; 5) modify the recycling process for new
commercial silicon solar cells; 6) explore a solar module backsheet reclamation
process, and 7) dissolve the ethylene vinyl acetate layer in sodium hydroxide.
What differentiates the proposed recycling technology is that it maximizes the
revenue from recycling by recovering all the valuable, bulky, and toxic
materials in silicon modules. These materials are raw materials to the solar
industry worth $12.43/module today. The current recycling process recovers only
the bulky materials worth $3.42/module, which is far below the actual cost of
recycling. The proposed technology is targeted to enable profitable
recycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.