* 1904991
* RUI: Development of peptoids for molecular recognition in water
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Amelia Fuller, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Proteins are fascinating molecules that fold into three-dimensional structures
for a wide range of biological functions. For example, some proteins fold to
create a pocket of specific size and shape for recognition and transport of
target molecules. Synthetic, abiological molecules termed peptoids are
relatively easy to synthesize and may emulate protein structures. Professor
Amelia Fuller at Santa Clara University and the undergraduate students in her
laboratory synthesize and study novel peptoids to investigate how they fold and
interact with other small molecules in water. The research team aims to better
understand the structure-property relationships in peptoids. This understanding
will inform future design of peptoids for applications ranging from transport of
pharmaceuticals to creating new soft materials such as hydrogels for use in
tissue engineering, sustained-release drug delivery systems, or absorption of
harmful materials. Undergraduate students who participate in the research
cultivate their problem-solving skills. A substantial fraction of the research
is carried out by students enrolled in an introductory undergraduate laboratory
course. This venue provides a high impact educational experiences to dozens of
undergraduate students, equipping them at an early stage with technical skills
needed for successful careers in science. In parallel, curricular materials and
educational advances that arise from including undergraduates in this work are
broadly disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peptoids are a modular and
customizable biomimetic molecular scaffold. Similar to proteins, the folding and
self-association of peptoids into three-dimensional structures in water are
programmed by the sequence of the building blocks (N-substituted glycines). Due
to their resistance to proteolysis, peptoids are advantageous for biomedical
applications. The ability to predictively design structurally complex peptoids
for desired applications requires a better understanding of the sequence-
structure correlations. With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry, students in the
Fuller laboratory synthesize and study N-substituted glycine oligomers with two
designs: amphiphilic helical molecules and combinatorial arrays of thioether-
linked peptoid amphiphiles. This research project aims to identify important
sequence-structure correlations of amphiphilic peptoids and investigates their
affinity for recognizing other small molecules in water. These studies clarify
the important sequence and structural features of peptoids that advance their
utility as a new class of supramolecular receptors that function in
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.