* 1904879
* CDS&amp;E: Orientational High and Low Field Ion Mobility Calculator with Gas Accommodation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Carlos Larriba Andaluz, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2023
* USD 353,680.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Chemistry
Division, Professor Carlos Larriba-Andaluz at Indiana University-Purdue
University in Indianapolis is working to improve our fundamental understanding
of the principles of Ion Mobility Spectrometry (IMS), a technique that separates
charged molecules through differences in their geometrical and electronic
structure in the gas phase. This technique is utilized in a wide range of
applications, such as airport security, health research, and environmental
sciences. The Larriba-Andaluz group seeks to improve the performance of this
important analysis tool by bridging the gap between classical assumptions and
the influence of previously neglected secondary effects that are now known to
have consequential impact on the performance of modern instruments. The impact
of the research is enhanced through dissemination of user-friendly IMS software.
An ancillary goal is expanding understanding of chemistry by outreach both to
mechanical engineering students and to K-12 students. The outreach efforts
especially seek to engage women and minorities, encouraging their participation
in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IMS is becoming an integral
part of modern mass spectrometry (MS). This has resulted in important advances
in IMS instrumentation with improved resolution, transmission, and sensitivity.
Despite these advances, there has not been a parallel improvement in
understanding the underlying theory. The problem is challenging, because IMS
separates analytes based on size over charge, where the size is an intricate
combination of gas parameters, forces applied and potential interactions between
ion and buffer gas. As IMS instruments reach resolving powers of several
hundreds, the existing simplified theory will often prove inadequate. By means
of relaxing Chapman and Cowling's first collision integral theory, Professor
Larriba-Andaluz and his team are 1) evaluating the effect of high field to
density ratios, permanent dipole moments, and preferred orientations; 2)
addressing the elastic/diffuse inelastic nature of the impingement-reemission
collision theory through the coupling of quantum mechanics (QM) and molecular
dynamics(MD) to kinetic theory; and 3) assessing collision cross section (CCS)
modification due to ion structure compaction in the gas phase. The aims are to
1) improve existing theoretical knowledge in the free molecular regime through
relaxation of linearization of the momentum transfer equations; 2) study
momentum exchange upon impingement, thereby improving understanding of how
energy exchange occurs at the molecular level; and 3) close the existing gap
between novel existing IMS systems and the theoretical understanding of how
separation occurs in them. Free dissemination of the algorithms developed should
spur development of new calculations, leading to better optimization and
development of instrumentation, and the emergence of new applications in imaging
for complex samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.