* 1904254
* Leveraging Metamaterials and Phase Control in ThermoAcoustic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Mostafa Nouh, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 04/30/2024
* USD 439,590.00

This objective of this research project is to benefit the national interests by
advancing the field of thermoacoustic energy generation using innovative
concepts in metamaterials and acoustic wave control. Such systems have the
potential to revolutionize modern-era energy generation by providing a clean and
sustainable alternative to traditional energy systems. Thermoacoustic systems
involve no combustion and therefore mitigate major concerns over the
environmental footprint of fossil-fuel-based energy in the U.S. economy. The
realization of thermoacoustic systems has the potential to impact a wide range
of applications including space power generation, solar energy scavenging and
waste heat recovery. Almost all thermoacoustic systems suffer from two inherent
limitations: Low power density and design complexity. This award supports
fundamental research to address both limitations by leveraging tools from
dynamics and controls combined with the unique wave filtering capabilities of
acoustic metamaterials. The multi-disciplinary project will develop new tools to
enhance the learning experience of students in the fields of dynamics, acoustics
and sustainable energy generation, and will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups through a range of outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ThermoAcoustic Generators (TAGs) are devices engineered to
spontaneously generate powerful sound waves from a heat source which are then
harnessed as electricity or mechanical motion. They have the potential to
approach the entropic limit imposed by thermodynamics. This project seeks to
reach this limit by developing a novel class of metamaterial-based TAGs which
rely on the optimal control of phasing between pressure and velocity which
prevents the formation of permanent standing waves in the acoustic resonator.
The desirable acoustic conditions are achieved without additional bulk
structures. Instead, inevitable nonlinearities emerging from the small and
complex pores of the thermoacoustic stack will be used to synthesize a new TAG
chamber that enables traveling thermoacoustic waves to propagate to one end of
the resonator (where energy scavenging takes place via electro-acoustic
transduction) while impeding boundary reflections. This work will combine tools
from dynamic systems theory with state-of-the-art experimental and laboratory-
scale investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.