* 1904872
* A library approach to investigate the correlation between peptide rigidity and binding affinity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Irene Chen, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The ability of a peptide to serve as an inhibitor depends on the affinity for
its targeted protein. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program
in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Matthew Hartman at Virginia
Commonwealth University and Dr. Irene Chen at University of California-Santa
Barbara to investigate how the molecular rigidities of peptides determine their
binding affinities to proteins. This project uses new and powerful technologies
to create molecular collections, or libraries, containing trillions of molecules
with diverse ranges of defined rigidities. These peptide libraries are tested
for their affinities to proteins with rigid binding pockets or with more
flexible binding surfaces. The resulting trends will streamline the discovery of
peptide molecules that inhibit biologically and clinically important proteins.
This project provides opportunities for interdisciplinary research training and
career mentoring to a diverse population of graduate and undergraduate students,
including students from underrepresented minority groups. In addition, a module
is developed that uses Lego construction toys to introduce upper elementary
students to the concept and power of molecular
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peptide libraries are powerful storehouses for
the development of protein ligands and inhibitors of protein-protein
interactions; molecules that are scarce in standard small molecule libraries.
This project addresses the potential benefits of introducing conformational
constraints into peptide libraries to answer two questions about the
relationship of peptide flexibility and target affinity: does rigidification
inherently improve binding affinity; and, are high-affinity binders with rigid
structures more rare compared to flexible structures of similar affinity within
a library? To answer these questions, peptide libraries are created with matched
hydrophobicity and sequence diversity, but increasing levels of rigidity. These
libraries will be tested against streptavidin (with a compact and rigid binding
site and that recognizes contiguous amino acid motifs), and a prototypical SH3
domain (with an extended and flexible binding surface) to study the dependence
on the structure of the protein targets. This wholesale analysis of the
prevalence of binders and affinities of peptides selected from each library
answers the guiding questions concerning the relationship of rigidity to
affinity. Dr. Hartman through this project provides training in chemical biology
to a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students at Virginia
Commonwealth University. He and his group are also developing the Plickers-based
activities to engage elementary school students (including those from
underrepresented minority groups) in learning about molecular interactions and
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.