* 1904037
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Striving Together? Second-Generation Americans' Path to College
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Nina Bandelj, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 15,998.00

We know that there are enduring differences in the rates of educational
attainment across different social groups. Because some social groups in the
United States have higher levels of college educated adults than others, these
adults become an educational and social resource for working-class background
youth from these same groups, who subsequently complete more years of schooling
than they would otherwise. Thus initial differences in educational attainment
are duplicated over time, thus posing challenges to some striving for upward
mobility. This project will advance how this process of resource activation
unfolds across different social groups. Moreover, the present study will examine
whether these resources can be shared beyond the originating social communities
to support academic achievement among peers of other social groups through
youths? friendship networks. The study will identify conditions under which
high-school level social resources from some groups not only serve to enhance
emerging educational mobility strategies of in-group members, but also advance
the social opportunity of working-class students from other social groups
through peer networks. Findings will provide guidance for K-12 schools as they
strive to encourage higher rates of enrollment in higher education and as well
as achievement of post-secondary education among many social groups who are
enrolled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project analyzes observational and
interview data from 120 high-school aged children of several social groups that
vary in terms of average adult educational attainment and in terms of social
resources. The project will interview respondents using a questionnaire and
semi-structured interview guide that collect demographic information, college
preparation strategies, and access to various forms and origins of social
resources. This project will also incorporate similar data from an existing
sample of 45 parents and young adults whose help may be useful to high school
students striving for upward mobility. The project will use MaxQDA, which is a
qualitative data analysis software that facilitates first and second cycle data
coding, to manage, store and analyze all data gathered for this project. The
project will also conduct participant observation in several high school
settings, including campus sporting events, student free time and during parent-
teacher-student organization meetings, to contextualize data produced via
questionnaires and interviews. By understanding what facilitates positive cross-
group relationships of adolescents, the study will inform sociological theories
regarding social mobility, educational access and inter-group
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.