* 1904601
* Glasses with Tunable Liquid Crystalline Order
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Ranko Richert, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 369,913.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals (LCs) and glasses
are important materials in modern technologies. LCs enable rapid adjustment of
molecular organization by external control, making them useful for displays and
sensors. Glasses merge liquid-like disorder and spatial uniformity with the
mechanical strength of a solid, finding applications in optics, in electronics,
and as amorphous pharmaceuticals. This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program as well as the Condensed Matter Physics program at
NSF, creates new materials that combine the advantages of both LCs and glasses -
glassy materials with continuously variable LC order. These materials display
molecular packing that is tunable between the order of a LC and the disorder of
a glass, while maintaining the advantages of ordinary glasses. They are expected
to find applications in organic electronics and optoelectronics. For example,
the ability to control the organization of emitter molecules in the active
layers of organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), which are widely used in cell
phone displays, can significantly enhance the efficiency of such displays. Given
the number of these devices this is a benefit of global scale. In general, these
new materials are ideal for applications where performance depends on molecular
orientation and packing and but can be compromised by defects commonly present
in crystalline materials. Additionally, pharmaceutical scientists will be able
to employ these materials to optimize solubility and physical stability.
Furthermore, the project advances the training of graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students by integrating materials research and education. Outreach
activities include the offering of a materials chemistry course each summer to
high school seniors from under-represented groups through the UW-Madison PEOPLE
program, a short course titled Amorphous Pharmaceuticals to industrial
scientists each May through UW Extension Services, and new demonstrations on
crystalline and glassy materials for Science Is Fun, an outreach program led by
ASU scientists and delivered throughout the Phoenix Metro
Area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals are known for their fast and
reversible phase transitions. The speed at which these transitions occur has led
to the notion that fast cooling will not suppress LC ordering, but recent work
has discovered that LC transitions can be dynamically arrested at practical
cooling rates, thus allowing the formation of glasses with variable LC order or
the access to different LC phases. This project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program as well as the Condensed Matter Physics program
at NSF, establishes the principles by which molecular organization can be
controlled through conditions of glass preparation. The team tests the
hypothesis that the amount of LC order trapped in a glass is determined by the
kinetic arrest of the end-over-end rotation of rod-like LC molecules. LC order
is evaluated as a function of temperature and cooling rate by X-ray scattering
conducted using both laboratory and synchrotron sources. Dielectric spectroscopy
determines the timescales of molecular rotations about the different axes and
the temperatures of kinetic arrest. Aging experiments are used to study the
stability of LC order in the glassy state. This project is expected to provide a
general recipe for selecting process conditions to control LC order in a glass,
leading to materials that have the potential to enhance the performance of
organic electronics and pharmaceutical formulations. Current theories of LC
transitions generally do not include time as a variable, effectively assuming
instantaneous transitions controlled by thermodynamics alone. Results from this
project will support development of theories in which transformation kinetics
play an important role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.