* 1904267
* Role of transport processes in formation of optimal microbial habitats and the root-microbe-soil carbon accrual continuum
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Alexandra Kravchenko, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 624,995.00

Soil fertility is vital to crop production and is dependent on the availability
of soil organic carbon (C). In general, the higher the level of soil C, the more
productive the soil. Conversion of agricultural land has resulted in significant
losses of soil C to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide (CO2). Enhancing the
ability of soil to store C will not only increase national agricultural
production, it will also decrease atmospheric CO2 levels. Understanding of the
mechanisms of soil C enhancement and storage remains incomplete. This project
aims to fill an important gap in current knowledge of how soils store C by using
a new conceptual approach and state-of-the art methods in micro-scale physics,
chemistry, and biology. The results will lead to progress in agricultural and
ecosystem science, and will form the foundation for the development of new
farming and management strategies for increasing soil C gains and improving soil
fertility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new conceptual paradigm
that links together micro-scale physics, chemistry, and biology, while
emphasizing the currently underestimated importance of physical connectivity of
optimal microbial habitats in C storage. The experimental work will offer
mechanistic insights into the following C-related transport components: (i) the
nature and properties of optimal microbial habitats, i.e., the physical space
where most of new C is microbially processed; (ii) the transport routes of new C
from plant roots into the optimal habitat space, and of the products of
microbial decomposition into potential C storage locations; and (iii) the
effects of physical connections on movement of extracellular enzymes and their
ability to intercept C products or reach them in storage locations. Several
established and novel tools for micro-scale physical and biochemical analyses
will be employed by the project, i.e, X-ray computed micro-tomography for
characterization of soil pores and roots, 13C labeling and site-specific micro-
scale 13C sampling for determining the fate of new C in relation to roots and
soil pores, osmium staining of soil organic matter to quantify development of
new C patterns, and 2D zymography for micro-scale mapping of extracellular
enzyme activities. This project provides training and research opportunities for
post-doctoral researchers, graduate, and undergraduate students. The materials
developed based on the project's findings will be reported to the farmers
interested in enhancing soil organic matter levels on their farms at Field days
and other events organized by the Michigan State University Extension
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.