* 1904554
* 3D Printing of Solar Cell Contacts with Metal Reactive Inks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/04/2018,06/30/2019
* Owen Hildreth, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2019
* USD 113,114.00

Current solar cell contacts are made by screen-printing silver pastes and then
sintering the silver particles together at high temperatures to form a
conductive electrode. However, the high-temperature sintering step is costly and
is not compatible with thin-film solar cell technologies. One solution is to use
low-temperature reactive inks. Reactive inks print chemicals (instead of
printing particles) that react at low temperatures, and can potentially produce
dense materials with good electrical conductivity. Unfortunately, non-optimized
reactive inks tend to produce high porosity in printed materials. This award
supports fundamental research to enable development of new silver and copper
reactive inks that can print conductive materials with very low porosity. These
new inks can have applications in photovoltaics and low-cost flexible
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research objective is to understand
the effect of ink composition (including ligand type, reactant concentration,
and solvent) on the chemical and fluid properties of reactive inks. Relevant ink
properties under investigation include reaction activation energy, Arrhenius
pre-exponential factor, heat-of-vaporization, diffusion coefficient, viscosity,
and surface tension. This objective will be achieved by experimentally measuring
relevant properties as ligand type (examples: [(NH3)2CH3CO2]-, [(NH3)2NO3]-, and
2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol), reactant concentration (10 µmol/L to 1 mol/L), and
solvent type (ethanol, water, glycerol, and 2,3-butandiol) are varied.
Activation energy, Arrhenius pre-exponential factor, and heat of vaporization
will be measured using a differential scanning calorimeter and a
thermogravimetric analyzer; diffusion coefficient will be measured using
chronoamperometry and cyclic voltammetry; viscosity will be measured using a
microVISC rheometer; and surface tension will be measured using a custom
goniometer. The second research objective is to understand the effect of ink
composition and processing parameters on chemical potential distribution in
evaporating reactive ink droplets. To achieve this objective, simulations will
be conducted using Comsol Multiphysics equipped with heat transfer,
computational fluid dynamics, chemical reaction engineering, and particle
tracing modules. These simulations will predict the chemical potential
distribution in evaporating reactive ink droplets as ink composition and
processing parameters are varied. The third research objective is to understand
the effect of reaction kinetics on particle nucleation and growth rate
distributions in evaporating reactive ink droplets. To achieve this objective,
particle nucleation and growth rate distributions will be modeled using the
classical nucleation theory with activation energies taken from the literature.
The reaction kinetics will be calculated using the measured reaction activation
energy, the measured Arrhenius pre-exponential factor, and the simulated
chemical potential distribution. Some predicted results will be compared with
experimental observations.