* 1904816
* Geometry-controlled rigidity in non-spherical hydrogel capsules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Richard Dluhy, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 560,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create
hollow micro-sized hydrogel particles (microcapsules) with geometrically
controlled rigidity and to provide fundamental understanding of their shape
transformations under pressure. Particle rigidity and shape are crucial
parameters that dictate specific biological functions, and controlling them
could allow comprehensive optimization of capsules for delivery of medications.
To date, regulating rigidity (stiffness) of hydrogel particles by varying their
shapes has presented a major challenge due to the lack of mechanical stability
of shape-defined hydrogel structures. The key task of this research is to
understand how stiffness of microcapsules can be controlled by structural
characteristics including non-spherical curvature, edge and facet number, and
overall shape. The proposed research will impact the development of micro-sized
hydrogels of complex shapes that can provide a powerful means to mimic key
properties of biological systems and hold potential as cell-mimicking particles
to be developed into artificial cells and multifunctional delivery carriers. The
design of these capsules also offers prospects for developing materials with
unique actuation characteristics having applications in polymer and materials
science, biomedical engineering, and chemical biology. The educational objective
of the project is to enhance a discovery-driven multidisciplinary polymer
science program at UAB, to promote student training from the high school through
graduate-level in modern aspects of chemistry, polymer science, and materials
science, and to broaden recruitment of historically underrepresented
populations. These efforts will also help to increase public awareness of
nanoscale polymeric materials and to train the next generation of the STEM
workforce in the southeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is
to test the hypothesis of geometry-controlled rigidity in hollow hydrogel
microcapsules and to gain fundamental understanding of pressure-induced capsule
shape transitions (buckling) at a molecular-level. Current approaches aim to
control the stiffness of hydrogel particles mainly by choice of polymer, fluid
content, and crosslink density. The objectives of the proposed study are: (i) to
determine how pressure-induced shape transformations are affected by
physicochemical properties of the capsule wall (shell) in vertices-free non-
spherical capsules; (ii) to understand how pressure-induced shape transitions
are influenced by the physicochemical properties of the capsule shell in
vertices-reinforced capsules; and (iii) to discover how capsule shell rigidity
can be controlled via the internal structure of the multilayer hydrogel shell.
Dimensional and shape changes defined by negative volume changes (shrinkage and
buckling instability) in response to increasing osmotic pressure will be
investigated using an osmotic pressure difference method. The impacts of
crosslink density, chain persistence length, shell hydration and architecture on
the hydrogel stability against osmotic pressure-induced buckling (shape loss)
and shape recovery after stress removal will be studied. The fundamental
relationships between the geometry-controlled rigidity and pressure-induced
shape transitions will be explored using a combination of in-situ techniques
including atomic force and confocal microscopy, ellipsometry, nanoindentation,
neutron scattering, and ATR-FTIR. The expected collaborative effort with the UAB
medical community will provide valuable opportunities for two-way feedback
between the research on fundamental material properties and testing materials
performance for biomedical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.