* 1904645
* Enabling Open Tubular Liquid Chromatography for Single Mammalian Cell Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Shaorong Liu, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2022
* USD 0.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Professor Shaorong Liu at
the University of Oklahoma is working to improve the effectiveness of methods
targeting analysis of chemical species associated with individual cells. By
devising enhanced sampling techniques and coupling them with improved separation
and high-sensitivity detection, the Liu group seeks to enable observation of
responses of individual cells to various stimuli, thereby complementing the
ensemble average usually measured by conventional methods. Technical impact is
enhanced through collaborations with instrument manufacturers, improving
prospects for commercialization of the approach. Educational impacts are
enhanced through outreach efforts engaging regional teachers and participation
in an international undergraduate summer research experience
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research group in Professor Liu's lab explores
the efficiency limits of narrow open tubular liquid chromatography to identify
and ameliorate the factors governing these limits. To exploit the advantages of
narrow open tubular columns, the group fabricates very small sample injectors
and electrospray emitters, enabling the coupling of narrow open tubular liquid
chromatography with mass spectrometry for single mammalian cell in-situ
analysis. The research seeks to advance knowledge and extend the boundaries of
separation science. This in turn will enable studies of cell heterogeneity,
providing better understanding how cells develop and how diseases evolve.
Collaboration with an instrument manufacturer facilitates the commercialization
of this technology. Introducing these topics to rural high school science and
mathematics teachers seeks to leverage efforts to improve STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.