* 1904943
* Resolving the Fates of Multiple Triplet Excitons in Single Multi-Chromophoric Conjugated Organic molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* John Grey, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2022
* USD 303,307.00

Organic polymers are long chains of repeating molecular subunits. When they
absorb light, some segments of the chain are placed in excited energy states
that live for about a billionth of a second. However, a fraction of this energy
can become trapped in lower energy states that last much longer, perhaps a
thousand times longer. These longer-lived states can interact with each other,
as well as excess charges existing on the chain, which poses significant
challenges for using polymers in emerging technologies, such as light-emitting
diodes and solar energy conversion devices. With support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor John Grey at University of New Mexico is studying these
long-lived states over a broad range of time scales. Working with his students,
Professor Grey is using microscopy methods that can observe single polymer
chains to determine how the chain structure and packing influence these long-
lived excitations. Their discoveries could inform the design of new polymers. In
addition, Professor Grey, who is a veteran himself, is engaging with student
veteran groups at the University of New Mexico to increase participation of
veteran and non-traditional students in STEM fields though weekly 'lunch and
learn' and tutoring sessions. The long-term goal is to improve enrollment and
retention of student veterans by recognizing their unique experience and
engaging them as leaders in classroom and laboratory
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines the population dynamics of
spin-forbidden (triplet) excited states in multi-chromophoric conjugated
polymers and molecular light harvesting arrays. Hybrid single molecule
spectroscopy techniques and stochastic kinetic modeling are the primary physical
probes used to resolve interactions between multiple triplets spanning time
scales from approximately 1 ns up to steady-state conditions. The goal is to be
able to count the number of triplets on a single molecule at any given time, and
to resolve how these states and their interactions with other excited states
evolve with increasing structural (morphological) complexity. This project also
exposes new kinetic insights of bimolecular annihilation processes that are
often difficult to measure reliably at the bulk material level. The research
further utilizes collaborations with synthetic materials chemists to investigate
how fine tuning of molecular structure impacts population dynamics of multiple
interacting excited states. Student participants gain valuable skills in
physical and materials chemistry as well as theoretical modeling vital for the
advancement of National science and technology
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.