* 1904570
* Characterizing Chemical Production and Loss of Nitrous Acid (HONO) Via Stable Isotopes
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Meredith Hastings, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2023
* USD 554,374.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program supports Professor
Meredith Hastings at Brown University to study nitrous acid. Nitrous acid is a
key species in atmospheric chemistry, with important implications for air
quality both indoors and outdoors. This project focuses on addressing the
difficult-to-resolve sources and sinks of atmospheric nitrous acid. Nitrous acid
is typically produced on an environmental surface by reactions of nitrogen
dioxide, nitric acid or particulate nitrate. The project uses stable isotopic
analysis of these species to determine potential pathways of gaseous nitrous
acid production. It builds on measurements of isotopic signatures from previous
work and leads to improved understanding of the relative contributions from each
source and pathway to the atmospheric nitrous acid budget. This has strong
implications for understanding air quality, climate change, and their impact on
human and ecosystem health. It also provides a potential tool for better
prediction and decision making related to emissions that lead to nitrous acid
production. This award also advances the career development of a postdoctoral
scientist and a graduate student. Results are being integrated into a newly
developed course on air quality at Brown University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new
method has been developed and verified in Professor Hasting's lab to efficiently
capture nitrous acid in the air for stable isotopic characterization of nitrogen
and oxygen isotopes. This technique has been used to distinguish the isotopic
signature of nitrous acid from major sources including vehicle, soil and biomass
burning emissions. In this project, a flow reactor is being designed and built
to couple with the collection technique to isotopically characterize the nitrous
acid heterogeneously produced on environmentally representative surfaces that
are both prepared in the lab and collected in the actual environment. The
results from this project will constrain atmospheric nitrous acid budget and
trace reactive nitrogen species cycling from regional to global
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.