* 1904592
* Instrument Development: Multiplex Sensory Interfaces Between Photonic Nanostructures and Thin Film Ionic Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Giuseppe Strangi, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Identifying and measuring the amount of naturally occurring or emitted gases and
metal species in a highly sensitive way is critical for ensuring the welfare of
the public; the safety of first responders, military personnel, and employees in
high-risk workplace settings; and the capability to assess the impact of gases
and metals that are key to a sustainable global environment. This project
develops an unexplored chemical sensing method that is based on the position of
light beams being shifted when minute levels of a gas or metal ion are
encountered. A team of chemists, physicists, and engineers is taking advantage
of the properties of light waves when they bounce off the surface of nanometer-
sized metal layers coated with thin films of environmentally friendly ionic
liquids. The project aims to offer unprecedented, low-cost monitoring of
atmospheric gases and metal ions in the environment, under a wide variety of
conditions and locations. Mass production of miniaturized sensors that use the
new method has the potential for widespread use of the sensors by people from
many walks of life. The multidisciplinary collaborative nature of this research
impacts the education of graduate and undergraduate students who are trained
using a teamwork approach. To encourage educational opportunities for high
school students from underrepresented groups, student interns from the East
Cleveland School District are trained through a jointly organized workshop. The
workshop has lecture and laboratory components and focuses on how the cross-
disciplinary research between engineering and science can address current and
pressing needs in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors B.
Gurkan, Hinczweski, Strangi, and U. Gurkan at Case Western Reserve University
are addressing development of a new "universal" method for the detection of
gases and metal ions. The three specific aims of the study are: (1) engineering
a photonic nanostructure to dramatically enhance the Goos-Hanchen (GH)
displacement of an incident laser beam, allowing for ultrasensitive detection of
local permittivity changes; (2) understanding of the refractive index changes of
the ionic liquid layer above the nanostructure, in the presence of solutes such
as carbon dioxide and metal salts; and (3) evaluating sensitivity and
responsiveness of the multiplex interface. The sensing mechanism is based on GH
displacement, where a laser beam internally reflected at a prism surface is
displaced along the surface. The size of the GH shift depends on the structure
and refractive indices of the materials on top of the prism, including the ionic
liquid layer. The photonic nanostructure amplifies the magnitude of the GH shift
so that it becomes easily detectable. The photonic nanostructure consisting of
alternating dielectric or metal layers with different hierarchical arrangements
and architectures are computationally designed and created by nanofabrication.
To suppress interferences, multiplexing is employed by the use of different
ionic liquids on the top layer with tailorable permittivity changes upon
exposure to target analytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.