* 1904670
* ATP Analogs to Study Human Histidine Kinases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Mary Kay Pflum, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2023
* USD 501,000.00

Kinases are a large and diverse family of enzymes essential to basic biological
functions in cells. Kinases act by adding phosphate groups to protein
substrates, which profoundly impacts the ability of the modified substrate to
regulate human biology. Kinases that modify serine, threonine, and tyrosine
amino acids within protein substrates are extensively studied due to their
having clear roles in cell function and dysfunction. Recently, a new family of
protein kinases that modify histidine amino acids has emerged as likely players
in human cell biology. However, few methods are available to study histidine
kinases, due to their unique structure and function. Professor Mary Kay Pflum
and her undergraduate and graduate students at Wayne State University aim to
apply her pioneering chemical approach of using adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
analogs to study histidine kinase enzymes. The new chemical tools developed in
this project are critical to fully reveal the chemical role of histidine kinases
in cell biology. Integral to the project is the involvement of undergraduate and
graduate students. At the middle and high school levels, Professor Pflum
introduces students from the Detroit metropolitan area to multidisciplinary
science and scientific careers through outreach programs. By integrating
research and educational activities, this application broadly impacts the
community by fostering the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemistry of Life Process
Program in the Division of Chemistry at the NSF, Dr. Mary Kay Pflum of Wayne
State University builds on prior work with adenosine triphosphate (ATP) analogs
being used to develop kinase-catalyzed labeling of substrates. Given the paucity
of chemical tools to study the chemical process of phosphohistidine-mediated
cell biology, the overall goal of this project is to apply kinase-catalyzed
labeling to human histidine kinases. Dr. Pflum accomplishes this overarching
goal by: 1) establishing kinase-catalyzed labeling with human histidine kinases;
2) using kinase-catalyzed labeling to identify phosphohistidine-containing
proteins; and 3) creating probes to monitor histidine kinases in human cells.
These studies represent a first step toward Dr. Pflum's long-term objective to
study the role of phosphohistidine in cellular processes. The identification of
new chemical mechanisms in cell biology related to phosphohistidine has wide
implications in human biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.