* 1904288
* Fundamental Properties and Applications of pi-Conjugated Platinum Carbene Chromophores and Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kirk Schanze, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Kirk Schanze at the University
of Texas at San Antonio. This investigation brings together several distinct
studies that probe the fundamental, excited state properties of molecules when
exposed to light. Potential applications are based on efficient light emission
(phosphorescence) which enables the materials to serve as organic light-emitting
diodes (OLEDs ? particularly efficient deep blue phosphors), solar cells,
photodetectors, sensor and materials for medical diagnostics and therapy, which
are widely used in today's society. This research will advance fundamental
insights with respect to the design and synthesis of molecules that efficiently
react with light contribution to large sectors of new technologies in the
commercial, military and health sectors. This award provides new opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate student training. Professor Schanze develops
education and outreach activities involving underrepresented groups in the
science-technology-engineering-math (STEM) fields at a Hispanic Serving
Institution. Specifically, he will develop and distribute a module entitled
'Navigating Scientific/Technical Literature for Non-Scientists' (NSTL) with the
goal of teaching the general public how to search and access the scientific,
technical, and patent literature by using publicly-accessible resources and/or
by using traditional subscription-based search and access tools typically
available at local Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Platinum acetylide
molecules and polymers that contain pi-conjugated organic ligands provide a
unique opportunity to investigate fundamental properties of spin-allowed and
-forbidden electronic excited states in delocalized electronic systems. This
research focuses on several distinct studies that probe fundamental excited
state properties and explore potential applications, focused particularly on new
platinum-carbene based chromophores and polymers that exhibit efficient light
emission. Development of such materials expands the range of accessible
optoelectronic organometallic materials and improves the understanding of
relationships between chromophore structure and excited state properties. A
significant potential benefit could also emerge by the development of a new
class of efficient deep blue phosphors for application in OLEDs. The project
advances knowledge in the fields of organic, organometallic and polymer
materials chemistry with potential impacts on applications of organic
electronics. Special emphasis is placed on broadening the diversity of students
working on this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.