* 1904660
* Chemically Functionalized Nanoscale Materials: Building Functional Polymers for Nanoscale Materials and Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Todd Emrick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 01/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

Semiconductor nanostructures can be created from many different types of
materials. They also come in many different shapes and sizes, with dimensions
that can be 100,000 times thinner than a sheet of paper. The unique properties
of these extremely tiny crystals have growing impact in the emerging science and
technology of wearable sensors, flexible electronics, solar cells, and
personalized medicine. However, finding ways to combine these different
structures into electronically active materials remains an important challenge.
With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Todd Emrick and his students at the
University of Massachusetts Amherst are creating synthetic polymers that link
nanostructures together, enabling easy transport of charges between them. Their
discoveries could lead to more efficient devices, ranging from flexible, mobile
solar cells to faster performing, lighter weight electronics. The project
provides education and training to a diverse population of researchers,
including graduate students engaged in Ph.D. research, undergraduates gaining
their first research experiences, and high school students participating in an
apprenticeship program that will increase opportunities for young researchers in
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is investigating new approaches to
synthesizing polymers containing functionality that enhances the electronic
activity of the materials they contact, focusing especially on zwitterionic and
charged groups. These polymers are investigated as coatings (from 5 to 100 nm
thickness) on electronically active substrates, such as transition metal
dichalcogenides (TMDC) nanostructures, and as ligands on perovskite
nanoparticles, facilitating interfacial contact and improving the lifetime and
stability of electronic contact. By emphasizing conjugated polymer zwitterions
(CPZs) and metal-free polymerization methods, this study is preparing materials
with chemistry that is ideally suited for integration into well-defined
ultrathin interfacial layers and robust multilayer structures. These synthetic
polymer chemistry designs are producing new knowledge in structure-property
relationships involving soft materials, including the effect of the position and
orientation of the charged moieties within CPZs that dictate their interfacial
contact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.