* 1904488
* Nanochemistry of sp3 Quantum Defects
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* YuHuang Wang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

Carbon nanotubes are small tubes with walls that are a single atom thick and
diameters that can be a hundred thousand times smaller than a strand of hair. In
a perfect nanotube, each carbon atom is bound to 3 other atoms, forming a
hexagonal lattice. Defects can be introduced in the lattice by attaching small
organic molecules to the outside of the tube such that a few atoms in the
lattice are bound to 4 carbons, instead of 3. These quantum defects attract
charge carriers moving along the tube, enabling them to fluoresce brightly. With
support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor YuHuang Wang at the University of Maryland
College Park and his students are using super-resolution microscopy techniques
to study individual fluorescent defects. Their discoveries could have important
implications for emerging technologies in chemical sensing and quantum
information science. Understanding the nanochemistry of quantum defects may
enable the precise synthesis of a whole new family of quantum emitters, and make
it possible to experimentally probe defects at the single defect limit as well
as chemical events that are otherwise difficult to capture. This research has
potential for extending applications in nanochemistry, photophysics, quantum
theory, materials engineering, optoelectronics, biological imaging, and quantum
science and engineering offering increased global and economic competitiveness
for the United States. The research provides a unique opportunity to develop
engaging outreach demos and involve undergraduate students from under-
represented groups in cutting-edge research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Wang and his students design and synthesize sp3 quantum defects by covalently
attaching selected alkyl or aryl functional groups to semiconducting carbon
nanotube model systems. Excitons -- electron-hole pairs each carrying a quantum
of excitation energy -- are efficiently harvested by the defects producing
bright emission that encodes chemical information at the defect site. The team
is exploiting this intriguing property and advancing a super-resolution
hyperspectral imaging technique in the shortwave infrared to study the
spectroscopic properties of these synthetic defects at the single defect limit.
Furthermore, the dependence of the emission spectrum on the nature of the
chemical defect is being used to watch the breaking and formation of bonds in
model chemical reactions involving aminoaryl substituents. The team is also
characterizing functionalization patterns of sp3 quantum defects at the high-
density limit and studying how sp3 defect chemistry may propagate on the sp2
lattice of low-dimensional carbon materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.