* 1904657
* Dynamics of Functional Polymers with Reversible Bonds: The Role of Associating Group Aggregates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Alexei Sokolov, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2023
* USD 560,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Associating polymers formed by
reversible chemical bonds between polymer molecules have unique macroscopic
properties and functionalities not achievable in other materials, including
self-healing and time-programmable functions. Moreover, they form recyclable
plastic materials critical for sustainability. However, detailed quantitative
understanding of how to control macroscopic properties of these novel polymeric
materials remains a challenge. The proposed research addresses this challenge by
combining a broad range of experimental techniques with development and testing
of new theoretical model approaches connecting molecular-scale processes to
macroscopic properties. The knowledge developed in this research will be central
to the rational design of novel recyclable polymers with unique, self-healing,
and stimuli-responsive properties. It will have strong impact on various fields
of science and engineering, including materials science, physics, chemistry and
biophysics. A significant focus of the project is integration with education
through active involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in research.
The project also promotes active collaborations with national user facilities
and international collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Associating polymers, formed by reversible
intermolecular interactions, include a wide spectrum of fundamentally and
technologically important materials with better recyclability than traditional
polymers. Rational design, synthesis, and fabrication of novel associating
polymers require a deep fundamental understanding of how the local reversible
interactions and phase separation of the associating groups affect the
macroscopic properties of these materials. Despite extensive attention and
efforts in the past, detailed quantitative understanding of dynamics in the
melts of associating polymers remains limited. This hinders development of novel
functional materials with desired properties. The main goal of the planned
research is to deepen the fundamental understanding of dynamics in associating
polymers on different time and length scales with special focus on the role of
associating group aggregates. In this research, the chain and segmental dynamics
and the viscoelastic properties of associating polymers will be studied by a
combination of rheology, dielectric spectroscopy, differential scanning
calorimetry, and light- and neutron scattering spectroscopies. It will be
complemented by analysis of structure using small angle X-ray and neutron
scattering, and will provide broad-based experimental tests of existing
theories. The proposed research will deepen fundamental understanding of
microscopic parameters controlling macroscopic properties of associating
polymers, especially the role of intrinsic heterogeneities. This will be
instrumental for a rational design of materials with unique viscoelastic and
self-healing properties, as well as for design of novel functional materials
with tunable time programmed and stimuli-responsive properties. From a broader
perspective, it might also have strong impact on understanding of many
biological materials where reversible bonding and interactions play a critical
role.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.