* 1904940
* Bifunctional foldamer catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Samuel Gellman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Samuel H. Gellman of the University of
Wisconsin-Madison is developing new types of protein-like molecules. This
fundamental research is biologically inspired. All organisms contain sequence-
specific oligomers and polymers that fold into particular shapes, and these
shapes enable complex functions. Many of these folded molecules, such as
enzymes, carry out crucial chemical transformations within the cells in the
human body. Gellman's laboratory creates unnatural oligomers, or "foldamers",
that adopt discrete shapes and catalyze chemical reactions. The foldamers are
prepared using beta- and gamma-amino acids as alternative building blocks to the
natural alpha-amino acids found in proteins. The folding of natural proteins
causes key subunits to be arranged into the precise three-dimensional arrays
that are essential for binding to other molecules and catalyzing chemical
reactions. A central aim of this research is to develop synthetic foldamers that
exhibit protein-like binding and/or catalytic properties. These artificial
foldamers might ultimately surpass proteins in terms of specific functions. The
basic research associated with this award could ultimately lead to development
of new types of drug molecules or new types of manufacturing capabilities at the
molecular level. This work provides excellent training in interdisciplinary
research. It also enables young scholars to undertake productive careers in
academics, industry or other settings. Gellman and his research team participate
in the "Chemistry Opportunities" program intended to introduce undergraduate
students to graduate-level opportunities at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on cutting-edge challenges in terms
of molecular design, with the specific goal of developing new types of foldamer
catalysts that facilitate important chemical transformations. The foldamer
scaffolds contain beta- and/or gamma-amino acid residues and adopt diverse and
stable helical secondary structures. Particular emphasis is placed on
bifunctional catalysis of aldol reactions that produce macrocycles. Synthesizing
large molecular rings via carbon-carbon bond formation is difficult because of
entropic barriers that enable intermolecular reactions to compete with
cyclization. Olefin metathesis has been a widely used and powerful method for
macrocycle formation, and this research aims to develop complementary methods
based on foldamer catalysis. Other cyclization reactions under exploration
include conjugate additions of aldehydes to enoate esters. Novel products from
the catalytic processes under pursuit include a class of detergents in which the
hydrophobic portion is the macrocyclic alkyl unit, rather than a more familiar
linear alkyl unit. The behavior of these novel detergents could provide
fundamental insights on structure-property relationships, and this effort may
generate useful tools for membrane protein studies. Transformative chemistry
associated with this research offers opportunities for invention in terms of
basic research and practical development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.