* 1904499
* Strategies toward Hierarchy and Compositional Complexity in Metal Nanocrystal Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Sara Skrabalak, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 11/30/2022
* USD 474,805.00

Nature is awe-inspiring for the intricate and hierarchical forms adopted by many
of its materials; Such complex structures give rise to the properties that make
many materials useful. Professor Skrabalak and her research group at Indiana
University are developing chemical processes that introduce structural
complexity to modern nanomaterials. This objective arises because the size,
shape, and spatial arrangement of nanoscale materials dictate their properties.
This research is expanding the synthetic toolkit in order to achieve
nanomaterials by design for applications in energy conversion, catalysis,
plasmonics, secured electronics, nanomedicine, and more. This multidisciplinary
project provides to graduate and undergraduate students (including members of
underrepresented groups) research opportunities and training in a range of
synthetic, analytical, and imaging techniques. In addition, the research team is
collaborating with science educators at WonderLab - a children's science museum
in Bloomington, Indiana - to provide an interactive display that teaches about
nanoscience through art. Professor Skrabalak also writes tutorials for the Joint
US-Africa Materials Institute (JUAMI). These tutorials include lectures on
nanomaterials for ~60 East African PhD students and U.S.
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry, the
Skrabalak group is developing synthetic tools in order to achieve nanostructures
with unprecedented hierarchy and compositional complexity. Three aims are being
addressed. The first objective is to demonstrate sequential seeded growth as a
general route toward nanocrystals with different hierarchies and chiralities.
The second objective is to synthesize new bimetallic heterostructures with high
refractive index sensitivity and structural stability through the use of
kinetically controlled deposition routes on shape-controlled seeds. The third
objective is to elucidate the mechanism of galvanic replacement between
intermetallic seeds to access new trimetallic compositions and heterostructures
with intermetallic domains. The optical, plasmonic, and catalytic properties of
achieved nanostructures are being examined in order to elucidate how complex
structure and composition contribute to a material's
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.