* 1904192
* Determination of the Controls on Bacterial Cell Surface Sulfhydryl Binding Site Concentrations
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Jeremy Fein, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2023
* USD 482,937.00

Bacteria are present everywhere on the Earth's surface. Bacteria take in
essential elements by adsorbing them from water using specific chemical sites on
their cell walls. However, these sites also adsorb metal toxins, affecting their
fate in the environment. Recently, a new type of binding site called sulfhydryl
sites was discovered on bacterial cells. These sites bind toxic metals strongly
and they may be the most important for bacteria in natural settings, but the
abundance of these sites in natural systems is unknown. This project will
investigate the factors that control the abundance and distribution of
sulfhydryl sites on bacteria so that models can predict how much toxic metal
will bind to bacteria under realistic conditions. This research could also lead
to an ability to manipulate bacteria to produce cells that are more effective in
removing toxic metal pollutants from contaminated waters or sewage. The project
will involve outreach with local high school science research programs in South
Bend, IN schools, and participation by high school students in the research. A
biogeochemistry module will be created and taught in these high school science
research programs, and 2-3 high school students each year will conduct some of
the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal adsorption onto bacteria can affect
the fate of metals in the environment, and can control metal bioavailability to
bacteria. Previous studies have identified the widespread presence of sulfhydryl
metal binding sites both within bacterial cell envelopes and on extracellular
polymeric substance (EPS) molecules. These sites are low in abundance, yet the
sites likely dominate the adsorption of chalcophile elements (e.g., Hg, Cd, Se,
As, etc.) onto bacteria under the low metal loading conditions typical of most
environmental settings due to the extremely high affinity of sulfhydryl sites
for these elements. The factors that control the concentration and distribution
of sulfhydryl sites are unknown, as are their concentrations in natural systems.
The funded research will determine use lab experiments to test the following
hypotheses: 1) A range of factors such as electron donor, carbon source, and
oxygen concentration during growth affect the concentration of bacterial surface
sulfhydryl sites. This hypothesis will be tested with potentiometric titration
measurements to determine the concentration of binding sites on the bacteria,
conducted with and without sulfhydryl blocking and with and without EPS removal
from the cells. 2) Bacterial cell envelope sulfhydryl sites are located on
sulfhydryl-bearing proteins at the bacterial surface, and the expression of
these proteins on the cell surface can be controlled. To test this hypothesis,
sulfhydryl binding site concentrations will be measured for bacterial strains
that are produced with either enhanced or diminished expression of specific
proteins within the cell envelope, using potentiometric titration and
fluorescence approaches and testing whether these parameters vary consistently
with protein concentration within the bacterial cell envelopes. 3) Sulfhydryl
binding sites on natural organic matter and bacteria in organic-rich soil
samples represent a significant component of the total binding sites in these
environments. A range of natural samples will be collected, and total and
sulfhydryl binding site concentrations will be measured using the same
potentiometric titration approaches used to test Hypothesis 1. The funded
research will improve our understanding of the controls on the environmental
fate of heavy metals in ground and surface water systems, and may lead to
improved bioremediation approaches for those waters. Optimization of
bioremediation strategies involving bacterial metabolic processes that affect
the speciation of elements such as Hg, Cd, As, and Se requires a thorough
understanding of, and potentially an ability to control, adsorption through
metal-sulfhydryl binding on bacteria. The proposed research project will involve
outreach and coordination with local high school science research programs in
South Bend, IN schools, and participation by high school students in the funded
research. The two PIs have close ties with two high school teachers in South
Bend schools who run highly successful science research programs. A
geomicrobiology/environmental chemistry module will be created and taught in
these high school science research programs (a short-course of 4 lectures given
by the project PIs and demonstrations run by University of Notre Dame graduate
students), and 2-3 high school students will be recruited each year to conduct
some of the funded experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.