* 1904291
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Production of Agriculturally Valuable Soils
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Tom Dillehay, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2021
* USD 22,952.00

Throughout the lower Amazon basin of Brazil, the study of enhanced, human-
modified soils, or Amazonian Dark Earth soils (ADE), has shed light on the
complex ways in which Native Amazonians interacted with diverse environments.
While the study of ADE has demonstrated its importance in the development of
complex societies before the arrival of Europeans, there have yet to be any
significant studies concerning the transformations of ADE during European
colonization of the Amazon. Researchers will collect and analyze samples of ADE
soils at the Carrazedo site, located at the confluence of the Xingu and Amazon
Rivers, to examine the processes and causes behind transformations of ADE
between precolonial, colonial, and modern occupations of the site. This study
will provide ecological and anthropological knowledge concerning both the
transformations of ADE soils and the political economies associated with their
production. The rupture caused by colonialism in this region presents an ideal
opportunity to identify the ways in which ADE production, which was originally
geared towards subsistence agriculture, transformed to meet the needs of
emerging capitalism. Within the Carrazedo community, this project will help to
foster greater appreciation of the community's archaeological past, will provide
incentive to protect the archaeological site from future development, will
contribute to the development of a community-based tourism project at the site,
and will provide archaeological training to both community members and
undergraduate students. The project also holds great potential towards the
ongoing development of productive, yet sustainable strategies for rural
agriculture in the Amazon. As the project fine tunes the analyses of the
complexities of ADE variability, farming communities may harness this knowledge
and benefit from the greater production that high fertility levels of ADE have
to offer. Opportunities for less deforestation and greater carbon sequestration
also make the study of ADE an important avenue for greater sustainability in the
Amazon.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Researchers of this project will address questions
concerning the chemical, physical, and cultural variability of ADE between
precolonial, colonial and modern occupations of the site. Specifically, this
study will seek to understand both the intentionality behind ADE production, and
the transformation of this traditional ecological knowledge over time. Were
these soils being reproduced after the arrival of Europeans? Or were the
techniques and knowledge of ADE production lost as a result of colonialism? This
study will answer these questions by conducting excavations and collecting soil
samples within various activity areas that cover a broad spatial and temporal
scope of the site with the intention of understanding the incremental and
systematic changes to ADE. Once collected, these samples will be analyzed in
order to understand their chemical, physical, and cultural components. These
results will then be integrated with findings from archival research in order to
gain insight to the nature of historic strategies for agricultural production
and community patterning in the greater Xingu-Amazon
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.