* 1904861
* Collaborative Research: A search for novel efficient p-type nitride materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Michael Reshchikov, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2023
* USD 245,018.00

Non-technical Description: Gallium nitride (GaN) semiconductor is a key
component in bright light-emitting diodes (LEDs) used in solid-state lighting
and other electronics applications. Most of these devices rely on so-called
p-type GaN, a material with added impurities, which greatly improve its
properties. In addition, exciting opportunities in optoelectronics currently
emerge in development of a related material, p-type AlGaN. This is potentially
groundbreaking since it will pave the way toward bright ultraviolet (UV) LEDs
that can be used in numerous energy efficient applications, including air and
water purification, phototherapy, gas sensing, plant growth lighting, and UV
curing. The integrated experiment/theory research project is aimed at realizing
new efficient conductive p-type GaN and AlGaN semiconductor materials. Adding
beryllium (Be) impurity to GaN and AlGaN is expected to result in significantly
improved p-type conductivity of these materials, leading to dramatic improvement
of UV LED efficiency. Students, including those from underrepresented groups,
have the opportunity to gain hands-on experience with state-of-the-art material
deposition, optical spectroscopy experiments, and theoretical calculations. The
project also builds a strong foundation for research and education in a
relatively small Physics Department at Virginia Commonwealth University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project focuses on growth of
Be-doped GaN and AlGaN and fundamental studies of point defects in these
materials. Analysis of photoluminescence from Be-doped GaN indicates that Be is
the shallowest acceptor in GaN, yet achievement of p-type conductivity is still
a challenging task, because a variety of point defects are formed during
material growth. This collaborative research involves first-principles
calculations of microscopic properties of Be and related defects in GaN and
AlGaN, growth of Be-doped GaN and AlGaN by metalorganic chemical vapor
deposition method, use of ion implantation, thermal annealing, and detailed
experimental studies, primarily with photoluminescence and Kelvin probe methods.
The roles of growth conditions (temperature, pressure, gas ambient), co-doping
with Si and Mg, delta doping techniques, use of surfactants, various thermal
annealing approaches are investigated to achieve conductive p-type materials. An
in-depth and comprehensive study of the properties and behavior of Be and other
defects in GaN and AlGaN by using advanced experimental and theoretical
approaches is essential to gain a basic understanding of point defects in
semiconductors, the mechanisms of radiative and nonradiative recombination, and
possible growth pathways for realizing the efficient p-type materials.
Furthermore, the accuracy of current approaches in solid-state theory is
critically examined through direct experimental
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.