* 1904541
* Excitonic Transport in Van der Waals Solids: Insights from Experiment and Predictive Calculations
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Parag Deotare, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2023
* USD 449,980.00

Nontechnical description: When a semiconductor absorbs a photon, an electron is
excited to a higher energy state. The negatively charged excited electron and
the positive charge left behind (hole) attract each other and form a bound pair
known as an exciton. These excited pairs are capable of transporting energy in
materials and play an important role in natural processes such as photosynthesis
as well as organic devices such as photovoltaics and light-emitting diodes.
Understanding the transport of excitons adds a new dimensionality to not only
bolster the performance of the current excitonic devices but also introduce a
platform for next-generation optoexcitonic devices. The current work studies the
energy transport and its relation to the separation between the bound electron
and hole pair that form the exciton. Above and beyond addressing fundamental and
technological challenges, this research at the frontiers of optoelectronic and
quantum materials provides an ideal venue for truly interdisciplinary education
at all levels. In addition to PhD training, the results of the research findings
are being incorporated into the curriculum of graduate and undergraduate courses
as well as used for training of undergraduate students. The knowledge gained
from this research has a potential to push forward the frontiers of research,
innovations and educating the next generation of scientists and engineers for a
better future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Exciton transport in
two-dimensional semiconductors has recently received significant attention due
to the prospects of achieving room-temperature-stable excitonic devices. These
van der Waals (vdW) semiconductors support stable room temperature excitons due
to reduced dielectric screening that results in high binding energies and small
Bohr radii. However, since these excitons remain delocalized over a few lattice
spacings, qualitative as well as quantitative understanding of the transport
behavior has been difficult. This is reflected from the fact that classifying
the excitons as Wannier-Mott or Frenkel excitons is not trivial in these
materials. Understanding the transport is crucial for the development of the
material system as a device platform as it determines the architecture of the
devices. To meet this challenge, the research team undertake a joint
experimental and computational research effort using diffusion imaging
microscope, ultrafast pump-probe and nonlinear optical techniques,
photoluminescence spectroscopy and first-principles calculations based on
density functional theory to conduct a systematic study of excitonic energy
transport properties that can provide insight on the excitonic states. The team
investigates excitonic energy transport in varying Lead Iodide layers that are
sandwiched between hexagonal Boron Nitride. This material system enables two
independent knobs (i) thickness of Lead Iodide (ii) thickness of Boron Nitride,
to control the dielectric screening of the excitons and hence the amount of
delocalization. Such atomic level control over the excitonic states as well as
dielectric screening provides an opportunity to study the relationship between
localized and delocalized excitonic energy transport in the same material
system. In doing so, it could potentially enable control over band-like or
hopping-like energy-transport mechanisms. Control over transport behavior is
potentially transformative as it will change the rules on how charge and/or
excited states are exploited for various devices such as photovoltaics, light
generation, transistors, etc. Through this work, the research team attempts to
gain control over the energy flow between and within nanoscale system that will
enhance progress in quantum-information science, energy harvesting, metrology,
and light sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.