* 1904454
* Collaborative Research: Applying Ion-Exchange Chromatography-Supercritical Fluid Chromatography to Small Molecule Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* James Grinias, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2023
* USD 228,399.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, the groups of Professors James Edwards and James Grinias from
Saint Louis University and Rowan University, respectively, are working to
improve the analysis of chemicals in complex mixtures like wastewater sludge and
blood by devising improved methods to physically separate the constituents prior
to their identification and quantitation. The approach utilizes a novel "green
chemistry" based technique, with reduced dependence on expensive and potentially
harmful solvents. The team is also devising a series of sample pretreatments
intended to improve both the separation efficiency and the subsequent analysis.
The analysis improvements will enhance the measurement and understanding of
environmental and biological phenomena. The collaboration is introducing
undergraduate and graduate students to complex chemical systems and tools for
their characterization, thereby enhancing the training of the next generation of
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of small molecules and metabolites
is limited largely by the performance of the separation system. Methods being
jointly developed in the Edwards and Grinias laboratories are capable of
preconcentrating derivatized small molecules and then chromatographically
resolving them based on analyte structure. Specifically, the approach entails
development of a two-dimensional (2D) ion exchange-supercritical fluid
chromatography (IEX-SFC) separation system. In this approach, small molecules
are derivatized with a cationic aromatic tag which allows them to be
preconcentrated on an IEX column. Using organic solvent rather than salts to
elute off the IEX renders the eluent compatible with SFC and mass spectrometry
(MS). The SFC then resolves analytes based on hydrophilic interactions,
independent (insofar as possible) of the tag. Both a full-bore IEX-SFC system
and a capillary based SFC system are being developed with multi-faceted
gradients (organic solvent and temperature). In addition, a novel nanospray
interface is being developed to facilitate MS detection coupled to
SFC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.