* 1904937
* Scalable Magnetic Anisotropy from Molecular Lanthanide Building Units
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Jeffrey Rinehart, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 489,469.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;One modern approach to the design of new
functional materials is through the construction and connection of molecular
building units. In this approach, chemists synthesize molecules with structures
that, when linked together to form a bulk material, lead to a material with
specific properties. New properties can be introduced and tuned simply through
modification of the molecular building unit. By analogy, a limitless number of
structures can be designed starting with bricks and mortar, as opposed to one
structure from a single pre-formed slab of fired clay. An area of synthesis
where the building block approach remains a challenge is magnetic materials.
Magnetic materials are vital components in nearly every aspect of modern life,
yet only a handful of materials meet the requirements for use in applications,
and none of these are made through a molecular building unit approach. The
complexity of interactions that determine what direction the magnetic moment
wants to align (its magnetic anisotropy) contributes to the difficulties in
making the materials. As molecular building units are connected, new
interactions disrupt their individual magnetic anisotropy, drastically weakening
it and destroying any rational connection with the anisotropy of the original
building unit. Returning to the construction analogy, connecting molecular
magnets to make a bulk magnet is often akin to using bricks that spontaneously
become raw clay when stacked. To change this, with support from the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms B program at NSF, researchers at UCSD are developing molecular
building units that retain their large anisotropy values when connected to form
an extended magnetic material. This class of new materials, built from
individual units containing a rare earth ion, Er3+, allows the researchers to
create designer magnetic structures that mimic rare and difficult-to-study
motifs from solid state chemistry or create entirely new magnetic structures by
design. Additionally, this project educates graduate and undergraduate students
through innovative approaches such as a "In the Lab" live-feed featuring lab
tours and demonstrations to enhance classroom
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;A molecular building
unit approach to magnetic materials can be realized only if the preferred
orientation of the electron spin (its magnetic anisotropy) can be controlled.
With this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B program at NSF, molecular
building blocks are identified that are capable of controlling anisotropy in the
presence of the intermolecular linkages necessary to construct magnetic
materials. Generating and fixing the magnetic anisotropy at the single-ion
level, shifts research efforts to the rational design of complex spin
geometries, enhanced magnetic coupling, and expanded dimensionality. The design
principles for creating strongly anisotropic magnetism by combining a lanthanide
with its specific, suitable crystal-field environment are well understood.
Maintaining this anisotropy while introducing coupling interactions, however, is
a complex challenge. One approach is to determine a single ligand-lanthanide
combination that can direct the anisotropy roughly independent of the rest of
the coordination sphere. Through computational and experimental results
researchers have previously shown that the interaction between Er(III) and the
cyclooctatetraenide dianion fulfills the requirements of a magnetic building
unit of roughly fixed anisotropy. In this project researchers at UCSD use the
molecular magnetic building unit to probe the behavior of anisotropic spins in
the presence of both exchange and magnetic dipolar coupling, which enables them
to construct new magnets and to independently tune system parameters,
unavailable in any other class of materials. Fixing the two-site anisotropy and
enhancing the exchange interaction creates stronger and switchable magnetic
interactions between ions. More complex 1- to 3-dimensional spin structures that
explore the limits of magnetic strength are created from these molecular
building blocks. Each aspect of the system, from the coupling anisotropy and
strength to the connectivity and dimensionality, allows the controlled study of
an array of fundamental magnetic phenomena - often in ways that are not tunable
or practical in traditional oxide or intermetallic magnetic materials. While
spintronic technology has become ubiquitous, it is almost exclusively based on
top-down approaches. Molecule-based materials offer the promise of enhanced
tunability, terminal scalability, self-assembly, and unique quantum-confinement
properties that align well with the goals of the NSF Big Ideas category: Quantum
Leap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.