* 1904443
* Design Rules for Obtaining White Light from Layered Perovskites and Related Lattices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Hemamala Karunadasa, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The transition to solid-state lighting
(SSL) is predicted to halve global electricity consumption for lighting by the
year 2025. SSL devices use light-emitting diodes (LEDs) coated with a phosphor
material, which converts blue or ultraviolet light from the LED to white light.
The emitted light must span the entire visible spectrum, similar to sunlight, in
order for the lighting to accurately show the colors of illuminated objects.
However, phosphors with such broadband emission are very rare. Commercial SSL
devices mix LEDs and phosphors of different colors to achieve broadband white
light, but a single material that emits broadband white light is highly
desirable for artificial illumination. Layered hybrid perovskites are
crystalline materials that contain alternating organic and inorganic layers. The
inorganic layers of some layered metal-halide perovskites can convert
ultraviolet light to broadband white light. The proposed work, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Electronic and Photonic Materials
programs in the Division of Materials Research, seeks to expand white-light
emission to a much larger range of lattices. Nontoxic compositions, in
particular, will be targeted. To date, the discovery of new white-light-emitting
metal halides remains serendipitous. This research will identify and disseminate
design rules for the predictable synthesis of white-light emitters.
Undergraduate researchers will be involved in all aspects of the research. A new
course will introduce general chemistry concepts to first-year students using
examples from materials chemistry. Concepts in solid state and inorganic
chemistry, which are typically not included in first-year courses, will be
introduced in general chemistry in order to draw students to these fields early.
Outreach activities at local high schools and at Stanford University will also
emphasize the importance of materials discovery, with demonstrations including
new materials synthesized in the PI's group. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Broadband white-light emission from a single
material without discrete chromophores is extremely unusual. Such an emission
has been reported from the inorganic layers of 2D hybrid halide perovskites,
attributed to exciton self-trapping. Although a growing number of metal-halide
broadband emitters are now being reported, they remain as relatively rare,
isolated examples driven by serendipitous discovery. This research, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Electronic and Photonic Materials
programs in the Division of Materials Research, seeks to probe the generality of
exciton self-trapping in a large range of lattices to substantially increase the
number of intrinsic white-light emitters. Synthetic and optical studies of 0D,
1D, and 2D lattices with varying composition and connectivity will allow for the
articulation of overarching design rules for the rational synthesis of white-
light emitters. Steady-state and time-resolved spectroscopies will probe
correlations between the ground-state structure of the lattices and excited-
state distortions associated with self-trapping. These methods will also
interrogate the role of extrinsic self-trapping by studying the influence of
native and chemically induced lattice defects on the emission. The fundamental
studies outlined here are expected to set the stage for the synthesis of
materials that can manipulate light in a predictable manner. Single-source
white-light emitters eliminate problems associated with current methods of
producing white light by mixing multiple different phosphors or light-emitting
diodes. The fundamentally different emission mechanism in these hybrids compared
to those of inorganic phosphors and organic LEDS may open new niches for their
use in large-area displays and panels. Undergraduate researchers will be
involved in all aspects of the research. New materials synthesized for this
project will be included in high school outreach events. A new course will
introduce general chemistry concepts to first-year students using examples from
materials chemistry. Concepts in solid state and inorganic chemistry, which are
typically not included in first-year courses, will be introduced in general
chemistry in order to draw students to these fields
early.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.