* 1904694
* Expanding known binary technetium nitrides and sulfides: A computationally-led synthesis program
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Paul Forster, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 449,901.00

PART I: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Technetium is a radioactive element, and
its fundamental solid state chemistry is not well established in comparison to
neighboring elements. This lack of understanding of technetium limits what may
be understood regarding the transition metals that surround it on the periodic
table. Solids composed of only technetium and either nitrogen or sulfur are
nearly unexplored. However, such compounds are both important in understanding
the fundamental chemistry of the element and of importance to developing
materials with exceptional hardness or useful electronic properties. This
investigation, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) uses high pressure/high temperature synthesis
methods to prepare and characterize a range of new examples of technetium
nitrides and sulfides. Synthesis productivity is enhanced by using cutting-edge
computational approaches to guide synthesis efforts and to assist in
understanding the new solids produced. More detailed calculations using quantum
mechanical methods will provide predicted spectra and other physical properties
to the experimental team before they attempt to synthesize these phases,
enabling quick identification and providing insights into how to begin
characterizing new materials. Outreach has been established through the National
Atomic Testing Museum for school students and the general public, designed not
only to inform them of the science behind radiation and nuclear processes, but
to further excite their imagination about science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART
II: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project fills in critical gaps in
fundamental knowledge of the solid state chemistry of binary technetium
compounds. Targeted synthesis of new solid-state nitrides and sulfides relies
upon diamond anvil cells (DACs), coupled with resistive heating (fully uniform
up to 1200 K) and laser heating (in excess of 5000 K). Reactions carried out in
DACs are monitored in situ during synthesis through X-ray diffraction (XRD) and
spectroscopic (XAS) techniques and in-house optical spectroscopy. Crystal
structure prediction searches identify which compounds are sufficiently stable
that they might be synthesized. By comparing free energies across pressure
ranges for competing phases computationally, very specific experimental
conditions where desired compounds are likely to form can be targeted. Machine
learning approaches will be used to extract empirical, reactive potentials from
this library of data which can be applied to the prediction of more
compositionally and structurally complicated phases than will be initially
accessible with first principles-based structure search techniques. These tools
will also enable the team to accurately simulate systems at length and time
scales inaccessible to conventional electronic structure methods. As simulation
and experiment provide an improved picture of the kinetic and thermodynamic
aspects of stability, a detailed understanding of adjusting structure and
composition may be exploited to rationally design materials. Outreach has been
established through the National Atomic Testing Museum for school students and
the general public, designed not only to inform them of the science behind
radiation and nuclear processes, but to further excite their imagination about
science. This project is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.