* 1904408
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Refugee Incorporation and Social Services in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Roger Waldinger, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 02/29/2020
* USD 15,687.00

Refugees resettled to the U.S. benefit from immediate access to U.S. social
services in ways that most immigrants do not. When refugees arrive, they
initially receive refugee-specific services from their resettlement agency and
then quickly transition to general welfare programs. Benefits such as food
stamps (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program or SNAP) and Medicaid fill in
the critical gaps not covered by resettlement assistance or eventual employment
in entry-level jobs. Institutional factors matter in immigrant incorporation,
yet we know little about how refugee-specific and general assistance programs
differentiate the experience of arriving refugees. Refugee relationships to
social services is further shaped by the city and state in which they are
resettled. Decisions at the federal level disperse refugees to places that vary
in their social policies and political climate. While the consequences of these
decisions are felt at the local level by refugees, service providers, and
communities, we know little about how refugee incorporation plays out in the
approximately 350 destinations throughout the U.S. that receive refugees. This
research examines resettlement in a diverse city with a history of immigration
and a city that is not considered a traditional immigrant destination in order
to understand the role of social services in refugee lives. Findings will
contribute to discussion of how best to support refugees in localities across
the U.S. and make the most efficient use of social services. This project uses
participant observation and semi-structured interviews to examine the role of
social service receipt in refugee lives as they incorporate into different
resettlement contexts. Interviews in both cities focus on resettlement from the
points of view of four key respondent subgroups. The project will conduct a
total of 135 interviews to capture a multitude of perspectives on resettlement,
including with: 1) 60 refugees from several countries of origin; 2) 40
representatives from local institutions (resettlement agencies, social service
providers, local government, and schools); 3) 20 community members not formally
employed to work with refugees; and 4) 15 interviews with national policymakers.
Interviews will show how refugees interact with community institutions, how
local communities respond to refugees, and how resettlement evolves beyond the
walls of the resettlement agency. Observational and interview data will be
analyzed and coded using Atlas.ti. This project will inform sociological
theories on social service usage, new immigrant destinations, and refugee
resettlement in the U.S.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.