* 1904460
* RUI: DNA and nanoparticle assemblies as biomimetic templates for calcium phosphate mineralization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Aren Gerdon, Emmanuel College
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 350,316.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to
support and mentor undergraduate students pursuing research in biomaterials,
mineralization, and biomimetics with an emphasis on analysis at the interface
between inorganic materials chemistry and biochemistry. All research proposed
here will be completed by undergraduate science students at a liberal arts
institution with a record of training women scientists. Primary focus will be on
mentoring and training undergraduate students entering research in their first
and second year and on ensuring that these students contribute to and integrate
with the larger scientific community. Research students will be trained in
numerous instrumental methods (QCM, optical and electron microscopy, AFM, FT-IR,
and others), materials synthesis (nanoparticle synthesis, DNA origami design and
synthesis), and general research methods. This will broaden their opportunities
to enter the industry workforce or graduate studies. The proposal will have a
positive impact on sustainable research and infrastructure of the science and
education departments at Emmanuel College due to the cross-disciplinary nature
of the project and by encouraging collaboration between faculty and research
students on campus. Findings from this research will be made available on campus
and off campus through local and national conference presentations and peer-
reviewed publication. This work will impact high school STEM education by
engaging and training a high school teacher in the research aims throughout the
summer and by visiting the high school teacher's classroom during the school
year. Work in the summer will carry forward to impact the college community as
the PI works to remove barriers that exist between science and society. Members
of the college community, including students, faculty, and staff will be invited
to visit the lab and join undergraduate student researchers in a guided inquiry
experiment at the most basic level. Collectively, this research and activities
have transformative potential for undergraduate students and will develop our
understanding and control of the mineralization
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to support and
mentor undergraduate students pursuing research in biomaterials, mineralization,
and biomimetics with an emphasis on analysis at the interface between inorganic
materials chemistry and biochemistry. An example of this interface is in the
interaction between calcium phosphate ionic solids with collagenous and non-
collagenous proteins in bone osteogenesis and in pathological mineralization.
The need for continued study of this interface is apparent in the prevalence of
bone and dental trauma and pathological mineralization and in the lack of
effective restorative medical procedures. Improved analysis of the calcium
phosphate mineralization pathways, in chemically- and biologically-relevant
systems, and the introduction of new molecules and structures that can enhance
or inhibit mineralization will help to ameliorate this need. Specifically, this
research aims to 1) create and characterize biomimetic DNA and nanoparticle
hierarchical assemblies, using previously selected DNA aptamers, gold
nanoparticles, and DNA origami technology, to take advantage of multi-valency,
programmability, and surface/solution versatility; and 2) analyze assembled
structures in dynamic, real-time, biologically-relevant collagen mineralization
systems that integrate microfluidic solution control and quantitative mass
sensing. This project may yield the creation of new aptamer/nanoparticle
assembled materials, new templates for calcium phosphate biomineralization, and
new analysis tools for biochemistry and bioengineering. These results will be
beneficial to the interdisciplinary field of mineralization in describing new
analytical evaluation techniques and in connecting mineralization with the
versatility and programmability of DNA nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.