* 1904575
* Policies and Strategies for Evolving and Managing Automated Mobility
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Romesh Saigal, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 529,816.00

The deployment of automated vehicles (AVs) is rapidly approaching with a push
from governments who are relaxing laws to allow AVs to operate on highways, and
industry, both manufacturers and mobility service providers, who are heavily
investing in the development of the technology and its applications. AVs are
expected to tremendously enhance the efficiency, safety and convenience of
existing transportation systems. However, all these benefits hinge on the level
of market penetration of AVs being sufficiently high. At low market shares, AVs
exert little impact on enhancing transportation system efficiency. Worse yet,
early deployment of AVs may even compromise the efficiency. The transition
period is expected to be lengthy. If we can shorten it, the tremendous benefits
promised by AVs can be realized sooner. This grant thus sets out to investigate
incentivizing policies and innovative traffic management strategies to promote
the development and deployment of AVs to maximize the social benefit over the
entire duration of the AV deployment. Specifically, incentivizing policies will
nurture the AV market and accelerate their adoption while innovative traffic
management schemes aim to better utilize AVs in the traffic stream and promote
high-occupancy mobility services to maximize the benefits of AVs at a given
market share. The synergies between incentivizing policies and traffic
management schemes may create an upward spiral for the AV deployment and
particularly reduce the duration of initial deployment where AVs exert little or
even negative impact on enhancing efficiency. This grant will provide timely
support for government agencies to better understand the impacts and
implications of AVs and provides guidance on their development and deployment.
This grant will involve students at all levels and traditionally
underrepresented students, and offer fresh materials and case studies for
courses on emerging automated mobility. Research results will be broadly
disseminated through a variety of media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
be conducted in two main thrusts. The first is the study of policies like tax
credits, subsidies, and preferential treatments for AVs etc., which can
incentivize the deployment of AVs from lower to higher penetration rates to
maximize the benefits of AV deployment throughout a planning horizon. As part of
the first thrust, we plan a continuous time principal-agent framework in which
the government is the principal who offers an incentive policy, and the
manufacturer is the agent who sets the retail prices of AVs. The optimal
incentive mechanism is obtained by considering the interplay between these two
entities. In the second thrust, we will develop innovative schemes to improve
the social welfare of the transportation system. These schemes could involve
headway-based congestion pricing for penalizing excessive headways of prototype
AVs or occupancy-based pricing for promoting high occupancy mobility. In
parallel, a distributed control scheme will be developed to use AVs in the
traffic stream as control actuators to distribute traffic demand across the
transportation network to reduce congestion. As the impacts of incentivizing
policies from Thrust 1 and traffic management strategies from Thrust 2 are
intertwined, an iterative application of the models developed in both thrusts
can prescribe a wise course of actions to evolve and manage automated mobility.
If successful, this grant makes three critical contributions: a continuous time
principal-agent approach for incentive policy analysis, data-driven headway- or
occupancy-based congestion pricing and distributed control of AVs for managing
traffic flow. Specifically, we formulate the incentivizing policy design as a
non-zero dynamic Stackelberg game under asymmetric information, a class of
problems extremely difficult to solve using traditional techniques. We offer an
innovative framework to decouple the decision-making processes to make the
problem mathematically tractable. Our research also advances the theory of
congestion pricing by providing a new framework of designing fine-grained
pricing schemes based on vehicle trajectory and occupancy. It shifts the
paradigm from model-based pricing to be more data-driven. The distributed
control of AVs for managing network traffic flow enriches the traffic control
literature and theorizes participatory traffic control that is distributed,
scalable and effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.