* 1904101
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community-Based Natural Resource Management for Wildlife
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Jill Richardson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,298.00

Since the 1970s, the Northern Rocky Mountains region has experienced a
population shift, often referred to as the New West or rural gentrification, in
which wealthier people from other parts of the county move into a region
historically home to a mostly white population engaged in ranching and
extractive land uses such as mining, energy exploration, and logging. The
population shift has coincided with the emergence of a number of conflicts over
the proper relationship between humans and nature. Most research on wildlife and
natural resource management comes from the natural sciences and applied natural
science fields, often focusing either on technical solutions to natural resource
management challenges, or on studies of attitudes toward wildlife. Existing
scholarship on wildlife conflicts in North America and Europe focus on
explaining why conflicts between people occur and persist, but not how they can
be managed or resolved. This project will study a non-profit organization in a
rural cattle ranching area in the Northern Rocky Mountains that uses citizen
science and participatory natural resource management methods to prevent and
mitigate human-wildlife conflict. The project will provide findings relevant to
several aspects of social life and policy. First, by studying a case of
successful wildlife management, the project will contribute to understanding the
social components of how to resolve human conflicts around wildlife management
and improve overall natural resource management. Second, the project will also
contribute to understanding how and why farmers and ranchers adopt sustainable
wildlife management methods. Third, the project will show how citizen science
can improve the effectiveness of participatory natural resource management.
Last, by examining a case in which a rural organization has promoted cooperation
in a region that is divided and on an issue that causes polarization, this study
can provide tools for reducing or resolving conflicts more generally. This
project analyzes how an organization uses participatory methods to facilitate
human-wildlife conflict reduction in an area in which humans clash over wildlife
management and the proper relationship of humans to nature in general. The
project will use case study ethnography to study a unique case of community-
based natural resource management (CBNRM). The project will triangulate data
obtained through interviews, observations, organizational documents, and
government data to compare individuals' accounts with their behavior, build a
coherent narrative of how participants developed and implemented wildlife
management practices over time, and to understand how this was interpreted from
different vantage points. The project will analyze data by creating timelines,
analyzing spoken texts and process tracing. Findings from the project will
inform sociological theories of sustainable agriculture and natural resource
management conflict and accommodation; they will also inform theories relating
to social identity and participatory democracy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.