* 1904087
* EAGER:  Measuring transcriptome-wide translation initiation rates from a single experiment
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Nicholas Ingolia, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2023
* USD 299,950.00

Translation is the process by which ribosomes read and use the genetic
information in mRNAs to generate proteins with specific cellular functions. The
translation initiation rate is the key measure of translational output, as this
rate specifies how much protein can be made from each mRNA and hence how much of
a particular protein will be available in a cell. The aim of this project is to
examine and optimize a novel approach for determining translation initiation
rates at a genome-wide level. This approach will allow transcriptome-wide
translation initiation rates to be determined quickly and efficiently in a
single experiment and for any type of cell. Ultimately, this technique will
allow researchers to address fundamental questions about the process of
translation more broadly and deeply. The staff exchanges between the theoretical
and experimental laboratory groups will allow graduate students and post-
doctoral scholars to learn complementary experimental and theoretical skills
that will enhance their training as quantitative biologists and
biophysicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ribosome profiling is widely used to obtain
high-resolution profiles of in vivo translation. Typically, ribosome profiling
experiments are carried out in parallel with RNA sequencing experiments on the
same sample. The resulting ribosome profiling and RNA sequencing data, however,
are not quantitatively comparable due to substantial technical differences in
library generation and the lack of an absolute standard permitting normalization
between these two independent experiments. This conventional approach also
doubles the amount of sequencing required and introduces additional statistical
uncertainty in comparing the generated DNA libraries. In this EAGER proposal,
the theoretical and experimental expertise of the investigators will be combined
to create a new experimental protocol to quantitatively measure messenger RNA
abundance and translation from a single experiment, and thereby quantify
absolute transcriptome-wide in vivo translation initiation rates. This new
experimental protocol will be a variant of ribosome profiling by combining
features of RNA sequencing and ribosome profiling into one experimental method.
This eliminates the technical differences encountered in comparing the
independent experiments of ribosome profiling and RNA sequencing thus allowing
direct quantification of transcriptome-wide translation initiation rates. This
technique will go beyond conventional qualitative measures of translation
control, such as "translation efficiency", and measure quantitative rates of
protein production in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.