* 1904280
* Nanoscale Nonlinear Terahertz Spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Daniel Mittleman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2023
* USD 441,241.00

As semiconducting devices become smaller and smaller, the question of how
electrons move on shorter and shorter time scales becomes increasingly
important. One way to investigate this question is to measure the radiation that
is emitted by electrons which have been rapidly accelerated, as would typically
be the case in a small device with a fast response. In many situations, it is
possible to induce this rapid charge acceleration using a very short pulse of
light (i.e., of 100 femtosecond duration); in this case, the emitted radiation
typically falls in the terahertz range of the spectrum. Measuring this emitted
terahertz radiation, a technique known as "laser terahertz emission
spectroscopy" (or LTEM), has proven to be a very powerful method for studying
many different kinds of materials, elucidating the earliest dynamical processes
which influence the motion of charges in solids. However, it has an important
limitation: since there is a limit to how tightly one can focus visible light,
the spatial resolution of LTEM is limited to a few microns or larger (that is,
the size of the optical spot on the sample). As a result, it has not been
possible to leverage this spectroscopic tool in the study of single
nanostructures, since they are far too small to be individually addressed by the
incident light pulse. In this research program, we will develop a new way to
apply LTEM which overcomes this limited spatial resolution. Our technique, which
is based on scattering the terahertz radiation from a very small metal tip held
near the sample's surface, will improve the spatial resolution of LTEM by three
orders of magnitude. This will open up an entirely new realm of nanoscale
phenomena for study using LTEM techniques. For example, we will study emerging
photovoltaic materials, to see if the crystalline grain boundaries have a
significant influence on charge transport which could limit their overall
efficiency. We will study nanosized electronic materials such as gallium
nitride, where surface defects and interfacial disorder are thought to strongly
influence their performance. These measurements will reveal the fundamental
physics of charge transport in many different materials, with both nanoscale
spatial resolution and sub-picosecond temporal resolution.&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The proposed research attacks the challenge of coupling millimeter
and terahertz waves to nanostructures in a novel way, by using a scattering-type
near-field microscope to implement tip-mediated nonlinear optics. Our
preliminary work established for the first time the feasibility of tip-mediated
terahertz generation (a second-order nonlinear optical process). Building on
this early work, we will establish nanoscale laser terahertz emission microscopy
as a valuable and versatile tool for spectroscopy of nanomaterials and
nanostructures. We will develop several new methods for studying material
systems based on this idea, including locally applied electric field bias
modulation, and tapping amplitude modulation for studying buried interfaces. We
will also broaden the scope of these techniques by combining them with a time-
delayed pump pulse, for time-resolved studies of the evolution of the terahertz
nonlinearities. This will all be done with a tip-size-limited spatial resolution
of ~10 nanometers. Our work will bring the full power of both linear and
nonlinear terahertz science to the realm of nanomaterials. We will use these new
techniques to study several different material systems, including organometallic
halide perovskites and GaN nanostructures and heterostructures. As well as
answering open questions about the role of nanoscale morphology in charge
transport in these important materials, these measurements will also serve as
demonstrations of the power and versatility of this newly developed
spectroscopic approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.