* 1904759
* Exploring the Mechanistic Diversity of Prenylated-Flavin-Dependent Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2023
* E. Neil Marsh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 01/31/2023
* USD 525,000.00

There is a need to develop new, environmentally friendly routes to fuels and
chemical feedstocks from renewable sources. With this award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Neil Marsh from
the University of Michigan Ann Arbor to examine how a newly-discovered class of
enzymes remove carbon dioxide from unreactive starting materials to make them
more chemically reactive and likely to form value-added commodity chemicals.
Understanding the basic mechanisms of reaction for these enzymes will allow the
development of highly efficient "green" catalysts to potentially replace energy-
intensive industrial processes. Such biocompatible, biodegradable and non-toxic
catalysts dovetail with efforts to replace fossil hydrocarbons for the
production of commodity chemicals that are cost-effective, low-energy and
sustainable. In synergy with the scientific goals, the project advances the
education, training and professional development of undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral scientists (including those from underrepresented
minority groups) in the interdisciplinary area of chemical
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will elucidate the mechanisms of three
prenylated-flavin (prFMN) decarboxylases that appear to use the same cofactor to
catalyze decarboxylation reactions through three distinct mechanisms. These
enzymes are: ferulic acid decarboxylase in which prFMN is hypothesized to react
by a dipolar cycloaddition mechanism; 4-hydroxybenzoate decarboxylase in which
prFMN may react by an electrophilic mechanism; and phenazine-1-carboxylate
decarboxylase for which evidence suggests prFMN may react by a radical
mechanism. The experimental approaches include steady state and pre-steady state
kinetic analyses combined with isotopically-labelled substrates. These studies
determine the rates of formation and breakdown of enzyme intermediates. The
researches also identify unstable covalent intermediates formed between
substrates and prFMN using novel mass spectrometry methods that allow for the
analysis of proteins in their native state. Finally, the researchers will probe
the reaction pathways with substrate analogs that may function as mechanism-
based inhibitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.