* 1904884
* Computational and Experimental Investigations of Phase-Separated Monolayers on Ultrasmall Noble Metal Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Kateri DuBay, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

Metal nanoparticles contain a small metallic core that might consist of just a
few thousand atoms, surrounded by a layer of organic molecules, which determines
its interaction with the environment. Layers made from two different types of
molecules can form complex patterns such as strips or spots as they separate on
the surface, like oil and water. The ability to manipulate these patterns could
lead to new technologies that require precise control of the nanoparticle
interaction with its surroundings. However, characterizing existing patterns is
difficult due to the small size and curved shape of the metallic core. With
support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professors David Green and Kateri DuBay at the University
of Virginia are using a combination of experimental and computational techniques
to study pattern formation on the nanoparticle surface. Their discoveries could
enable innovations in optoelectronics, sensing, and medical applications. The
project is also training future scientists and engineers. In addition, by
engaging K-12 students in the Charlottesville area, as well as undergraduates at
the University of Virginia and at historically black colleges and universities
and minority-serving institutions in the southeast, they are providing
educational and research opportunities to underrepresented minority students in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a tightly
integrated program of theory, computation, and experiment to study self-
assembled monolayers (SAMs) on ultra-small noble metal nanoparticles (NPs),
where the monolayer is composed of a mixture of organic ligands that can move
about on the surface and self-organize to form equilibrated nanophases. The work
combines multiple analytic tools and algorithms in an integrated strategy to
elucidate the driving forces that govern SAM morphology in NP-SAM systems. In
particular, the computational tools enable comprehensive examination of the
effects of length and chemical mismatches between ligands as well as NP size,
facilitating the de novo design of SAM morphologies by tuning these
characteristics. To determine how ligand type and NP size affect SAM morphology,
single NP statistics are required. The research plans include: (1) synthesizing
well-defined monolayer protected NPs; (2) mapping ligand distributions on NP
surfaces with laser desorption ionization mass spectroscopy using NP fragments;
and (3) predicting and visualizing SAM morphology with atomic simulation
anchored by comparisons to experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.