* 1904702
* Biomimetic Nanosponges to 'Lure and Kill' Phospholipase A2
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Liangfang Zhang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 11/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research to the University of California, San Diego is
to explore a highly innovative strategy for effective inhibition of harmful
enzymes and to investigate the fundamental principles of this new approach. The
proposal specifically targets phospholipase A2 (PLA2), key players in critical
diseases including autoimmune diseases, cancers, and venomous injuries. Although
PLA2 inhibition has been shown critical for the treatment of these diseases,
safe and effective PLA2 inhibitors remain lacking. Herein, a nanostructure is
constructed by using safe polymers and natural cell membranes. They are further
functionalized to first 'lure' PLA2 for an attack and then 'kill' the incoming
PLA2. The resulting nanoparticles (denoted "lure and kill" and abbreviated
'L&amp;K-NP') combine PLA2 stimulation and inhibition, two seemingly
counteracting functions, together for synergistic inhibition of the enzyme.
Meanwhile, these nanoparticles preserve the functions of inhibitors and
simulants while suppressing their toxicity otherwise unsafe for direct use.
L&amp;K-NPs also feature modular and tailorable design, representing a platform
anti-PLA2 technology. The proposal will also carry out well-planned education
components as an integral part of the project. The outcome is expected to
contribute significantly to the continual growth of biomaterials science and
engineering. Particular efforts will be dedicated to training a new generation
of skilled and collaborative researchers and educators in the field of
biomaterials and nanomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is to develop and
investigate a novel biomimetic nanoparticle platform with an integrated "lure
and kill" mechanism for effective inhibition of phospholipase A2 (PLA2), a class
of enzymes responsible for numerous diseases. Specifically, the design leverages
nanoparticles coated with natural cell membranes that are susceptible to PLA2
attack. However, instead of being a simple sacrificial approach against PLA2,
the proposed design incorporates two additional components: PLA2 stimulants such
as melittin that spontaneously insert into the membrane and 'lure' the enzyme
for an attack, and PLA2 inhibitors with a lipid-like structure that, upon
membrane digestion, expose themselves to 'kill' PLA2. The resulting
nanoparticles (denoted L&amp;K-NPs) incorporate both PLA2 stimulants and
inhibitors within the cell membrane, therefore eliminating the toxicity
associated with free molecules of the stimulants and inhibitors for safe use. To
achieve the primary goal, three specific research tasks will be pursued: (1)
fabricate and optimize L&amp;K-NP formulation, (2) validate L&amp;K-NPs for
preventing cell damage from venomous PLA2, and (3) extend L&amp;K-NPs to inhibit
mammalian PLA2 by using macrophage membrane coating. Furthermore, through this
project, the PI will train a team of interdisciplinary and multi-level
collaborative young investigators, provide minority students with stimulating
research experience, and enhance scientific education among K-12 students and
community at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.