* 1904757
* Student Travel Grant for Fifteenth International Conference on Logic Programming and Nonmonotonic Reasoning and Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Yuliya Lierler, St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 03/31/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This student travel grant will enhance the education of selected US graduate
students in the research area of Logic Programming and Nonmonotonic Reasoning.
This will be realized by enabling them to attend the 15th International
Conference on Logic Programming and Nonmonotonic Reasoning (LPNMR19) and its
Doctoral Consortium (LPNMR19-DC), which will include specially organized events
for these students. An important focus of the conference is to improve student
education in the field of Logic Programming and Nonmonotonic Reasoning (LPNMR).
The conference brings together prominent researchers in the area. Student
participation in this conference will help develop the next generation of LPNMR
researchers by enabling students to meet senior researchers at the conference
and take part in face-to-face discussions with them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
activity furthers technological advancement in the area of LPNMR, which is
currently seeing substantial industrial interest. In particular, this edition of
the conference seeks to stimulate education opportunities and interdisciplinary
collaborations between LPNMR researchers and researchers from both neighboring
communities and areas that may yield fruitful collaborations, such as deep
learning, robotics, cybersecurity, cyberanalytics, cyber-physical systems, and
human-aware AI. This edition of the conference is organized under the
Philadelphia Logic Week 2019 umbrella, which hosts not only LPNMR and its
workshops but also the 3rd International Workshop on the Resurgence of Datalog
in Academia and Industry (Datalog 2.0). Supporting the educational mission of
the conference will bring long-term benefits to both industry and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.