* 1904295
* Collaborative Research: Ethylene-Forming Enzyme
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Robert Hausinger, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Guanidine is a potential nitrogen fertilizer and ethylene has been proposed as a
potential alternative fuel source; thus, the biosynthetic reactions that form
these compounds are commercially important as they have potential benefits for
agriculture and the biofuels industries. With this award, the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Drs. Robert Hausinger and
Jian Hu at Michigan State University, and Dr. Christo Christov at Michigan
Technological Institute to investigate how ethylene-forming enzyme (EFE) from
bacteria and fungi catalyzes dual reactions to form guanidine or ethylene. In
the typical reaction of EFE, a carbon dioxide is removed from other molecules
(2-oxoglutarate, or 2OG), while being added to the amino acid, L-arginine, to
transform it into guanidine. Alternatively, EFE catalyzes the transformation of
2OG into ethylene, with the release of carbon dioxide / bicarbonate. Research
into the mechanisms of EFE catalysis provides specialized biochemical,
structural, and computational training to postdoctoral fellows, and graduate and
undergraduate students, including women and students from underrepresented
minority groups. Incorporation of these studies into a university science
festival engages families and lifelong learners through outreach programs about
the potential use of ethylene as a biofuel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goals of this research project are to elucidate the molecular determinants that
distinguish the two distinct reactions catalyzed by EFE and to establish the
catalytic mechanisms of the enzyme by a combination of experimental and
computational studies. This work also investigates why other members of the
iron(II)- and 2OG-dependent oxygenases fail to produce ethylene. To understand
the basis of the two EFE-catalyzed reactions, the researchers are characterizing
naturally occurring analogs, a reconstructed ancestor, and site-directed
variants of the protein by using kinetic, structural, and computational methods.
Using this information along with structure-guided protein engineering, the
researchers are creating EFE variants optimized for the production of either the
biofuel ethylene or the plant fertilizer guanidine while eliminating wasteful
L-Arginine hydroxylation or 2OG-degrading reactions. In addition, the team is
using biochemical, kinetic, spectroscopic, and computational methods to
elucidate the chemical reaction mechanism of EFE. This work extends the
structural/mechanistic information available on other important iron(II)- and
2OG-dependent oxygenases that are unable to catalyze these
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.