* 1904016
* Collaborative Research: Mechanochemistry of Metallocenes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Stephen Craig, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 253,710.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Chuanbing Tang of the University
of South Carolina and Professor Stephen L. Craig of Duke University to develop a
new class of polymers (plastics) that respond to specific types of stress.
Synthetic polymers are versatile, processable, light weight, and have tunable
mechanical properties, making them useful in everyday life. These metal-
containing polymers made by the Tang group are used to make polymer materials
that respond to physical pressures but are stable at high temperatures. The
team's research explores the design and potential uses of mechanochemically-
controlled plastics. Such plastics may be recycled by physical manipulation
rather than re-melting, ultimately resulting in energy-savings during reuse.
Outreach activities include the Chem-STAR program that provides research
resources to primarily undergraduate institutions in the Raleigh-Durham area.
Economically disadvantaged and minority students are also mentored and exposed
to cutting-edge research through American Chemical Society Project SEED summer
research program at the University of South Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on developing synthetic approaches toward
main-chain metallocene-containing polymers and studying their mechanochemical
reactivity. The research plan utilizes ring-opening metathesis polymerization to
synthesize well-defined main-chain metallocene polymers and copolymers.
Experimental characterization of metallocene mechanochemistry is carried out
through a combination of state-of-the-art techniques in polymer sonochemistry
and single molecule force spectroscopy. Metallocene lability in polymers is
further investigated using computational models that simulate forces applied at
the molecular level. Mechanistic studies are conducted in order to elucidate the
relative contribution of peeling versus shearing at the molecular scale. The
overarching goal of this work is to understand the mechanisms and structure-
activity relationship underlying the highly selective mechanochemical scission
of metal-cyclopentadienyl bond. This work has the potential to develop synthetic
polymers that are mechanically responsive and thermally stable, both of which
are important for reusability and recyclability of most commodity
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.