* 1904024
* Band flattening at the Fermi level as a precursor of quantum electron crystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Sergey Kravchenko, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 317,548.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Construction of room-temperature
superconductors has been a dream since the discovery of the superconductivity in
1911. For quite a while, the highest temperature, at which superconductivity was
observed, remained at 23 K (or -250 C); however, in 1986, high-temperature
superconductors were discovered with superconductivity surviving up to 138 K (or
-135 C) and, more recently, even up to 203 K (-70 C) under high pressure.
Presently, the most promising candidates for room-temperature superconductivity
are the so-called 'flat-band materials' (i.e., the materials in which the energy
of electrons does not depend on their momentum in some range of momenta). The PI
and his team have recently discovered such behavior in silicon-germanium quantum
wells and are pursuing the investigation of this material. The proposed
activities offer unique opportunities to train students in novel technologies at
the cutting edge of present-day capabilities. Northeastern University is famous
for it's signature cooperative learning ('co-op') education, which affords
students the opportunity for hands-on experiential learning during their
studies. Within this program, the PI has a remarkable record in training
undergraduate and graduate students in his
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
is an experimental effort to unequivocally establish the flattening of the
electronic band in the two-dimensional electron systems that may be vital for
the construction of the room temperature superconductivity. The team intends to
study silicon-germanium quantum wells of unprecedented quality developed by the
PI?s group, as well as ZnO-based heterostructures of comparable quality. In the
past, the band flattening in silicon-germanium quantum wells was observed by
transport methods by the PI's team. However, the thermodynamic characteristics,
like the spectrum of electrons, can only be reliably obtained by thermodynamic
measurements. The PI and his team intend to use the techniques already available
in the PI?s laboratory at Northeastern University to measure the thermodynamic
magnetization and the thermopower of the electrons in two-dimensional systems.
The first method yields the energy-averaged effective mass of the electrons; the
second method yields the effective mass on the Fermi level. The saturation of
the energy-averages mass and the divergence of the mass at the Fermi level in
the limit of very low electron densities is the hallmark of the flattening of
the electron band. The group also intends to investigate the quantum Wigner
crystal formation in these ultra-clean systems as a direct consequence of this
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.