* 1904852
* Collaborative Research:  Fundamental Basis for General Molecular Weight Determination for Ionic Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Ralph Colby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 215,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
with partial co-funding from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the
Division of Chemistry is funding Dr. Ralph H. Colby from Pennsylvania State
University and Dr. Louis A. Madsen from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University. The team is developing new methods for measuring the molecular
weight of polymers that have attached ions. Polymers are long-chain molecules
consisting of many repeating units that are linked together through carbon-
carbon bonds. While there are many firmly established techniques used to
accurately determine the molecular weight of nonionic (uncharged) polymers,
applying such methods to ionic polymers is usually difficult. Ionic polymers are
a very important class of polymers used by industry as thickeners in water-based
paints and coatings and in water purification technologies. A large fraction of
biological molecules, including DNA, RNA, many polypeptides and polysaccharides
are also examples of important ionic polymers. This project develops a novel set
of robust techniques that determine molecular weights for both natural and
synthetic ionic polymers. Development of these new methodologies benefits
society by accelerating the development of ion-conducting energy materials and
biodegradable materials. Such research activities train students in
macromolecular sciences for future employment in polymer (plastics) industries.
The development of both materials and workforce are central to keeping US
industries globally competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused
on developing four methods that utilize easily measured dynamic properties of
semidilute unentangled solutions of ionic polymers to obtain the number-average
molecular weight. Each method relies on specific combinations of calibrated
measurements so that each one directly determines the number density of chains
in solution and thus the number-average molecular weight of the polymers in that
solution. These four methods each have the advantage that they are insensitive
to salt concentration (since salt can be challenging or even impossible to
remove) and have the transformative potential to enable routine molecular weight
determinations for ionic polymers, while using very little sample. Quick
adoption of these methods is anticipated, allowing rapid growth of the
development of polyelectrolytes and ionomers to suit a myriad of applications.
Development and validation of the theory and experimental methods in this
project further impact the physical underpinnings of polymer science and enable
new understanding of ionic polymer properties. While mainly being tested and
developed using synthetic polymers, this research also promises to enable
routine characterization of molecular weight for biopolymers such as hyaluronic
acid, heparin, DNA and RNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.