* 1904616
* Phase Control in Rare Earth Chalcogenide Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Sarah Stoll, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 464,838.00

Prof. Sarah Stoll of Georgetown University conducts research to develop new
methodologies for synthesizing nanoparticles containing rare earth elements.
This is a relatively unexplored class of nanostructures with potentially useful
electronic and magnetic properties. The fundamental knowledge to be gained from
this research could inform future design of nanoparticle systems for
applications in electronics, magnetics, and quantum computing. This project
provides to undergraduate and graduate students training in chemical synthesis
and the state-of-the-art techniques in characterization of magnetic
nanoparticles. In addition to conducting outreach activities at D.C. public
schools, Prof. Stoll develops new seminar series for the Georgetown University
program called 'Science in the Public Interest' and engages Georgetown students
in the organization called the 'National Science Policy Network'. These
activities link groups of undergraduate and graduate students interested in
science policy making and provide them opportunities to meet representatives
from foundations, government and academics who are engaged in science
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program, the research group of Prof. Stoll
develops new solution-phase synthetic methodologies for preparing lanthanide and
uranium chalcogenide nanoparticles. This research aims to 1) provide mechanistic
insights into the role of precursor reactivity in determining the composition,
size, and structure of nanocrystals of these f-block elements; and 2) increase
our fundamental understanding of the evolution of energy levels from molecular
orbitals to the density of states diagram. Ferromagnetic uranium chalcogenides
are of interest because of predicted high surface anisotropy, which should have
a significant effect on the hysteresis curves as a function of particle size. In
addition, the lanthanide and uranium chalcogenides exhibit strong magneto-
optical properties. A suite of techniques (including high resolution
transmission electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy, magnetic circular
dichroism, X-ray absorption spectroscopy, SQUID magnetometry, solid-state
thermolysis, and dynamic light scattering) is employed to characterize the
nanoparticles and study their magnetic and electronic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.