* 1904776
* Collaborative Research: Structure-Mechanics Relationships for Ultra-thin Block Copolymer Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Robert Riggleman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2022
* USD 189,217.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
brings together scientists at the University of Massachusetts Amherst and the
University of Pennsylvania to gain new understanding of how mechanical
properties, like stiffness and strength, change when a polymeric material is
made into a film with thickness near the size of an individual molecule. Ultra-
thin films, such as the ones studied in this project, are desired to help
decrease energy consumption in processes like filtration, as well as in
semiconductor manufacturing. However, current materials are unable to provide
sufficient strength in these applications. New experimental methods will be
combined with molecular simulations to understand how structures in the polymer
thin films affect their properties in these highly confined states. Beyond the
broad impact related to the development of new fundamental science and
materials-design guidelines that will decrease materials waste and increase
energy efficiency, this project will provide new opportunities for educating
Ph.D. students, undergraduate students, and high-school students through rich,
collaborative research experiences involving both experiments and
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will provide new
fundamental data and knowledge on the role of block copolymer domain structure
in controlling the full mechanical response of ultra-thin polymer films, where
film thickness is comparable to or smaller than the domain structure size scale.
The proposed approach unites the strengths of advanced simulations and novel
experimental methods to test new hypotheses based on the role of position within
a confined material on segmental mobility and inter-chain entanglements, and the
consequential impact on mechanical properties. Experimentally, a recent
mechanical measurement method, called The Uniaxial Tensile Tester for Ultra-Thin
films (TUTTUT), will be used to quantify the mechanics of ultra-thin block
copolymer films. The experiments will integrate with simulations that use
coarse-grained models to predict the molecular response of polymer films, and
the simulations will provide a local picture of the changes in the entanglement
network and local dynamics as a function of position away from the interfaces in
the block copolymer films. Through these efforts, the co-PIs will support the
education, training, and inspiration of the next generation of materials
scientists and engineers, with a focus toward increased participation of women
and traditionally under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.