* 1904180
* Pathway Control in Dynamic Covalent (DC) Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jeffrey Moore, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 549,513.00

Molecular cages are emerging as a unique class of compounds with potential
applications in catalysis, battery technology, and filtrations and separations.
These single molecules have three-dimensional shapes, variable sizes, and empty
space in their interiors. The most efficient way to build molecular cages and
other shape-persistent architectures is the synthetic process known as dynamic
covalent chemistry (DCC). Using DCC means that chemists can build structures
with simple precursors which "self-assemble" into the desired geometry over the
course of a single chemical reaction rather than building structures step-by-
step over many reactions. However, a major challenge when using DCC is the
difficulty in predicting what precursor is best to obtain the desired
architecture. Currently, the Moore group of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champain is working toward a set of guidelines for DCC which will help
chemists design better precursors and synthetic strategies for building three-
dimensional architectures. This project supports the education and professional
development for future researchers and educators, preparing for a workforce for
the science and engineering fields. In addition, the Moore Group members
participate in public outreach and educational activities (e.g., Encouraging
Tomorrow's Chemists events for local middle schools) to communicate and promote
a strong literacy in science for the next generation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the support from the NSF Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program, the Moore group is using alkyne metathesis as a model DCC reaction to
study the relationship between exchange rate and product distribution,
especially in cases where kinetic traps are known to form. DCC describes
reversible reactions where molecular components can exchange freely until a
thermodynamic minimum is achieved, and kinetic traps arise when exchange rates
are too slow and/or the building blocks have a high valance. The team aims to
build a computational model that describes the relationship between exchange
rates, valancy, and product distribution. The computational model is designed to
provide chemists with a better understanding of which DCC reactions or reaction
conditions are necessary to access predicted structures. Additionally, the model
predicts when kinetic traps are likely to arise in a given reaction and the
maximum product yield that can be expected. The computational model is
supplemented with experimentally obtained kinetic data for both simple and
complex alkyne metathesis reactions. Once the fundamentals are established, they
will be used as a guide for accessing more complex shape-persistent molecular
architectures of nanoscale dimension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.