* 1904196
* Vectorially-Coupled Reaction Networks in Low-Dimensional Nanofluidic Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Paul Bohn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 501,000.00

Reactions are the central events of chemistry and controlling their behavior and
the locations where they occur is at the heart of chemical measurements and
making new chemicals. Ideally, scientists want to design reactions so they occur
rapidly, make efficient use of all the chemical participants, employ inexpensive
chemicals and environmentally friendly conditions, and produce easily-isolated
chemical products. In nature, such as in biological cells, these stringent
objectives are achieved by spatially-organized reaction networks. Dr. Paul
Bohn's research team at the University of Notre Dame mimics nature by designing
and developing networks of reactions whose behavior is controlled by electrical
stimulus and whose location is defined by the size of the reaction vessel. In
their work with electron-transfer reactions, they carefully build specially-
designed structures from nanometer-sized materials, whose nature and placement
leads to particular, well-defined, and highly efficient reactions occurring in
specific locations. Furthermore, electrical control of the location-specific
reactions and movement of nearby liquid allows for shuttling of chemical
products from one reaction site to another one downstream, where they are used
as the chemical starting materials for another defined reaction process. All the
reactions are sped up using enzymes, nature's chemical reaction catalysts. The
Bohn team is developing an understanding of how electrical voltages can be
applied to control the activity of catalysts. The research efforts are
integrated with new education and training programs that cut across disciplinary
lines within the University of Notre Dame and combine talents from multiple
universities. In the process, these activities address specific NSF goals
including development of a diverse, globally competitive science-technology-
engineering-mathematics workforce; increased partnerships between academia and
industry; and improved economic competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal goal of this project supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging
Program and partial co-funding from the Molecular Separations, Electrochemical
Systems, and Process Systems, Reaction Engineering and Molecular Thermodynamics
Programs at NSF is to develop networks of spatially-organized redox reactions
which can be controlled by electrical signals to manage transport, dictate
reactivity, and isolate products. The overall goal is addressed by developing
control over delivery of reactant molecules and particles to a reactive site as
well as control over reactivity, within zero- and one-dimensional
electrochemical nanostructures. The team also combines these nanostructures to
develop full three-dimensional control over cascade reactions to produce
vectorially-controlled reaction networks (VCRNs). The first objective is the
development of high-precision nanoscale architectures to support VCRNs by
simultaneous control over transport and reactivity using both metal-insulator
multilayer stack-based nanopores and hierarchically-organized assemblies. The
second objective explores ways in which electrochemical potential can be used to
control activity of enzymes bound to one of the electrodes. Using horseradish
peroxidase, HRP, as a model oxidoreductase enzyme, the intrinsic reactivity of
the electrode-bound enzyme is followed using a fluorogenic redox reaction that
converts a non-fluorescent reactant into fluorescent product within the
ultrahigh sensitivity environment of an electrochemical zero-mode waveguide.
These capabilities are being combined and tested using a set of stringent single
enzyme kinetics experiments, in which the HRP is moved among the available
locations and tested for intrinsic reactivity when coupled to an electrochemical
potential control signal. The ultimate goal of this work is to leverage control
of single reaction events to create a preparative scale capability for VCRNs. To
test this capability, two-enzyme electrochemically-modulated reaction systems
are being coupled to individual reactions in a spatially coordinated manner and
used to deliver the reaction products to a downstream collection point. This
project has impact outside the principal discipline of chemical analysis,
especially in the general area of cascade reactions - powerful constructs in
chemical synthesis that are used, for example, in enzymatic biofuel cells to
capture the full electrochemical reducing power of fuel
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.