* 1904633
* NSF-BSF: High-mobility amorphous-iodide-based channel materials for p-type thin-film transistors and complementary TFT circuitry
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* David Paine, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 469,975.00

Nontechnical description: Over the past decade, displays in electronic devices
like laptops have been revolutionized in part by using transparent conducting
amorphous oxides due to their processing versatility and higher carrier mobility
combined with low-temperature, large-area deposition conditions. A team of
investigators from Brown University and Technion (Israel) is investigating a new
class of materials, amorphous metal iodides like CuSnI and CuPbI, that would add
to the arsenal of transparent conducting materials for use in displays and other
transparent circuit technologies. Compared to other amorphous materials, the
amorphous metal iodides feature a different physical mechanism: under an applied
voltage, the currents are carried by positively charged holes. This offers new
low-power dissipation circuit possibilities, as long as the materials properties
of these metal iodides, including impurity content, phase, and temperature
behavior can be tuned using composition and processing parameters. The research
program covers a number of topics, ranging from fundamental experimental
materials science of material deposition and characterization to theoretical
modeling of phase transformation and impurity incorporation to prototype
transistor device fabrication, brings together transparent electronic material
and device expertise at Brown University with cutting-edge materials
characterization and modeling at the Technion. The research project has an
educational impact in and out of the classroom, including graduate student
support, Brown-Technion graduate student interaction and exchange visits, as
well as outreach to underprivileged middle-school students in the Providence
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Two Brown experimentalists
with complementary expertise in amorphous electronic materials and device
physics, in collaboration with a Technion team experienced in atomic/nano/micro
characterization and physical modeling, are focusing on the need for a high-
mobility wide-bandgap low-temperature p-type material for thin film transistors
(TFTs). The PIs have identified amorphous iodide-based materials as the most
promising: they have a wide bandgap (3 eV), high hole mobility (up to 40
cm2/V.s), native vacancy doping, and are compatible with arbitrary substrates.
They are also compatible with low-temperature-deposited amorphous n-type zinc
oxide-based materials, opening the way for complementary TFT circuitry. The
Brown PIs are leveraging their recent demonstration of high-performance indium-
zinc-oxide materials by reconfiguring an oxide sputtering tool for in-situ
iodide deposition. The Brown team is developing and optimizing the synthesis of
a-Cu1-xMxI thin films (M = Sn, Pb, In, and others), studying the doping
mechanism via Brouwer analysis, investigating phase stability, and fabricating
prototype TFT demonstrator circuits. The experimental work is complemented by
the detailed materials characterization and physical modeling performed by the
Technion team, that has extensive experience in nanoscale amorphous and
crystalline films. The final experimental goal is to develop the deposition of
both n- and p-type transparent conducting materials in the same sputter-
deposition process at low temperature on arbitrary substrates. The project
provides training opportunities to the participating graduate and undergraduate
students in cross-cutting electronic materials and devices fields, to the Brown-
Technion visitor and student exchanges, as well as to the local underprivileged
middle-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.