* 1904204
* Collaborative Research: Integrated experimental and computational investigations of exogenous surfactant distribution in conducting zone lung airways
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Mehdi Raessi, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 282,391.00

Our lungs contain a branching network of airways. Lung stability and normal
breathing is maintained by a natural substance called surfactant. The lungs of
most premature babies are underdeveloped and lack surfactant, making breathing
very difficult for the newborn. These babies often receive a treatment that
involves instilling a surfactant solution into their windpipe. Airflow from a
ventilator is then used to direct the solution into the lung airways. The
success of this treatment heavily depends on the uniformity of distribution of
surfactant in airways. However, evidence from x-ray imaging shows non-uniform
surfactant distribution, leading to a poor response to the treatment. Improving
this treatment and its effectiveness has proved difficult due to inaccessibility
of airways. This project will address this unresolved issue by using a combined
experimental and simulation approach. We will design realistic models of human
lung airways, use them to study surfactant delivery to the lungs, and determine
delivery conditions that lead to a uniform surfactant distribution, thereby
making the treatment more effective. In addition to providing training
opportunities to students and promoting diversity through outreach programs, our
project will also make a transformative impact through developing new tools and
elucidating fluid flow in lung airways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this project is to understand fluid dynamics of surfactant delivery and
distribution in conducting zone airways. Using a set of design rules, we
generate 3D computational models of airway tree and fabricate them using
additive manufacturing. We will then use complementary experimental and
computational studies to quantitatively elucidate how fluid type (Newtonian and
non-Newtonian surfactants), airflow type (constant vs cyclic), and gravitational
orientation of the airway tree affect surfactant deposition and distribution in
airways. We will achieve this goal through two specific aims: (i) Quantitatively
study surfactant distribution in lung airway tree under constant airflow; and
(ii) Cyclic airflow and pre-existing surfactant film effects on surfactant
distribution. This work will make a transformative impact on fundamental
understanding of fluid dynamics of multi-phase flow in lung airways and lead to
design of strategies to enhance surfactant replacement
therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.