* 1904862
* Collaborative Research: Mechanism-guided enzyme engineering for fucosylated glycoconjugate synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 269,987.00

Glycosynthases are enzymes that have been engineered to make instead of break
chains of complex sugars (oligosaccharides and carbohydrates). With this award,
the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr.
Heather Mayes from the University of Michigan and Dr. Shishir Chundawat from
Rutgers University to uncover how glycosynthases synthesize prebiotic
oligosaccharides or carbohydrates. These enzymes fill a pressing need in
research and industrial biotechnology for the ability to produce designer
carbohydrates, sugars that are designed for a specific purpose. There remains,
however, a lack mechanistic understanding for how to better engineer
glycosynthases to be highly specific and efficient in making complex sugars.
This project combines computational and experimental studies to provide a
mechanistic understanding of how a glycosynthase (alpha-L-fucosidase) catalyzes
creation of specific oligosaccharides, which will in turn enable rational design
of enzymes to make designer carbohydrates. The broader impacts include designing
efficient routes for creating human milk oligosaccharides that could be included
in infant formula to bring the composition closer to that of human milk. Human
milk oligosaccharides can improve human health by promoting growth of beneficial
gut bacteria and lowering incidences of other pathogenic infections. The
software developed in this work for designing such enzymes will be made publicly
available. Finally, the studies form the basis for outreach activities that use
the biochemistry of carbohydrates to engage with students from under-resourced
communities in Michigan and New Jersey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to understand how alpha-L-fucosidases synthesize simple
glycoconjugates (e.g., human milk oligosaccharides). The hypothesis to be tested
is that a priori analysis of enzyme active and binding sites, based on sequence
and structural data, can be used to predict mutations that will eliminate the
hydrolysis activity of the enzyme in favor of glycosidic bond synthesis of
bespoke oligosaccharides. The objectives of this project are to: 1) employ
experimental and computational studies to identify key structural properties
that determine whether a particular enzyme mutant will be an active
glycosynthase; 2) create automated processes to predict and test which mutants
of disparate enzymes will be active fucosynthases; and 3) predict and test
mutations needed to alter substrate specificity. The results of this feasibility
study will advance the path to production of a broad suite of oligosaccharides
not currently readily available for research and/or commercial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.