* 1904160
* LHCB Operations and Computing
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Mike Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 03/31/2024
* USD 3,041,405.00

The development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics is a major
intellectual achievement. The validity of this model was further confirmed by
the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However,
the Standard Model leaves open many questions, including why matter dominates
over anti-matter in the Universe (CP violation), the values of the masses of
quarks and leptons, and the properties of dark matter, among others. Most
explanations require new phenomena, which we call Beyond the Standard Model
Physics (BSM), and which the LHCb experiment at CERN has been designed to
explore. This award provides facility operations, maintenance, and computing
support to enable the participation of U.S. scientists in the LHCb experiment at
CERN. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LHC is the premier High Energy Physics particle
accelerator in the world and is currently operating at the CERN laboratory near
Geneva Switzerland, one of the foremost facilities for answering these BSM
questions. The LHCb experiment is one of four large experiments at the LHC and
is designed to study in detail the decays of hadrons containing b or c quarks.
The goal is to identify the existence of new physics beyond the Standard Model
by examining the properties of hadrons containing these quarks. The new physics,
or new forces, can be manifest by particles, as yet to be discovered, whose
presence would modify decay rates and CP violating asymmetries of hadrons
containing the b and c quarks, allowing new phenomena to be observed indirectly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. groups play a leading role in the physics analysis,
hardware development, and computing of LHCb. This award will support the NSF-
supported groups' share of common items necessary for the experiment,
maintenance and operations support for U.S.-delivered components, co-location of
an LHCb Tier-2 computing facility, and R&amp;D to optimize the operation of the
experiment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this award cover many
areas, from student research experiences for graduate and undergraduate
students, to very active QuarkNet Centers and Masterclass programs for high
school teachers and students. A steady stream of undergraduates has been working
in the participating university laboratories, where graduate students also have
direct engagement in both instrumentation development as well as data analysis.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be direct participants in the
fabrication, testing, and maintenance of detector components under U.S.
responsibility. Early career and nontraditional researchers will be integral
participants in this exciting program of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.