* 1904980
* RUI: Developing Insight and Control of Polarity in the Pyrochlore Lattice
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Geneva Laurita, Bates College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2023
* USD 193,405.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Many energy and technology-driven applications
rely on materials that utilize the chemical properties of lead. However, the
known toxicity of lead and subsequent regulations prompt the investigation of
alternative elements for technological applications. With joint support from the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
this project seeks to understand the arrangement and interactions of atoms that
give rise to the desired physical properties for applications, and will focus on
a widely studied yet poorly understood family of materials called pyrochlore
oxides. The principles discovered through this work will deepen the
understanding of pyrochlore oxides, offering new knowledge for achieving
properties that offer alternatives to lead-based technologies. Undergraduate
education and exposure to solid state chemistry is at the heart of this
research, and providing an experience that promotes excitement and is inclusive
to all is of paramount importance. Taking place at Bates College, a primarily
undergraduate institution, this work is well-suited for students interested in
chemistry, materials science, and sustainable approaches for energy and
electronic applications. Through participation in this research, students will
be exposed to techniques not typically covered in undergraduate chemistry
curricula, as well as perform cutting-edge experiments at facilities that are
often underutilized by undergraduate institutions. In addition to independent
research, this work will promote professional development of participants
through purposeful discussion of career paths, interaction with outside
scientists, and reflection on activities performed throughout their
involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Polar crystal
structures comprise a class of materials with a broad range of technological
applications, particularly as components in electronic devices. While widespread
in their use, these materials often rely on the electron lone-pair chemistry of
Pb, and finding alternative Pb-free materials that do not sacrifice performance
is of considerable importance. Current research focuses broadly on perovskite
oxides due to high temperature stability, facile preparation, and a wide range
of chemical substituents. However, the vast literature on perovskite oxides
provides no clear way to get around the use of Pb. The ability to alter the
metal cations and anion stoichiometry in pyrochlore oxides provides a versatile
platform for obtaining Pb-free polar crystal structures. Pyrochlores have been
less studied than perovskites due to their complex crystal structure, but recent
developments in measurement and computational techniques make it possible to
study and determine the causes of long-range polarity in these materials. This
research, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), will apply knowledge of the causes of polarity in
perovskites to systematically investigate and determine the fundamental drivers
of polarity in pyrochlores. The interpenetrating networks found in the
pyrochlore structure will be decoupled through systematic substitution of
different metal cations, namely those that can cause second-order Jahn-Teller
distortions (s2 or d0 electronic configurations). Comparing detailed structures
of materials with metal ions that can cause structural distortions to materials
with cations that will not cause distortions will provide insights into the
underlying chemistry that leads to long-range polarity. In addition to cation
substitution, the work will investigate the influence of anion stoichiometry on
structure, local distortions, and overall polarity. Structural observations will
be correlated to physical property measurements through characterization of the
dielectric constant and nonlinear optical behavior. Undergraduate student
researchers will be the primary participants in on-site preparation and
characterization of samples at Bates College, a primarily undergraduate
institution, and off-site characterization at national laboratory user
facilities. Through collaboration, the group will obtain computational
calculations to support experimental measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.