* 1904754
* Creation of tools to determine the impact of natural modifications on RNA damage
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Christine Chow, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 01/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

The best-known role of RNA is to convert information stored in DNA to functional
proteins. However, RNA has many other responsibilities in the cell. One group of
RNAs with a less common role is small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs), which is found in
the nucleus. The snRNA assists in cutting RNA into pieces, and these pieces then
play roles in activating genes (for example). With this award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding a study by Dr.
Amanda Bryant-Friedrich at the University of Toledo and Dr. Christine Chow at
Wayne State University to study the protection of snRNAs from oxidative damage
(damage from oxygen-containing species in the environment) that may harm cells.
As a key part of this collaboration, Drs. Bryant-Friedrich and Chow train
students, trainees and junior faculty from diverse backgrounds for their full
participation in the scientific enterprise.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While it is
widely known that oxidative damage causes extensive modifications to DNA and
impacts its structure and function, the same damage has not been actively
explored in RNA. Due to the central nature of snRNAs in the assembly, structure,
and function of the spliceosome, it is suspected that oxidative damage to snRNAs
could cause lesions that impact both the structure and function of the
spliceosome. Due to the high extent of post-translational modification of U2
sRNA, this small RNA is used as a prototype to determine the impact of the type
and number of modifications on the outcomes of oxidative damage when compared to
unmodified RNA. The effect of post-transcriptional modifications on the
susceptibility of snRNA to oxidative damage is measured by a combination of
synthetic, biophysical, biochemical, and analytical methods. This work may lead
to new tools that can be used to understand oxidative damage in naturally-
modified RNAs. The collaborative nature of the work and complementary scientific
expertise of Bryant-Friedrich and Chow provide cross-mentoring opportunities for
a range of trainees, particularly those from underrepresented groups who work at
the chemistry-biology interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.