* 1904704
* RUI: Rapid and high-resolution hyperspectral imaging using frequency combs
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Bachana Lomsadze, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 214,249.00

Real-time hyperspectral imaging is a powerful method for obtaining an image of
an object by recording the way in which light of practically all colors
interacts with the object in a point-by-point fashion. However, existing
technologies have significant limitations, particularly in how well they can
differentiate between the signals of target species and those of the background.
With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Lomsadze and his research group at Santa Clara
University are developing and experimentally demonstrating a revolutionary
approach to high-speed hyperspectral imaging. This novel method is predicted to
provide capabilities that other methods cannot, including being able to "see"
the signal of an item of interest against a bright and dynamic background. This
is a valuable capability, as it has the potential to afford highly precise
visualization of certain tiny items in a sea of others, such as when examining
biological tissue, detecting individual particles of toxic materials in
mixtures, identifying bacteria or diseased cells in specimens, and examining the
surface of the Earth. This newly developed method will enable field-deployable
devices for the broad spectrum of applications described above. This research
project involves mentoring undergraduate students and educating them on a wide
range of cutting-edge optical imaging and detection methods through their hands-
on involvement in the design, construction, and use of a laser-based
hyperspectral imaging system. These experiences prepare the undergraduate team
well for opportunities in graduate school and/or research careers in high-
technology industries, such as those in the local Silicon Valley region or
elsewhere. The research further enhances Santa Clara University's scientific
community and provide excellent directions for meaningful local outreach
activities emphasizing cutting-edge, modern technologies for important new
signal detection applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid and high-resolution
hyperspectral imaging is an extremely powerful optical method that is used in
fundamental science for studying optical properties of materials at the single-
particle level. The imaging methods are also widely used outside the research
laboratory for practical applications. However, many of these existing imaging
methods face challenges in differentiating between signals from the target
species and the cluttered background. In addition, the identification process
becomes even more complex and near impossible when transitions are
inhomogenously broadened and the transitions from different species overlap.
Professor Lomsadze and his group at Santa Clara University are developing a
novel imaging method that addresses these challenges by use of a method he
coinvented, called tri-comb spectroscopy (TCS), a revolutionary approach to
laser spectroscopy. TCS is a rapid, high-resolution and background-free optical
method that enables the measurement of homogenous linewidth in inhomogenously
broadened systems. It also provides information about whether the measured
transitions belong to the same or different analytes in a mixture. The
development of TCS-based microscopy imaging has a tremendous impact on
fundamental chemistry and physics, as it will enable precision measurements of
optical properties of materials. Furthermore, it provides a compact and powerful
tool for studying the fast dynamics and localization effects of individual
quantum systems (molecules, quantum dots and color centers) that are promising
candidates for quantum computing. In the long term, this imaging method shows
potential for application in tip-enhanced spectroscopy, which is anticipated to
enable rapid, high-spectral, and sub-wavelength spatial resolution measurements
of single objects, such as nanoparticles. Professor Lomsadze plans for
integrating student research, education, and outreach activities, which exposes
students, including those from underrepresented groups, to opportunities in the
development of sophisticated instruments that address important measurement
challenges. The research project also provides the students an experience
enriched by participation in outreach activities with companies in Silicon
Valley and exploration of future career opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.