* 1904503
* Microstructure Evolution and Hot Cracking in Arc Welds
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Sindo Kou, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2023
* USD 340,034.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hot cracking occurs during welding
(while the weld is still very hot) either during or right after solidification
of the weld pool. It is essential to avoid cracking in welds of stainless steels
because various grades of stainless steels are commercially available and widely
used in power and chemical plants. The project seeks to address two fundamental
issues: 1) why some grades of stainless steels resist hot cracking significantly
better than some other grades, and 2) how the microscopic features inside the
weld (called the microstructure) resist hot cracking at elevated temperatures
during welding. The project is expected to advance the understanding of hot
cracking in welds of stainless steels, which is currently based on the room-
temperature microstructure that does not even exist at elevated temperatures
during welding to resist hot cracking. The experimental results from the project
can be expected to guide the search for stainless-steel filler metals that
better resist hot cracking, help understand hot cracking in additive
manufacturing of stainless steels and serve as excellent new materials for
teaching the metallurgy of stainless steels. The project seeks to hire a
Hispanic graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project deals with hot cracking in arc welds
of stainless steels, which are essentially Fe-Cr-Ni alloys. The goal is to
establish the fundamental understanding of solidification cracking and
ductility-dip cracking in welds of stainless steels. It is proposed that good
resistance to solidification cracking (which occurs along boundaries between
dendrites growing in the mushy zone behind the weld pool) is caused by the
formation of a significant amount of the interdendritic phase early during
solidification to bond the dendrites together. It is also proposed that good
resistance to ductility-dip cracking (which occurs along boundaries between
fully-grown dendrites in the region of the fusion zone closely behind the mushy
zone) is caused by the absence of naked columnar dendrites that provide long
straight paths for easy crack initiation and propagation. The mechanisms will be
verified by: 1. quenching various grades of stainless steels with liquid Wood's
metal (70oC) during welding to freeze-in the elevated-temperature microstructure
in and around the mushy zone, 2. examining the extents of cracking induced by
quenching and relating them to the elevated-temperature microstructure, and 3.
conducting solidification cracking tests on the stainless steels. The proposed
study on stainless steels will be applied to high-entropy alloys FeCrNiCoCux
(which also contain Fe, Cr and Ni like stainless steels) to better understand
their weldability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.