* 1904006
* The Nature of Cities Summit--A movement for transdisciplinary green cities; Paris, June 2019
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Diane Pataki, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 04/30/2020
* USD 49,438.00

Ecosystem scientists have played a small role in the planning and design of
cities. This is limiting advances in understanding of how cities develop and
function. Ecological features like biodiversity, energy flow, nutrient cycling,
hydrology and pollution loads, remain poorly understood, especially to those
responsible for urban design. The flow of scientific information to urban
planning, design, and policy professionals has been relatively slow. Scientific
advances that may contribute to solving pressing urban problems have not been
adequately incorporated into policy and practice. To improve communication
between urban ecological science and the practitioners that plan, design, and
manage cities, the PIs propose to bring scientists and professionals together at
a unique international summit about the ecology of
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This summit is uniquely designed to equally advance
both scientific understanding of cities as well as better urban societal
outcomes. The PIs wish to ensure participation from a broad range of U.S.
students, ecosystem scientists, and practitioners in urban ecological planning
and design. They seek to broaden participation in urban ecological research and
urban practice by funding attendance from members of underrepresented groups,
researchers from predominantly undergraduate institutions, and practitioners who
lack the funds to attend an international summit. The intended scientific
outcomes are to ensure that urban ecological research addresses the most
pressing uncertainties in meeting social and environmental challenges in modern
cities. There is great potential for integrating cutting edge ecosystem science
into many elements of city creation and management, yet currently, there are
very few avenues for doing so. This summit presents a rare opportunity to create
meaningful and lasting collaborations between scientists, planners, designers,
artists, developers, community leaders, and elected officials who share these
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.