* 1904811
* Towards Internet of Implantable Things: A Micro-Scale Magnetoelectric Intra-Body Communication Platform
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Shashank Priya, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2023
* USD 428,540.00

Towards Internet of Implantable Things: A Micro-Scale Magnetoelectric Intra-Body
Communication Platform Wirelessly connected networks of implantable medical
devices with sensing and actuation capability hold the promise of unprecedented
real-time healthcare monitoring and therapies that can transform societal health
and well-being. In such systems, implants can measure critical physical and
physiological parameters, such as mobility, heart rate, neural activity, and
chemistry. Based on this data, the system can act to prevent the onset of
critical health events or treat diseases in many applications, such as drug
delivery, closed-loop neural prostheses, etc. For this vision to be successful,
a paradigm shift from conventional standalone highly invasive implants to
wirelessly connected networks of miniaturized implants (i.e., Internet of
Implantable Things) is of paramount importance. Multiple unresolved challenges
exist within current state-of-the-art techniques for intra-body communication
that includes radio frequency, inductive, ultrasound, and human body
communication. These challenges are: high power consumption, short communication
range, low data rate, and large implantable transmitter/receiver transducers.
Novel micro-scale implantable methods that enable low-power intra-body
communication across long distances (meter) at Mega bits-per-second (Mbps) rates
are needed. The proposed research will demonstrate a unique building block for a
comprehensive set of wirelessly connected minimally invasive implants that will
enable real-time healthcare monitoring and therapies. It will open opportunity
for conducting unprecedented neuroscience and electrophysiology experiments that
address the most basic questions about the complex nervous system. This program
also includes a significant educational and outreach component by taking
advantage of the multidisciplinary nature of the research to impact K12 teachers
and students, minorities, and undergraduate and graduate students. K-12 teachers
and students will be hosted in summers and supported with multidisciplinary
classroom research projects, engineering modules, and hands-on opportunities
closely coupled to the proposed research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
Internet of Implantable Things are envisioned to be minimally invasive, fully
wireless, and highly connected to address existing challenges within current
state-of-the-art techniques for intra-body communication, such as high-power
consumption, short communication range, low data rate, and bulky
transmitters/receivers. The main objective of this program is to enable
wideband, long-range, and low power wireless communication among a network of
miniaturized biomedical implants through the use of MHz-range magnetic fields
coupled with implantable micro-scale magnetoelectric transducers. The
overarching target is to simultaneously provide several Mbps data rate and
whole-body communication range with pico-joule-per-bit (pJ/bit) level of energy
consumption while dramatically reducing the implant's size. Low-frequency
magnetic fields are attractive because of their very low absorption in human
tissue and safety. Systematic investigations will be conducted to understand the
fundamental behavior of implantable micro-scale magnetoelectric transducers
operating at tens of MHz and interfaced with custom-designed pulse-based
transceiver circuits for energy-efficient and robust intra-body communication.
Effects related to implants' crosstalk, alignment, orientation, and tissue
interaction uncertainties in ambulatory subjects will be overcome through
innovative magnetoelectric transducer and circuit design. Extensive
characterization will be conducted to elucidate the influence of material
microstructure and anisotropy, transducer operating mode, alignment,
orientation, and tissue interactions on the performance. High accuracy
computational and circuit models for magnetoelectric transducers at different
tissue medium will be developed and experimentally validated, which will serve
as a basis for broad range of system design. The program will provide
foundational basis for a novel modulation technique, termed Ultrasound Harmonic
Modulation, along with a transceiver chip for micro-scale magnetoelectric
transducers. This will lead to a first-in-class micro-scale implantable platform
for channelized energy-efficient meter-range communication at safe MHz-range
frequencies. System-level demonstrations with different magnetoelectric
transducers (dimensional range of 0.1-1 millimeter) and frequencies (10-100 MHz)
enabling communication up to meter range at Mbps with pJ/bit power consumption
will establish the fundamental basis for the Internet of Implantable
Things.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.