* 1904835
* Non-targeted Quantification of Fluorochemicals in Reactive Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kaveh Jorabchi, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, Dr. Kaveh
Jorabchi and his group at Georgetown University are developing new chemical
measurement techniques for quantification of fluorine-containing chemicals
("fluorochemicals") in complex samples. These chemicals are largely manmade and
are widely used because of their unique chemical and physical properties.
Agrochemicals, pharmaceuticals, food packaging materials, and flame retardants
are a few of these diverse applications. Along with their positive attributes,
these compounds also cause persistent environmental pollution and food
contamination. Dr. Jorabchi's group is providing new tools and methodologies to
detect and quantify fluorochemicals and their reaction products at trace levels.
These techniques enable elucidation of reaction pathways, leading to development
of safer and more effective chemicals. Dr. Jorabchi's group provides research
opportunities for regional high school students, enhancing STEM education and US
competitiveness. Industrial collaborations facilitate the research and its
eventual commercialization, while enhancing career preparedness of
trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques being developed use elemental mass
spectrometry for facile quantification of fluorochemicals without compound-
specific standards. To address the sensitivity challenges derived from the
limited efficiency of thermal mechanisms for ion formation, Dr. Jorabchi's group
is developing chemical ionization methods for elemental F analysis. The approach
takes advantage of thermally stable neutrals created from fluorinated compounds
in a plasma, followed by gas-phase ion-neutral reactions for ionization. By
combining the ionization method with liquid chromatography, fluorinated
compounds and their reaction products can be readily detected and quantified in
a non-targeted fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.