* 1904108
* Nanoscale Control over Surface Functionalization by Molecular Layer Deposition
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Stacey Bent, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2023
* USD 475,516.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Stacey Bent and her research
group at Stanford University are developing new chemistries for carrying out
processes that deposit a molecular layer of material on a surface (molecular
layer deposition (MLD)). These layers are nanometer-sized (one billionth of a
meter) and contain organic molecules in a very thin film. Organic thin films on
surfaces are important because they provide ways to tune the electronic,
chemical and mechanical properties of materials, with applications ranging from
nanoelectronics to biomedical devices to catalysis. The research program studies
the fundamental process by which the layers are added to the surface as well as
the resulting organic films. The fundamental understanding gained from this work
helps introduce a new tool-kit for attaching thin films with useful and tunable
properties to solid materials. The Bent group provides mentorship and training
to graduate students and undergraduate researchers. The team hosts high school
teachers in a diverse, multidisciplinary environment. STEM undergraduates have
the opportunity to work in small, energy-related companies through a summer
internship program that Professor Bent helped initiate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project contributes new methods for the controlled synthesis of functional thin
films at solid surfaces by expanding the MLD technique in two principal
directions. The research explores ways in which solution-based approaches can
inform new synthetic strategies for organic MLD with the use of nanometer-thick
films of liquids at the surface. These films mimic solvent effects on surfaces.
The team expands MLD approaches to create novel, hybrid surface assemblies,
including hybrid materials based on metal sulfides and metal nitrides. The film
synthesis is closely integrated with characterization studies that elucidate MLD
mechanisms and both microscopic and macroscopic film properties. Experimental
and theoretical approaches are undertaken to uncover information such as the
extent of reaction, film structure, the presence of long-range order, chain
orientation, film stability, and optical and electrical properties in the
interfacial assemblies. The studies aim to answer fundamental questions about
growth mechanisms and the relationship between film structure and interface
properties in MLD. Taken together, the research may lead to new approaches to
create interfacial functionality for a wide range of
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.