* 1904716
* Discovery and Fundamental Investigation of Emergent Phenomena in Novel 2D Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Sefaattin Tongay, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 509,826.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic materials have long been recognized
for their technological importance, beginning with the compass, and are an
integral part of today’s information storage and many other standard
applications. However, such applications demand new magnetic materials with new
properties. The recently discovered two-dimensional (2D) magnetic materials pose
an immense advantage in this regard and offer a unique set of properties that
are not possible with the existing magnetic materials. They measure only a few
atoms in thickness, they are flexible, and better yet they can be stacked onto
each other -much like Lego bricks- to form entirely new materials with new
magnetic properties. The goal of this research program is to expand the library
of 2D magnets employing a combination of experimental and theoretical methods.
The outcome from this project benefits society by offering new magnetic
materials for potential applications in data storage, quantum communication, and
consumer electronics fields. The proposed multidisciplinary research program
also provides an excellent training platform for undergraduate and graduate
students, involves K-12 students in active research environment through the
Arizona State University SCENE program, and will enable the development of new
modules for existing undergraduate and graduate level courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D) van
der Waals magnets offer unique opportunities from a fundamental as well as a
technological perspective. While the first 2D material graphene was discovered
back in 2004, it took more than a decade to show experimental evidence of long-
range magnetic order in 2D. To date, magnetic order in 2D has been demonstrated
only in a handful of materials and Curie temperatures (Tc) remain lower than
300K which is an important consideration for their disruptive impact in
applications. This proposal combines advanced theoretical and experimental
techniques to predict, synthesize, characterize, and manipulate the properties
of entirely new-classes of 2D magnetic materials: from ferromagnetic insulators,
to ferromagnetic half-metals, antiferromagnetic chiral higher order topological
insulators and quantum anomalous Hall effect insulators. If successful, these
studies will lay a solid foundation to create novel 2D magnets, combine
topological order with magnetism in 2D, and take aggressive steps towards
demonstrating the first chiral higher order topological insulators while
significantly advancing our understanding of magnetism in the 2D to 3D crossover
limit, and the effects of pressure, gating, and chemical
substitution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.