* 1904655
* Collaborative Research: Combining Theory and Experiment to Understand Carotenoid Photophysics in Photosynthetic Light-Harvesting
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Warren Beck, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 262,240.00

Carotenoids are essential light-absorbing pigments that help conversion of
sunlight energy during photosynthesis and, in addition, provide photoprotection
from the sun's damaging effects to photosynthetic organisms. With this award,
the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division and the
Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences is funding Dr. Gascon from University of Connecticut and Dr. Beck
from Michigan State University to investigate the energy transfer and
photoprotection functions of carotenoids in the proteins of such organisms.
High-level computational methods are developed to predict how light harvesting
affects the structure of carotenoids within these proteins and experimental
methods are used to test these predictions. Results from these studies are
applicable to engineering new materials for solar energy capture and storage
that are more efficient at absorbing light, while being less susceptible to
photodamage. In addition, the project increases the knowledge of high school and
undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented groups, on how
computational methods help to answer important questions in biology and
chemistry, and how computer modeling is prevalent and impacts our daily
lives.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Carotenoids act as light-harvesting pigments, which
are uniquely positioned to absorb light outside the light-capturing range of
Chlorophylls (Chl). Equally important is the role of carotenoids as photo-
protectors of the photosynthetic apparatus via non-photochemical quenching
mechanisms and quenching of singlet oxygen. Two examples of protein complexes
with these two capabilities are the peridinin-chlorophyll a-protein (PCP) from
marine algae dinoflagellates and the orange carotenoid protein (OCP) from
cyanobacteria. Despite the availability of high-resolution structures of PCP,
OCP, and other carotenoid-containing light-harvesting proteins, and considerable
experimental and theoretical efforts, a general understanding of how the
carotenoids function in energy transfer and photoprotection is still not fully
available due to longstanding controversies in several areas. This research
produces a systematic and synergistic examination of these mechanisms, combining
advanced electronic structure calculations in proteins and advanced spectroscopy
techniques to discover the controlling spectral factors and the dynamical fate
of carotenoids during the first events of light harvesting and photoprotection
in photosynthetic proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.