* 1904636
* Tuning the structure-property relationships in intermetallic superconductors and magnetic systems with chemical doping
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* David Young, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 455,512.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on an
experimental investigation of the magnetic and transport properties of certain
intermetallic compounds that display bulk magnetism or superconductivity. The
physical properties of the materials being studied are intimately tied to their
crystal structures and underlying symmetries. In fact, the growing body of
recent research in condensed matter physics shows the importance in
understanding a material’s topology. The synthesis of high quality single
crystals is an important component of this project, and chemical doping is used
to tune the material’s physical properties. This research is integrated into an
educational plan to enhance both graduate and undergraduate learning in the
laboratory and classroom. A productive K-12 outreach effort targets pre-college
minority students and utilizes professors, graduate students, and education
majors in physics. This experimental research provides graduate and
undergraduate students with valuable experience and training in the areas of
materials synthesis, structural characterization, measurement of physical
properties, data acquisition, and analysis. In addition to synthesis and
characterization experience, the undergraduate researcher learns basic
laboratory skills and receives training in techniques of low-temperature
physics. Finally, single crystal growth and the synthesis of new materials help
the United States to maintain a significant presence in a highly competitive
global materials effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on superconductors,
impurity band ferromagnets, and new materials formed under high pressure, where
the salient features of the physics in these systems are driven by their
structure/property relationships. The level of chemical and structural disorder
is controlled through doping, and variable stoichiometry provides the ability to
probe the material’s phase space. The recent discovery by the principle
investigator’s research group of a Dirac surface state in the electronic
structure of BiPd and the existence of a nontrivial pi-Berry phase in one of its
bulk bands provide the motivation for further study. In particular, the
synthesis in reduced dimensions, along with the effects of hole doping, is
explored. Second, the discovery of a ferromagnetic quantum critical point in
electron-doped FeGa3 suggests the preservation of a novel structural feature
(Fe-Fe dimers) is important for the stability of long-range order. Interesting
magnetic ground states observed in FeGa3 doped with Ru and Mn are thoroughly
explored. In addition to studying compounds related to FeGa3, the PI focuses on
other materials containing boron or carbon dimers. Finally, high-pressure
synthesis capabilities are used to search for new superconductors in the boride
and carbide all-metal perovskite family of compounds. The experimental results
obtained from this research aid in understanding of strongly correlated electron
systems in general. This research offers the opportunity for new materials
discovery, as well as trains the next generation of materials scientists in
multiple techniques of single crystal growth and physical properties
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.