* 1904444
* Exploring Clouds for Acceleration of Science (E-CAS)
* CSE,OAC
* 11/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Ana Hunsinger, INTERNET2
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 3,030,955.00

Internet2 leads the "Exploring Clouds for Acceleration of Science (E-CAS)"
project in partnership with representative commercial cloud providers to
accelerate scientific discoveries. The effort seek to demonstrate the
effectiveness of commercial cloud platforms and services in supporting
applications that are critical to growing academic and research computing and
computational science communities, and seeks to illustrate the viability of
these services as an option for leading-edge research across a broad scope of
science. The project helps researchers understand the potential benefit of
larger-scale commercial platforms for scientific application workflows such as
those currently using NSF's High-Performance Computing (HPC). It also explores
how scientific workflows can innovatively leverage advancements provided by
commercial cloud providers. The project aims to accelerate scientific discovery
through integration and optimization of commercial cloud service advancements;
identify gaps between cloud provider capabilities and their potential for
enhancing academic research; and provide initial steps in documenting emerging
tools and leading deployment practices to share with the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloud computing has revolutionized enterprise
computing over the past decade and it has the potential to provide similar
impact for campus-based scientific workloads. The E-CAS project explores this
potential by providing two phases of funded campus-based projects addressing
acceleration of science. Each phase is followed by a community-led workshop to
assess lessons learned and to define leading practices. Projects are selected
from two categories; time-to-science (to achieve the best time-to-solution for
scientific application/workflows that may be time or situation sensitive) and
innovation (to explore innovative use of heterogeneous hardware resources,
serverless applications and/or machine learning to support and extend
application workflows). The project is guided by an external advisory board
including leading academic experts in computational science and other fields,
commercial cloud representatives, NSF program officers, and others. It leverages
prior and concurrent NSF investments while creating a new model of scalable
cloud service partnerships to enhance science in a broad spectrum of
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.