* 1904167
* Phase Behavior and Physical Properties of Thermotropic and Lyotropic Liquid Crystal Oligomers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Hamza Balci, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 573,103.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals are best known for their use
in information displays like smartphone screens and flat-panel televisions. They
are also a fascinating state of matter whose fundamental understanding and
technological potential continue to pose interesting challenges and
opportunities. While much is known about what kinds of molecules or molecular
assemblies tend to form liquid crystals, there are important open questions
about how the specific architecture of these constituents determines the nature
and properties of the liquid crystalline states they exhibit. This project
explores liquid crystalline states formed by "oligomers" that are constructed by
connecting together a small number of elongated, rigid components via flexible
linkages. One thrust of the project focuses on oligomers composed of short,
rigid segments of double-stranded DNA (duplex DNA) linked by flexible, single
strands. Here the objective is to elucidate the liquid crystalline states formed
in concentrated aqueous solutions of these constructs, including layered
structures that are not observed in solutions of fully paired duplexes and that
may offer a new means to simulate crowded DNA (physiological) environments. A
second thrust investigates the liquid crystalline properties of much smaller
"rigid+flexible" oligomers built up from molecules similar to the types used in
displays. These materials afford new possibilities to tune certain viscoelastic
properties, which could improve existing liquid crystal devices or motivate
entirely new ones. The parallel study of the two oligomeric systems with similar
architectures expressed on different microscopic length scales should enhance
insights into how these architectures determine macroscopic material properties.
The project trains students at graduate and undergraduate levels, across
disciplines (physics, biochemistry, materials science), for productive careers
in the 21st century scientific workforce. The students have ample opportunities
to master a broad spectrum of experimental techniques both in the "benchtop"
laboratory setting and at large US national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project
experimentally investigates two distinct molecular systems where linking a small
number of rigid subunits with flexible connectors promotes new liquid
crystalline (LC) phase behavior or significantly alters macroscopic physical
properties of familiar LC phases. Thermotropic LC oligomers consist of two or
more small, rigid molecular elements connected by flexible spacers, whose
specific arrangement can favor bent or helical conformations. These oligomers
undergo transitions between LC states driven primarily by changes in enthalpy.
Lyotropic, nucleic acid-based LCs, composed of DNA duplexes linked by single-
stranded "gaps" or containing extra, unpaired base inclusions ("kinks"), also
possess a "rigid+flexible" oligomer-like architecture, at ~10 times the length
scale of the thermotropic materials. The DNA constructs exhibit concentration-
dependent mesophases influenced primarily by entropy. The major objectives of
the project are: (1) To measure orientational viscoelastic parameters of
thermotropic LC oligomers, with emphasis on extending the results from dimers to
higher n-mers, and to correlate their relative magnitudes and temperature
dependencies with the nature of nanoscale modulated phases, such as the "twist-
bend" phase, these oligomers form; (2) To examine the orientational anchoring of
oligomers at the free surfaces of LC droplets and quasi-two-dimensional,
freestanding LC films drawn from n-mer/monomer mixtures; (3) To determine the
structure of mesophases exhibited in concentrated solutions of DNA duplexes that
form oligomer-like constructs due to the selective placement of "gaps" and
"kinks"; and (4) To explore, selectively, certain potential technological
applications in areas ranging from responsive optical devices to new approaches
for simulating crowded, physiological DNA environments to a concept for viral
DNA/RNA detection. Experiments are performed in the PI and co-PIs' laboratories
and at US National Labs, and utilize techniques including laser light
scattering, small- and wide-angle X-ray scattering, high sensitivity
fluorescence detection, magneto-optics in high fields, and "click chemistry"
methods to assemble the DNA constructs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.