* 1904380
* Molecular Structures of Interfacial Proteins Studied by Isotope Labeling and Sum Frequency Generation Vibrational Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Zhan Chen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/29/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Zhan Chen and his group at the University of Michigan
are developing an innovative approach to elucidate detailed molecular structures
of surface-bound proteins. Their approach uses selective heavy-atom (isotope)
labeling and advanced spectroscopic methods to derive crucial knowledge about
how adsorption of proteins at interfaces affects their structure and function.
These interactions impact a range of applications, such as biocompatibility of
biomedical materials, performance of antifouling coatings, selectivity and
sensitivity of biosensors, and efficiency of biofuel cells. This highly
interdisciplinary research provides educational opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students. Professor Chen and his students are also working to
engage high school students (including those from underrepresented groups,
including women) and to enhance their interest in science through a class taught
each summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of a
generally applicable methodology to characterize the conformation and
orientation of proteins at interfaces using isotope labeling and sum frequency
generation (SFG) vibrational spectroscopy. Using a model cell membrane-
associated antimicrobial peptide tachyplesin I, a protein GB1 mutant which can
retain its native structure at the graphene interface, and a wild-type protein
GB1 which denatures on graphene, Professor Chen and his group are developing SFG
isotope labeling methods to characterize various protein secondary structures at
the solid/liquid interface; to deduce orientations and slight conformation
changes of interfacial proteins from crystal structures due to interfacial
interactions; and to determine conformations of denatured interfacial proteins.
Results obtained from molecular dynamics simulations and the Hamiltonian
approach are compared to the experimentally measured SFG data from isotopically
labeled proteins to determine the most likely protein conformations and
orientations at the interface. This method can also be used to determine
interfacial structures of proteins with unknown crystal structures, adding a
powerful spectroscopic tool for studying interfacial biological
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.