* 1904021
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of the Law on Precarity among Youth
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2021
* Cecilia Menjivar, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2021
* USD 15,800.00

Youth who experience precarity in living arrangements and life experience may
have difficulty in the transition to adulthood and in achieving economic
stability in later years. Some youths are more subject to precarity than others,
thus allowing study of how laws and their interpretation may promote or deter
positive outcomes in this population. In addition, policies relevant to this
precarity have changed over time, and/or their interpretations have changed,
thus creating a natural experiment. This is an under-studied aspect of the
transition to adulthood, thus motivating the project that will portray these
varied experiences. The project will shed light on how interpretations of laws
and the laws themselves can be significant factors in easing the transition to
adulthood, or reducing the likelihood of successful assumption of productive
adult roles. Findings from the project will help inform state and federal
policies to better support youth transitions to adulthood.

This project will use participant observation and in-depth semi-structured
interviews to highlight the processes and mechanisms through which some youths
more or less easily navigate precarious environments. The project will conduct
interviews with 30 youths who experience some degree of precarity, as well as
with 30 adults charged with helping them navigate the transition to adulthood.
The project will also conduct an additional 25 interviews with state actors
assisting in these transitions. Participant observation over a period of several
months will allow inferences regarding the variety of contexts relevant to the
transition to adulthood for youths subject to precarity. Re-interviews with a
subset of youths at a second time point will allow inferences regarding how the
relevant processes evolve over time, as well as analysis of key outcomes that
have occurred during the interval. Qualitative analyses using Atlas.ti will
permit iterative coding of the interview and observational data, allowing both
deductive and inductive approaches. Findings will inform key literatures on the
sociology of law, the role of state supports of youth, and the transition to
adulthood.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.