* 1904216
* Modulating the Adhesion, Friction and Lubrication Characteristics of Few-Atom Thick Materials in Aqueous Environment over Several Length Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* SungWoo Nam, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 449,985.00

Two-dimensional (2D) materials are drawing significant attention because their
atomic size results in unique material properties. Although water is often
present in these systems and it significantly affects the microelectromechanical
system or device performance, very little is known about the interfacial
properties of 2D materials in the presence of water. This is partially due to
the challenges involved in contamination-free, controlled processing of high
quality 2D materials, which limits fundamental studies and applications. This
project will study the science associated with the interfacial properties of 2D
materials. Since the technology has direct applicability to micro and nano-scale
devices, the research has the potential to impact the automotive, consumer
electronic, aerospace and defense sectors, and therefore directly impacts
economic welfare and national security. The research will contribute to the
development of work force in the U.S. by training two graduate students research
assistants. Further, the PIs? integrated education plan is designed to spark the
early interest of K-12 students in STEM and inspire undergraduate and graduate
students to further advance their interests in the intersection of 2D materials
and surface science and engineering. In addition, the PIs will focus on
broadening nano-engineering education by engaging student veterans and high
school and minority students via summer research opportunities and field trips.
The PIs will also actively pursue outreach activities, including interactive
lectures and hands-on activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to fill the
knowledge gap of interfacial properties of 2D materials in aqueous environment,
two major lines of research will be followed: (1) establish manufacturing
methods for single- and few-layer graphene and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) that
afford control of their quality, the number of layers and substrate-induced
doping characteristics over several length scales and (2) fundamentally
comprehend, measure and model friction, adhesion, and lubrication by few-atomic
thick materials in aqueous environment. The research hypothesis is that
substrate-induced doping can be a means to modulate the interactions of few-
atomic thick materials with water and ions, as well as their interfacial
mobility, and therefore, it can be used to control electrical double layer,
friction, adhesion and lubrication mechanisms. Preparation of contamination-
free, single-crystalline graphene and MoS2 layers with controlled substrate-
induced doping will enable careful study of interfacial properties of 2D
materials in aqueous environment. Measurements with a surface forces apparatus
(SFA) will provide thorough data of interfacial forces, which will be precisely
modeled to quantify the effects of the substrate-induced doping. The ease of
preparing samples for atomic force microscopy (AFM) will enable to also
investigate substrate-induced doping via metal thin films, a higher number of
ionic compositions and also to qualitatively compare the interfacial behavior of
MoS2 and graphene with several other (exfoliated) 2D materials and with the bulk
crystals. Ultimately, a theory for the relation between substrate-induced doping
of 2D materials and their adhesive and frictional characteristics in the
presence of water will be established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.