* 1904612
* Structural analysis of the siroheme biosynthetic enzyme CysG, a central player in sulfur metabolism
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Elizabeth Stroupe, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2024
* USD 390,000.00

Heme is the iron-containing molecule that allows hemoglobin to carry oxygen in
blood. Heme also plays many other important biochemical functions in cells. With
this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is
funding Dr. Elizabeth Stroupe at Florida State University to study a special
form of heme (called siroheme). Siroheme helps chemically transform
environmental sulfur or nitrogen compounds to biologically usable forms using
microbes. This research topic is of particular importance because environmental
pollution in the form of toxic sulfur byproducts from commercial pig farms has
become problematic due to recent flooding in the southern United States. Dr.
Stroupe is studying a key enzyme (CysG) made from two bacteria in order to
determine the basic science of siroheme formation. By knowing how siroheme is
formed, scientists may improve upon the bio-remediation of toxic sulfur
compounds. The project trains diverse groups of undergraduate and graduate
students in molecular structure determinations and follows the biochemical
activity of enzymes at various stages of reaction. Dr. Stroupe and her students
impart an appreciation for the role that organic chemistry plays in biology to
middle and high school students through the SCIGirls and Florida's Next
Generation Science Standards outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteobacteria use a single gene product (CysG)
to synthesize siroheme. CsyG is the product of a gene fusion event between a
methyltransferase (CysG-A) and a bifunctional dehydrogenase/ferrochelatase
(CysG-B). The mechanisms for CysG-B's bifunctionality and its alternative
function as a cobaltchelatase are unknown. Other organisms use three distinct
enzymes for siroheme synthesis, including the CysG-B homolog SirC, which is a
monofunctional dehydrogenase. X-ray crystallography, biochemical analysis, and
Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FT-ICR MS) are
applied to dissect the underlying mechanisms for the last two steps of siroheme
synthesis. The questions addressed by this project include how bifunctional
active sites in CysG-B catalyze dehydrogenation and metal chelation and how
chelatase discriminates between iron and cobalt to make siroheme. Researchers
also ask how CysG-B functions as a bifunctional dehydogenase/ferrochelatase when
SirC, a homologous enzyme, only functions as a
dehydrogenase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.