* 1904304
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Admissions Policies at Women's Colleges
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Sarah Ovink, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,979.00

In the last few decades, many women's colleges have adopted admissions policies
extending the opportunity for enrollment to more diverse groups of students. As
such, women's colleges offer an important case to study diversity inclusion
policies because these institutions must still rely on some form of exclusion
criteria in order to remain a women's college. Yet, sociological research has
overlooked examining the experiences of students within these institutions as
such policies are implemented. This study asks how academic and social
experiences of diverse students are shaped by more inclusive policies. Because
college achievement, persistence, and student well-being in higher education
remain unequal, this research will help policy makers within educational
institutions as well as those with oversight responsibility to improve policies
that contribute to positive educational outcomes. The findings will inform
conversations regarding college admissions policies for students, with
implications for studies of social opportunity and career prospects of students
in the United States today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs a year-
long comparative ethnography of admissions policies at two women's colleges.
They are geographically proximate to one another, have similar levels of student
enrollment and were both founded in the late 19th century. Yet one has a
reputation for more inclusivity and one has a reputation for less inclusivity in
terms of admissions policies. This project will use three types of ethnographic
methods. It will analyze over 30 years of archival records relevant to
admissions to set the context for contemporary observations. The project also
includes 9 months of participant observation and interviews with 120 diverse
students, alumni, and employees at the two colleges to examine day-to-day
institutional practices and conversations relevant to admissions. These data
will be coded and analyzed with the use of qualitative coding software, Nvivo,
followed by open and axial coding to detect themes in the data. Findings from
this project will inform sociological theories regarding diverse participation
in organizations, as well as theories related to educational diversity and
social mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.