* 1904775
* Transition Metal Pnictide Nanoparticles for Energy-Relevant Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Stephanie Brock, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 468,219.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Through this research project, which is
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, new
materials for magnetic refrigeration (MR) that exploit earth-abundant transition
metal phosphide, arsenide or antimonide nanoparticles are established.
Traditional refrigeration and air-conditioning are based on the compression and
expansion of an inert gas in a process that consumes a whopping 17% of the
electrical energy consumed globally. In addition to being energy intensive,
inevitable refrigerant leaks of the hydrochlorofluorocarbon gases (HCFs) are
projected to contribute 13% of the global greenhouse gas emissions by 2030.
Magnetic refrigeration is a process that relies on magnetic polarization within
a solid material (not a gas) to absorb and release heat. While MR is
theoretically capable of 50% more energy-efficient refrigeration than standard
vapor-compression approaches, it is not widely adopted yet. This is due in part
to an absence of materials that are simultaneously (1) high-performing in the
temperature region of interest, (2) can be efficiently cycled with minimal
energy losses, (3) are inexpensive, and (4) are based upon materials with high
natural abundance. Some earth-abundant materials known to be active for MR but
are not routinely used because of inefficiencies from cycling losses. As part of
this project these materials are prepared as nanoparticles. Prof. Brock and her
group at Wayne State University expect the decrease in the size of the particles
to reduce barriers for magnetic polarization, thereby enabling efficient
cycling. To evaluate this hypothesis, the researchers carry out tests on a
series of structurally-related materials with different compositions as part of
this project. In addition to providing key insights to the development of viable
MR technologies, the project also includes training and mentoring of students in
interdisciplinary collaborative research and introduction of Detroit-area
6th-9th grade students, many of which are minorities, to materials chemistry
through hands-on activities for outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program at NSF this project establishes the fundamental characteristics of
transition metal pnictide (pnicogen = Group 15 element) nanomaterials relevant
to alternative energy applications, specifically focusing on magnetic
refrigeration (MR). Many transition metal pnictide materials are well-suited to
MR applications, displaying a large magnetocaloric effect (MCE, a large change
in magnetic entropy during polarization and depolarization) near room
temperature. The largest effects are associated with first-order (abrupt) phase
transitions from the ferromagnetic to the paramagnetic state at TC, but these
are also quite sharp (do not span the temperature range of interest).
Nanostructuring has been suggested as a means to broaden the temperature range
over which MCE is maximized; blending particles with differing TC's to extend
the temperature range over which appreciable magnetic entropy can be attained.
In this project, "materials opportunities" in the search for functional
magnetocalorics among nanoscale transition metal pnictides, are pursued via
three aims. In Aim 1, magnetic entropy data is collected on P-doped MnAs
nanoparticle samples and correlated to single particle magnetic force microscopy
data to discern how polydispersity affects the ensemble behavior of the samples,
in terms of producing uniform magnetic entropy responses over large temperature
ranges. In Aim 2, a relative reactivity scale for metal precursors with P
(trioctylphosphine), is created as a way to design new, more complex MCE
materials (ternary and quaternary phosphide phases). Finally, in Aim 3 intrinsic
challenges that face the exploitation of nanomaterials for magnetic
refrigeration are addressed, including reduction of the magnetic entropy due to
surface oxidation. Insights from the reduction strategy are leveraged to target
new antimonide phase for MR. In addition to providing key insights to the
development of viable MR technologies, the project also includes training and
mentoring of students in interdisciplinary collaborative research and
introduction of Detroit-area 6th-9th grade students, many of which are
minorities, to materials chemistry through a hands-on activity based on liquid
crystal sensors for the annual Wayne State University STEM day
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.