* 1904853
* Quinine polymer beacons for probing encapsulation and cellular delivery of CRISPR-Cas9
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Renee Frontiera, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 679,804.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research, Professors Reineke and Frontiera are
developing a series of new polymeric materials that bind, compact, and transport
nucleic acids and gene editing systems into living cells. The development of new
delivery vehicles is crucial to reducing the cost and toxicity of gene editing
therapies. The goal of gene editing is to modulate the expression of gene
products to treat diseases by delivering therapeutic nucleic acids and/or
ribonucleoprotein complexes. Traditionally, gene editing systems, have been
delivered by modified viruses, which are extremely expensive and can lead to
detrimental immune responses. Polymeric vehicles are promising candidate systems
for delivery as they bind nucleic acids and proteins into compact nanoscale
vehicles, while simultaneously reducing side effects from traditionally used
viral vehicles. Here, the PIs propose using a tunable series of polymers
containing quinine, a natural product long used to treat malaria, to promote
delivery and unpackaging of gene therapy components in living cells. The PIs
will synthesize and characterize a family of polymers rationally designed for
efficient gene editing construct delivery, and comprehensively characterize
their structure and packaging efficiency. These polymers will be screened for
genome editing efficiency and lack of toxicity. The most promising candidate
formulations will be examined with advanced spectroscopies in order to determine
the mechanism of cellular delivery. Additionally, the PIs will establish an
interactive mentoring and learning environment by attracting students to the
McNair Scholars program and hosting them for summer research and mentoring
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Development of
new materials that bind, compact, and transport nucleic acids and gene editing
systems into living cells in a manner that is efficient, nontoxic, and does not
interfere with normal cell function is essential for the success of many facets
of medical research. Polymeric nucleic acid vehicles show great promise in
circumventing the problems associated with viral vectors (immunogenicity,
difficulty in scalability, and high cost) because their structures can be
modified synthetically to endow them with properties for nontoxic and highly
efficient transport. The objective of this project is to develop a novel family
of seven delivery vehicle "beacons" containing quinine that form complexes with
nucleic acids and Cas9 protein, are low in toxicity, and can be readily tracked
for payload packaging and intracellular trafficking. The project will entail
synthesis of a family of tunable quinine-containing polymers, with quantitative
characterization by comprehensive optical and vibrational spectroscopies. This
suite of polymers will be assessed for cell viability and genome editing
efficiency, with statistical identification of the most promising formulations.
These systems will be examined in detail, with discovery of the mechanisms of
intracellular delivery, kinetics of unpackaging, and editing payload location.
The exploration of new delivery systems with unique properties to facilitate
multicomponent complex formation, spectroscopic probing of payload packaging,
cellular delivery, and imaging could offer transformative potential to the field
of non-viral based gene editing system development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.