* 1904256
* I-Corps: On-line Monitoring of a Tissue Welding Process
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Wei Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that the
proposed technology provides a much-needed solution to the current problems in
electrosurgery that is widely used in many medical specialties such as
neurological surgery. Electrosurgery is fast and requires short post-surgery
recovery time; however, major problems such as collateral nerve damage and seal
failure still exist, sometimes with fatal consequences. The proposed technology
helps eliminate those problems by monitoring the electrosurgical process with an
acoustic signal. It will enable an assistive device for surgeons to make precise
decisions that will ensure the surgical quality. It will reduce surgeon fatigue,
time in the operating room, and healthcare cost, while improving the overall
patient experience. This project allows extensive customer discovery and market
analysis, from which commercial products will be developed to satisfy the needs
of patients, surgeons, and hospitals. With the projected $5.17B global market
for electrosurgical equipment by 2021, the proposed technology will have a
significant commercial potential. The monitoring methodology applied to this
project brings advances to the field of precision surgery with engineering
principles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on developing a
real-time acoustic signal monitoring system for quality assurance of the
electrosurgical process. First, sound signals captured during the surgery is
correlated to the water boiling and protein denaturing process in heated tissue.
Then, a decision-making algorithm is developed based on the signal strength and
number of bubble bursting events. Previous research on the electrosurgical
process has provided fundamental understanding and suggested that the acoustic
monitoring method is dramatically better than existing ones. In the previous
study, experiments was conducted with ex-vivo porcine tissue and the feasibility
of the proposed technology using a low-profile sensor was demonstrated. This
I-Corps award will provide opportunities to conduct customer interviews for
technology refinement. A set of functional requirements for product development
will be identified to support commercialization of the proposed
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.