* 1904089
* Epitranscriptomic regulation of codon biased stress response genes in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Karl Thompson, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2024
* USD 626,764.00

This project will help characterize new ways in which cells control the flow of
genetic information, particularly when responding to stress and to conserve
energy. Chemical modifications of RNA, which are known to regulate gene
expression, may be biased toward targeting certain genes over others due to
specific sequences within the genetic code known as synonymous codons. The
research will explore this phenomenon, which remains poorly understood thus far,
especially in bacteria. The project will thus advance how gene expression
regulation is at the frontier of genetics and biotechnological development. The
project will also provide opportunities to train under-represented minority
graduate and undergraduate students in cutting edge techniques in genetics and
molecular biology. In addition, it will provide the scientific basis for
outreach to faith-based communities through lectures at high school and divinity
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic mechanisms used to quickly respond to
cellular stressors are not completely understood. While transcriptional and
post-transcriptional regulators are thought to be primary effectors of cellular
stress responses, recent studies suggest an emerging role for the
epitranscriptome (RNA modifications) in the stress response toolbox. While it is
clear that RNA modifications have an influence on stress response gene
regulation, it is not clear how they target specific genes for regulation. The
hypothesis addressed in this project is that synonymous leucine and serine codon
bias provide a basis for epitranscriptomic targeting of stress response genes
for regulatory purposes. This hypothesis will be tested by measuring expression
of heat shock genes, with genetically engineered modified synonymous leucine or
serine codon usage ratios, in the absence of specific tRNA modifications.
Ribosome profiling in the absence of RNA modifications will also be performed to
determine the sensitivity of specific codons to RNA modifications. The project
will be a vehicle for training under-represented minority graduate and
undergraduate students in cutting edge techniques in genetics and molecular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.