* 1904986
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Quantum Transport in a Helical One-Dimensional System
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Jun Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 456,260.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The invention of the silicon transistor and
decades of research development by academia and industry led to the current era
of rapid information processing and propagation characterized by computers and
the internet. The silicon transistor is rapidly approaching its limit of
performance. To go beyond the conventional silicon technology requires
drastically different paradigms that are fundamentally quantum in nature and
operate on new materials and device concepts that are yet to be discovered.
Quantum wires that can carry current without dissipating energy and transport
information-carrying quantum states without losing coherence are an important
building block of the next-generation quantum computers and quantum networks. In
prior research, the PI's lab discovered a new type of quantum wire that has the
above potential. The objectives of this project are to further understand the
fundamental properties of the wires and develop its technological potential by
constructing nanoscale devices and performing measurements in such systems.
Knowledge gained in this research is expected to have significant impact on the
development of quantum electronics. The research activities aim to educate the
next-generation workforce of quantum technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The PI's lab recently
pioneered a new one-dimensional helical system in bilayer graphene known as the
kink states, where the valley degrees of freedom of an electron is locked to its
direction of propagation. Electrons moving in opposite directions carry opposite
valley indices. The valley-momentum locked quantum wires display excellent
ballistic transport properties and support the operations of a topological
valley valve, a waveguide and a tunable electron beam splitter, which the PI's
lab demonstrated. This project seeks to further develop capabilities to
manipulate and probe interactions of the kink states beyond conductance
measurements. The research activities aim to construct a quantum point contact
and utilize the versatile tunability of the platform to systematically examine
the controlled coupling of the kink states at the quantum point contact, in
particular signatures of interacting one-dimensional systems. The construction
of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer enables the studies of phase coherence
transport of the kink states. Research efforts also include coupling the kink
states to a high upper-critical-field superconductor through superconductor-
kink-superconductor junctions and understanding the supercurrent distribution
carried by the kink states. These experiments lay the foundation of pursuing
emergent phenomena in superconductor-kink hybrid structures. Experiments are
aided by theoretical efforts in the interpretation and prediction of
measurements. Experimental and theoretical knowledge obtained in this project
fundamentally enrich the understandings of topology, superconductivity and one-
dimensional physics. The research activities equip students of all levels with
necessary skills to pursue careers in STEM fields and summer camp activities
promote science leadership among high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.