* 1904540
* Functional and Biochemical Characterization of Polysaccharide Monooxygenases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Michael Marletta, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Cellulose is the major component of biomass in nature and a potential source of
biofuels. Despite years of study, the industrial production of biofuels from
cellulose is limited by the efficiency and ease of breaking down (degrading)
cellulose. Polysaccharide monooxygenases (PMOs) are enzymes important in
cellulose degradation and biofuel development that have been recently
discovered. PMOs may help to overcome the high costs associated with cellulose
degradation. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Michael Marletta from the University of
California, Berkeley to continue his studies of PMOs. The research is focused on
understanding the chemical reactions and the physiological functions of PMOs
found in fungi and bacteria. Preliminary data indicates that PMOs play important
roles beyond cellulose degradation. The research may contribute to the
understanding PMO chemical reactions as well as to the discovery of new
biological uses for these enzymes. Beyond the chemistry impact and relevance to
sustainable energy, the project also creates training opportunities for
students. The project continues Dr. Marletta's commitment to training of
scientists and to advancing Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) fields. Students in the College of Chemistry Scholars Program (COSIP) are
directly engaged in the research. Engagement of students from the Berkeley
Chapter of the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native
Americans in Science (SACNAS) is also underway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to gain insight into the mechanism by which the
oxygen- and copper-dependent fungal PMOs catalyze the regioselective
hydroxylation and oxidation of glycosidic bonds of crystalline cellulose. A
multi-disciplinary approach is used to gain insight to the PMO active site
chemistry and to probe the functional and biochemical roles of selected PMOs.
Requisite recombinant expression systems for both fungal (Neurospora crassa and
Pichia pastori) and bacterial PMOs (Escherichia coli) as well as methods for the
isolation of PMOs from the native hosts have been developed. The chemistry of
the active site of the PMO is examined because this enzyme utilizes soluble
substrates and thus makes possible in-depth kinetic and spectroscopic studies.
Assays have been developed to unravel the complex kinetics and chemical
mechanism of PMOs. The kinetics of oxygen (O2) activation and the copper active
site species used to hydroxylate substrate are characterized. Through
bioinformatic analysis, unique subsets of PMOs have been identified that are may
have important roles in the natural lifecycle of those organisms. The structure
and function of these novel PMOs are being studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.