* 1904629
* Forward Model Based Strain Analysis in Highly Deformed Metallic Systems Using Electron Back-Scatter Diffraction Patterns
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Marc De Graef, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2023
* USD 466,116.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of metals and alloys in
engineering applications requires a thorough understanding of how these
materials will behave when they are subjected to stresses that cause them to
deform. Although the deformations can sometimes be visible to the naked eye, the
actual deformation processes take place at very small length scales, which
necessitates the use of electron microscopes operated at high magnification.
This research will develop a new experimental technique to measure these
deformations with high accuracy. Such detailed measurements will contribute to
our understanding of how materials deform, and, ultimately, this will impact how
metals and alloys can be used safely in structural applications throughout
society. All techniques developed in this program will be made available to the
community through publications and in the form of open source code. The PI will
also explore the possibility of generating free college-level text books via a
crowd-sourcing approach; this "OpenChapters" project will combine individual
chapters written by multiple authors into customizable on-demand text books that
will be freely available to college students as well as to society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern engineering materials often have a complex
multi-phase microstructure that makes it difficult to accurately predict how
they will behave under the influence of an applied stress. Many aspects of the
deformation behavior of a material are still poorly understood. The extraction
of lattice strains from deformed polycrystalline samples is a difficult
undertaking that requires renewed attention due to the availability of new
detector systems, in particular for electron back-scattered diffraction (EBSD),
the tool of choice for the proposed program. The PI and his group will employ a
physics-based model for the prediction of EBSD patterns and incorporate a new
capability to include the deformation tensor in the pattern generation
algorithm. In combination with a recently developed indexing algorithm, a new
approach will be developed to determine the deformation tensor components by
matching complete simulated EBSD patterns against their experimental versions,
with an anticipated strain resolution of better than 0.0001 over large sample
areas. This program has the potential to advance our understanding of micro- and
nano-scale mechanisms of deformation in modern engineering materials as well as
in lower symmetry geological samples. The combination of sensitive EBSD
detectors with a modified indexing scheme will lay the foundation for the
routine determination of strain fields by full-pattern matching of EBSD data.
The algorithms will be made available to the community in peer-reviewed
publications and as open source code. On the educational side, the OpenChapters
project will address the rapidly rising cost of text books by creating an open
source mechanism for the generation of free text books by a crowd-sourcing
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.