* 1904600
* InP/ZnS Luminescent Quantum Dots for Bioimaging with  Improved Cellular Targeting Capabilities
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Zeev Rosenzweig, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2024
* USD 549,995.00

Quantum dots are extremely small nanocrystals of semiconductors that are 100,000
times smaller than a grain of salt and contain just a few thousand atoms. When
exposed to light, quantum dots luminesce, and the color of their emitted light
depends on their size. It is these unique optical properties that make quantum
dots useful in applications ranging from cell phones to light emitting diodes
(LEDs). Quantum dots have also attracted the attention of the biotechnology
community due to their potential use in bioimaging and biosensing applications.
However, most quantum dots contain heavy metals like cadmium and lead that are
toxic to living cells and their surfaces quickly become coated with proteins and
lipids that degrade their stability. With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor
Zeev Rosenzweig in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) is developing non-toxic quantum
dots from indium phosphide. Working with his students and collaborator Dr. Karen
Leinkamp at Albert-Ludwigs Universitat in Germany, Professor Rosenzweig is
modifying the surface of the quantum dots with novel polymers that inhibit the
formation of protein corona on their surface, allowing them to maintain their
bright luminescence and stability in biological solutions. Their discoveries
could have broad implications for using semiconductor quantum dots in biological
applications. The project provides interdisciplinary research training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students involved. Professor
Rosenzweig and his team are also actively engaged in outreach to nearby high
schools to introduce students to concepts in nanoscience and nanotechnology,
including their impact on human health and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly emitting quantum dots (QDs) are
currently limited in their chemical stability in complex biological media, and
in their cellular targeting efficiency due to protein corona formation. The
project is addressing these limitations, enabling the use of InPZn/ZnS QDs as
non-toxic bioimaging probes. The goals of the project are realized through the
following specific aims: Aim 1) Modifying the surface of InPZn/ZnS QD with
oxonorbornene-based polymers that allow systematic functionalization of the
polymer side chains to inhibit corona formation. Aim 2) Development and use of a
high-resolution fluorescence microscopy system, typically used in single
molecule fluorescence studies, to follow in real time the process of protein
corona formation on InPZn/ZnS QDs without photodegradation, or the need for
large quantities of nanoparticles. Aim 3) Demonstrate that the surface
modification of InPZn/ZnS QDs with oxonorbornene polymers results in protein
corona formation inhibition, and increased macrophage targeting efficiency. The
project provides interdisciplinary research training opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students. It also enhances the recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups to scientific research in nanomaterials chemistry
through partnership with the national Interdisciplinary Consortium for Research
and Educational Access in Science and Engineering
(INCREASE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.