* 1904749
* Protein Cross-Linking Technology and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* James Reilly, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, and partial co-funding from the Cellular Dynamics and Function
program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Professor James
Reilly and his group at Indiana University are developing experimental and
computational methods to better characterize the complex interactions among
proteins that are critical to the function (and misfunction) of biological
cells. Their work addresses interactions such as protein folding and misfolding
(implicated in conditions such as Alzheimer's or Parkinson's disease), and the
chemistry of antibodies relevant to treating certain diseases. Graduate
students, undergrads and high school students who participate in this research
learn about the interplay of physical, analytical and biochemistry. They are
also involved in the dissemination of research results through publications and
conference presentations that prepare them for further scientific training or
careers in academia, biotechnology and the pharmaceutical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cross-linking mass spectrometry is a method of
studying protein-protein interactions that is growing in popularity. The
isolation and identification of protein cross-links is nevertheless still filled
with challenges. Work in the Reilly laboratory aims to contribute to this field
by improving the degree of confidence of protein cross-link identifications.
Multiple fragmentation methods, highlighted by novel cross-linkers that are
cleavable by electron transfer dissociation, are being utilized to increase the
information content in mass spectral data. Data fusion seeking both qualitative
and quantitative information is a significant challenge. Ion exchange and
isoelectric focusing are used to enrich and distinguish linked proteins from
unlinked counterparts. Protein dimerization thermodynamics, the temperature
dependence of protein unfolding, and interactions between ribosomes and
associated proteins are among potential applications testing the relative
performance of thioimidoesters and commercially available succinimidyl ester
cross-linkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.