* 1904106
* Photoelectron Emission at Semiconductor-Liquid  Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Robert Hamers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2023
* USD 520,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, focuses on
new approaches to achieving light-induced electron emission into water and other
non-vacuum environments using solid-state materials. Electrons in water and
other liquids have many unusual and important properties, including the ability
to initiate very difficult chemical reactions. While nearly all other electron-
emitting materials are unstable in water, diamond thin films are chemically
stable and able to emit electrons into water, air, and other non-vacuum
environments, but only when illuminated with ultraviolet light. In this project,
researchers are conducting fundamental research on diamond films and other
solid-state materials with the goal of enhancing efficiency and stability of
light-induced electron emission. Research includes investigating the fundamental
mechanisms involved in light-induced electron emission and exploring new
approaches to enhancing the efficiency of this process by manipulating the
optical properties of laboratory-grown diamond films. This work could lead to a
new generation of highly stable, versatile and efficient electron emitters that
could be used to initiate high-energy chemical reactions and would have broader
use in other technologies such as optical detectors. This project incorporates
advanced training and professional development opportunities for students and
postdoctoral scholars and includes efforts to increase the diversity of the
scientific workforce by providing summer research opportunities for students
from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program at NSF, is aimed at understanding the atomic-scale
factors that control the ability of diamond and related wide-bandgap
semiconductors to emit electrons into water and other non-vacuum environments.
Hydrogen-terminated surfaces of diamond are chemically stable and exhibit
negative electron affinity, thereby yielding barrier-free emission of
conduction-band electrons into water and other non-vacuum environments. However,
excitation of electrons across the diamond bandgap requires deep ultraviolet
light with wavelengths less than 220 nm. This research explores the formation,
optical properties, and photoelectrochemical properties of heterostructures
coupling diamond with optically active materials that can inject electrons into
its conduction band more efficiently using longer-wavelength light. One approach
involves incorporating nanoparticles that have low workfunctions or plasmonic
resonances into diamond films. Detailed measurements of photoelectrochemical
response and electron emission properties as a function of wavelength and other
parameters are being used to extract fundamental insights into the mechanisms of
electron excitation and emission. Exploratory work is being performed using
other wide-bandgap materials with high-lying conduction bands. Graduate students
and postdoctoral scholars supported on this project receive extensive mentoring
and professional development opportunities. This project also supports summer
research for students from under-represented groups and broader efforts to
enhance diversity of the scientific work force. Ultimately this research
provides fundamental new insights into the nature of internal photoemission
processes and may lead to new materials and structures that can act as stable,
energy-efficient electron emitters into water and other non-vacuum
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.