* 1904324
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Opportunity and Decisions about Environmental Change
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Kalyani Jayasankar, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 15,952.00

This project investigates how people's access to resources, perceptions of risk,
beliefs and values, and ties to localities affect their decisions in response to
change in their environment. Specifically, this study uses ethnographic research
to look at how residents of two cities with similar heightened risks of flooding
but very different populations make decisions about flooding and more broadly
about environmental change. This research will contribute to understanding how
these residential decisions may reshape geographies in coastal cities. Findings
of this study will be relevant to stakeholders interested in increasing
awareness of environmental change and in particular in communicating its risks.
They will be useful also for designing adaptations to change, which can be
enriched by taking these micro-level decisions into
account.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study entails comparative, longitudinal
ethnographic research spanning two years. It involves participant observation
and interviews with residents from various socioeconomic backgrounds in two
flood-prone neighborhoods. Two decision-making questions are explored: First,
how do residents perceive the risks of living in low-lying neighborhoods that
flood frequently? Second, how do residents make decisions about adaptation,
moving, and staying, and what do these processes entail? Comparison of the two
cities allows investigation of how coping with climate change varies greatly in
two distinctive regimes. Attention is paid to three variable dimensions in
particular: state and other support for residents, the durability of housing
stock, and residents' awareness of environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.