* 1904002
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Parental Opioid Addiction and Kinship Care
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Mario Small, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 15,613.00

This project examines kinship care of children as a result of parental addiction
in the opioid epidemic. Recently, attention has been drawn to the secondary
effects that the opioid epidemic has inflicted on families of drug users. One
such effect has been a significant rise in the numbers of children living in
kinship care arrangements, that is, placed under the legal custody of
grandparents, great-grandparents, aunts/uncles, and other relatives. Data will
come from interviews with and observations of the families of children who have
at least one parent who has lost custody because of drug addiction. This
research will illuminate the specific challenges that such families face and
point to strategies that could help improve child, birth parent, and kin
caretaker outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is based in one of the
epicenters of the opioid epidemic, where nine percent of all children live in a
kinship care arrangement. The sample will consist of 60 families, either
currently or recently in a kinship care arrangement. Data collection will
consist of two parts: interviews with members of these families and sustained
observation of a subset of these families. Researchers will study how kinship
care arrangements are formed, conceptualized, and experienced. Through tracking
custody shifts, they also will investigate the interplay between the state and
family.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.