* 1904047
* RUI: Dual Domain Organogels: A Novel Material Platform
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kenny Mineart, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2023
* USD 195,681.00

Part 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer gels are solid-like
materials that are mostly composed of liquid. They appear in a wide variety of
applications ranging from food and cosmetic products, to agricultural uses, to
pharmaceuticals and biomedical devices, and also are relevant to water
sustainability. Nearly all research on "loaded gels" thus far has concentrated
on water-based materials since water is abundant, versatile, and biocompatible.
However, loaded gels comprised of hydrocarbon solvent (e.g., mineral oil),
instead of water, offer many benefits including greatly improved shelf life and
elimination of complicated water-polymer and water-nanocarrier interactions.
This RUI (Research in Undergraduate Institutions) project will deliver an
approach to fabricate hydrocarbon-based gels loaded with nanocarriers. Then,
principles correlating gel formulation quantities with resultant nanoscale
structure and subsequently nanoscale structure with release rate of the
nanocarriers and gel physical characteristics (e.g., flexibility and strength)
will be established. These results will provide a fundamental understanding of
the isolated effects of loaded gel nanostructure on practical properties.
Furthermore, the findings will contribute to future developments of loaded gel
materials in the health, agricultural, water-sustainability, and related
industries. Of equal importance to its technical contributions, this work will
be partially conducted by undergraduate STEM students, thereby cultivating their
scientific/technical expertise and interests. The students will also be exposed
to cutting-edge instrumentation and research at national laboratories. The
principal investigator, along with support from these aspiring
engineers/scientists, will apply acquired knowledge in undergraduate teaching
and middle/high school outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer gels extend the usefulness of
macromolecules, including their ability to be loaded with nanocarrier species
such as micelles, vesicles, and nanoparticles. Nanocarrier-loaded polymer gels
exhibit superior properties over their stand-alone constituents (i.e., payload-
containing gels and nanocarriers dispersed in liquids), which is particularly
beneficial in applications where high payload storage and slow, steady release
are desired, such as in agricultural and pharmaceutical delivery devices. This
RUI award supports investigation of loaded block copolymer organogels (referred
to as dual domain organogels (DDOGs) or their block copolymer and nanocarrier
domains) wherein the solvent and block copolymer are nonpolar hydrocarbons and
the nanocarriers are reverse micelles. This makeup eliminates the complex, long-
range interactions, such as electrostatic and dipole-dipole forces, present in
hydrogels as well as eradicates dependence on a single solvent and greatly
extends shelf-life. Objectives of the work include: (i) synthesis of
formulation-structure design rules for DDOGs such that a number of their
nanoscale features can be methodically tailored, and (ii) establishment of
structure-property relationships for reverse micelle diffusion and mechanical
behavior in the tailored organogels. The results from this work will not only
advance the scientific communities' understanding of loaded gel formulation and
properties, but may also inform use of these materials in a number of high-
impact technologies including sensors, water purification, ion-exchange
processes (e.g., batteries), agriculture, and health. Of equal importance, the
work will cultivate the careers of undergraduate STEM students including
exceptional experiences to operate cutting-edge instrumentation at national
laboratories, interpret resultant data, and present their findings. The
principal investigator, along with support from these aspiring
engineers/scientists, will extend acquired knowledge to inform undergraduate
teaching and middle/high school outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.