* 1904534
* Incorporating Tailored Hydrogen Bonding Interactions in Organic Optoelectronic Thin Films - Pursuing Universality of Form and Function
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ronald Castellano, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 560,000.00

Carbon-based (organic) materials hold enormous potential for use in everyday
applications including displays, lighting, solar cells, transistors, and
sensors. In these contexts, it is often the three-dimensional (3-D) arrangement
of the molecules in thin (10-1,000 nanometer) films that ultimately affects
efficiency, stability, and overall utility. This research borrows an approach
used by nature, called self-assembly, to encourage organic materials to adopt
profitable arrangements in thin films largely independent of their size and
shape. Central to the universal approach of self-assembly are hydrogen bonding
interactions that are also responsible for "sticking" water molecules or the DNA
bases together. In the broadest sense, the research contributes to a fundamental
understanding of how to control the 3-dimensional structure of organic matter at
the nano-/mesoscale to accelerate development of next-generation organic-based
electronic materials. Broader impacts with respect to education and training
come from graduate and undergraduate students being exposed to multidisciplinary
science that includes synthetic and physical organic chemistry, spectroscopy,
computation, and materials processing/characterization. Professors Castellano
and Xue take advantage of the University of Florida (UF) Bridge to Doctorate
Fellowship program, a collaboration between the Graduate School at UF and the
Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (FGLSAMP), to
help recruit female and minority students contribute to research and receive
mentorship to encourage degree completion. Through the team's participation in
U-FUTuRES, physical science content is delivered to Florida science teachers
(grades 4?8).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prevailing interactions between pi-
conjugated organic molecules in thin films do not yield large energy differences
among competing solid-state packing arrangements, leading to kinetically-driven
spatial structures that are susceptible to minor changes to molecular structure
and processing. The structure-property studies in this research expose the
thermodynamic and kinetic drivers of hydrogen bond (H-bond) guided thin film
assembly to allow the charge mobility and optical characteristics to be
independently addressed through rational design and synthesis. This project
specifically examines the interplay of kinetics and thermodynamics in film
formation through variation of programmed intermolecular interactions and
deposition conditions. The research also introduces a bioinspired structural
scan to relate H-bonding configuration to optoelectronic properties and examines
alternative molecular designs involving repositioned H-bonding units within the
pi-framework to improve assembly orientational control in the pi-stacking
direction and with respect to the substrate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.