* 1904315
* Electronic and Magnetic Phenomena in Heavy-Fermion and Iron-Based Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Carmen Almasan, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 469,101.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Two major themes in condensed matter physics
are quantum critical phenomena and unconventional superconductivity. A quantum
phase transition takes place at zero temperature and describes a phase
transition between competing ground states driven by an external parameter such
as chemical composition, pressure, or magnetic field. The recent studies of
unconventional superconductors show that superconductivity develops in proximity
to a magnetically ordered phase. This raises the possibility of quantum phase
transitions in these systems arising from competing types of such orders. The
present studies of unconventional superconductors such as heavy fermions and
iron-based superconductors mainly focus on the understanding of the normal state
properties of these superconductors and on the mechanism of superconductivity.
These studies enhance our fundamental understanding of the extent to which a
quantum phase transition controls the finite temperature properties of these
superconductors and promise insight into the interplay between magnetism and
superconductivity of other unconventional superconductors. This new knowledge
could provide a more global understanding of the phenomenon of unconventional
SC. This highly interdisciplinary project allows graduate and undergraduate
students to benefit from exposure to a diversity of experimental techniques, a
variety of different physical systems and phenomena, and forefront topics in
condensed matter physics. The diversity of the expertise gained by the
participants in this research program is a substantial advantage in today's
knowledge based, technology driven economy, being beneficial to a future career
in industry, government, or academia. Professional mentoring is provided for the
graduate students. The international collaborations with scientists in China
contribute to the nation's infrastructure for research and education. The
principal investigator develops teaching lab modules for a senior laboratory
that verifies experimentally counterintuitive physical phenomena learned in
Quantum Mechanics; e.g., how a single photon will interfere with itself, or how
local realism can be violated. She also participates in the STEM education of
K-12 students by contributing to several activities: Annual STEM Project Fair,
Science Experience Internship, and Young Women's Summer Institute. In addition,
she provides middle school and high school students and their physics teachers
workshops and lab tours. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses a major theme in condensed matter
physics: quantum critical phenomena in heavy fermions and iron-based
superconductors. The proposed research significantly enhances our fundamental
understanding of charge conduction and magnetism of heavy fermions and iron
pnictides/chalcogenites, addresses issues related with the interplay between
magnetism and superconductivity, and contributes to a more global understanding
of the novel phenomenon of high temperature superconductivity. The goals of this
research are to: (1) study coexistence of antiferromagnetism and
superconductivity; (2) reveal quantum phase transitions; (3) study nature of
quantum critical points; (4) study pseudogap region and search for nematic
states; (5) facilitate the training of highly qualified personnel through
comprehensive and multifaceted research and improve K-12 STEM education. The
methods that are used in these studies are resistivity, magnetoresistivity,
current-voltage, torque, thermoelectric power, and magnetization measurements.
The proposed research will significantly enhance our fundamental understanding
of quantum critical phenomena, arising from competing types of orders, in iron-
based and heavy-fermion superconductors. Specifically, it will address issues
related with the interplay between magnetism and superconductivity, and reveal
the nature of the ground state, for example a conventional metal or an ordered
phase, which would have appeared had superconductivity not intervened.
Fundamentally, it will reveal the extent to which quantum criticality controls
the finite temperature properties of these systems. This research could also
contribute to a more global understanding of the novel phenomenon of
unconventional superconductivity. Understanding the intrinsic electronic,
magnetic, and magnetotransport mechanisms in these complex materials is critical
to understanding the nature of strongly correlated materials and revealing the
origin of unconventional superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.