* 1904560
* Applying Rules of Life to Catalysis: Significance of Distorted Coordination Environments in Enzyme Active Sites
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Shiyu Zhang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2022
* USD 440,000.00

Nature accomplishes challenging reactions under ambient conditions using as
catalysts enzymes that contain one or more Earth-abundant metals. The
coordination environment of the metal ions situated in these enzymes' active
sites are often an inspiration for new synthetic catalysts. However, there is
often a significant difference between the reactivity of enzymes and their
synthetic analogs, which reveals the existence of subtle rules that govern the
reactivity of the metal ions in living systems. With this award, the Chemistry
of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Shiyu Zhang
from The Ohio State University to discover, elucidate, and apply fundamental
rules that enzymes active sites employ to achieve difficult cellular reactions.
The research project is integrated with an educational program whose goal is to
teach students how to engage members of the community in modern STEM research
and to improve scientific literacy through collaborative outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project focuses on understanding
the impact of distorted coordination environments - a ubiquitous feature of
active sites in metalloproteins in living organisms - on the reactivity using a
combination of synthetic inorganic and theoretical methods. The key concept is
that bioinspired catalysts supported by symmetric organic/organometallic ligands
cannot sufficiently model the electronic structure details that are frequently
important for executing biological functions. The research project focuses on
understanding how the reactivity of synthetic model complexes changes as a
function of geometric distortion. Specifically, the research will evaluate the
effect of distorted coordination environments inspired by protein active sites
on: (1) the interconversion of nitrite (NO2-) and nitric oxide (NO) catalyzed by
a copper nitrosyl complex modelled after the active site of ceruloplasmin (Cp)
and copper nitrite reductase (CuNiR); (2) the challenging sp3 C-H hydroxylation
catalyzed by copper-oxo complexes modeled after the active site of particulate
methane monooxygenase (pMMO); (3) selective four-electron reduction of oxygen to
water catalyzed by a site-differentiated tricopper-oxo cluster modelled after
the trinuclear copper site in multicopper oxidase (MCO). The study will exploit
structure-function relationships of enzymes and will be directed towards the
identification of new strategies to reproduce the reactivity of enzymes and the
discovery of broadly generalizable rules for catalyst design that are applicable
beyond the scope of the biological systems used as
inspiration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.