* 1904800
* Elucidating chemical features and biological functions of short hydrogen bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Lu Wang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 435,000.00

Quantum effects are largely neglected in the description of living organisms,
despite their importance in a wide variety of biological processes. Hydrogen
bonds are best recognized as interactions that help fold DNA, RNA, and proteins
into their functional shapes. Hydrogen bonds that bring atoms together to very
short distances show prominent quantum mechanical properties and are closely
associated with biological functions that range from enzymatic catalysis to
antibiotic resistance. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program
in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Lu Wang from Rutgers University to
computationally elucidate the quantum nature and biological functions of short
hydrogen bonds (SHBs) in proteins. This project utilizes first principles
calculations and simulations (based on the concepts of atomic nuclei and
electrons) to unravel the quantum fluctuations and biological roles of SHBs in
proteins that signal changes in a cell or that catalyze chemical reactions.
Results from these studies provide guiding principles to the design of novel
proteins and bio-inspired materials with enhanced functions. This project also
enables graduate and undergraduate students, particularly women and students
from underrepresented minority groups, to learn advanced computational methods
and to discover the essential roles of quantum effects in biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project examines how the interplay
of chemical features and quantum effects determines the biological functions of
SHBs. The structural and chemical factors that facilitate the formation of SHBs
are uncovered by statistically analyzing the Protein Data Bank. The impact of
electronic and nuclear quantum effects on the proton behavior, spectroscopic
shifts and functional roles of SHBs are studied by first principles simulations,
with particular emphasis on the biological processes of bacterial phototaxis and
enzyme catalysis. Information from this study helps establish a structure-
property relation that explains and predicts the functions of biological
SHBs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.