* 1904102
* Persistence, Effectiveness and Retention Studies In STEM Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Hannah Sevian, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 392,264.00

Research literature in STEM education related to teacher effectiveness,
persistence, and retention is extremely inadequate. This project serves the
national interest by fostering additional research projects related to these
three important areas. The overarching objective of the Persistence,
Effectiveness and Retention Studies in STEM Teaching (PERSIST) project is to
bolster the rigor and creativity of Noyce Track 4 research proposals through
participation in community-building that leverages and shares resources and
forms mutually beneficial collaborations that further the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program's agenda. The pool of teachers who have participated in
various Noyce Track 1, 2, and 3 projects includes over 10,000 individuals, whose
collective experiences and knowledge could generate a wealth of understanding
about improving STEM education in high-need schools. Yet, this potential is
largely untapped due to the structure of typical Noyce scholarship and
fellowship projects. The PERSIST project will be conducted in two phases. During
the first phase, project leaders will invite current NSF Noyce Track 4 Research
Principal Investigators (PIs) and Co-PIs to participate in a 1-day meeting
immediately preceding the Annual Noyce Summit. Following the Noyce Track 4 PI
meeting, the ideas generated will be synthesized and resources will be
collected. These will be compiled into a published magazine-style brochure
intended for use in guiding discussions and dissemination efforts during the
second phase of project. During the second phase, the outreach phase of PERSIST,
half-day pre-conference workshops will be developed to take place at three
national STEM education conferences in 2020. By encouraging researcher
partnerships to design research projects related to STEM teacher recruitment,
preparation, and effectiveness in high-need school districts, this project will
help move the field forward in ways that will help broaden STEM
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three goals guide this project. First is to
familiarize participants with the NSF Noyce program, particularly the recently
added Track 4, which focuses on research related to STEM teacher preparation,
effectiveness and persistence. Second, the project seeks to create and foster a
collaborative community among Noyce Track 4 projects. Third, the PIs will
generate synergy across Noyce-funded research with the intent to extend
knowledge of highly effective approaches to recruiting and retaining effective
K-12 mathematics, science, engineering, and computer science teachers in high-
need local education agencies. Pursuit of these goals will lead to four
outcomes. First, the meetings will connect workshop participants (researchers
not currently engaged in Noyce) to one another and to the Noyce community, as a
basis for potential future collaboration. Second, interactions at the meetings
will enable participants to discuss and disseminate critical areas for research
in STEM teacher preparation and retention. Third, participants will find
opportunity to discuss and disseminate methodological approaches for the study
of STEM teacher effectiveness and persistence. Finally, meeting attendees will
share with the NSF Noyce program, the Noyce community, and other interested STEM
teacher education researchers the leading-edge questions and needs that emerge
from the collected Noyce Track 4 program's research arena. By helping to
generate additional research into STEM teacher preparation, effectiveness, and
persistence, and by broadening the pool of researchers engaged in pursuing
important research in these areas, this project ultimately has the potential to
advance STEM teaching and learning, especially related to teacher effectiveness,
persistence and retention in high-need school districts. Thus, the potential to
broaden participation in STEM of underrepresented groups in STEM is
high.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.