* 1904294
* Studies Involving Atoms in High Rydberg States
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* F. Barry Dunning, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 560,066.00

In this project atoms in carefully engineered states that possess sizable
internal energy, termed excited states, are used to study how atoms interact
with one another together with the outcomes of such interactions. Atom-atom
interactions, for example, lie at the very heart of many of the protocols
proposed for quantum information processing and provide a novel means to probe
phenomena such as magnetism and superconductivity. Laser beams are used to
create excited atomic states whose physical characteristics, and hence
interactions, are then manipulated using a carefully tailored series of pulsed
electric fields. Use of such "designer atoms" enables atom-atom interactions to
be probed in great detail and allows creation of novel chemical bonds and new
molecular species. The laser-created atoms are large and lie at the interface
between the microscopic word, characterized by quantum theory, and the larger
classical world governed by Newton's Laws. This work provides a bridge between
these two realms and helps illuminate the transition from quantum to classical
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atoms in high-n Rydberg states are used to study
strongly-coupled Rydberg systems, to generate long-lived two-electron-excited
"planetary atoms," and to explore the physical and chemical properties of
ultralong-range Rydberg molecules which comprise a Rydberg atom in whose
electron cloud are embedded one, or more, weakly-bound ground state atoms. The
work involves high-n, n~200-400, strontium Rydberg atoms created in both hot
atomic beams and in ultracold atom clouds using multiphoton laser excitation.
Strongly interacting Rydberg systems are created by exploiting dipole blockade
and focused laser beams to create two, or more, Rydberg atoms with well-defined
initial separations. Their mutual interactions are then increased by exciting
them to higher-lying states using protocols developed previously to engineer
high-n states with pulsed electric fields. The time evolution of the product
strongly coupled system is examined to explore energy interchange and to search
for long-lived configurations where, due to their correlated motions, the
excited electrons remain far apart. Planetary atoms are created by first placing
the Rydberg electron in a near-circular orbit and then exciting the second inner
valence electron to a high-lying state. Rydberg molecule formation is identified
spectroscopically through shifts in their excitation spectra. Such shifts also
illuminate their structure and properties. The present studies promise new
insights into the behavior of strongly interacting few-body systems which form
the basis for many protocols proposed for quantum information processing and, by
extension, into the behavior of many-body systems where interactions give rise
to a wide variety of phenomena fundamental to condensed matter physics. The work
also furnishes information on physics in the ultra-fast ultra-intense regime and
speaks to the engineering of low-lying atomic states using attosecond laser
pulses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.