* 1904442
* Visualizing quantum Hall ferromagnets, their 1D topological edge modes and their interplay with superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Ali Yazdani, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 540,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Research on topological phases has connection
to both concepts in quantum field theory and proposed approaches for creation of
fault tolerant quantum computers. The idea that low energy, emergent
quasiparticles in condensed matter systems can provide a laboratory to test
field theory concepts follows the long tradition of generalizing concepts in
physics across energy and length scales. Equally important to the study of
topological materials, topological phases and associated emergent quasiparticles
may well provide fundamental new approaches to electronics. For example, valley
degree of freedom for electronic wavefunction in solids, a property examined
here, is a feature that has been proposed to create new types of electronic
devices. The graduate and undergraduate students trained on this project are
learning state-of-the-art scanning probe microscopy, cryogenics, and materials
physics experimental techniques that are of strong interest to both industry and
academia. Lab research is being moved into the classroom with the development of
a Princeton freshman seminar course introducing students to some basics of
quantum mechanics, quantum computing, and exposing them to 'tabletop'
discoveries in quantum condensed matter physics such as superconductivity,
superfluidity, laser cooling and Bose condensation. The course is designed to
introduce quantum phenomena to those with minimal training, with only high
school courses in science and math. This approach will allow students from
various academic backgrounds and interests to be exposed to the excitement of
condensed matter physics and quantum phenomena early in their
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project is
focused on the study of electronic phases in which interaction between electrons
and topology of their wavefunctions must be treated on equal footing. These are
quantum Hall ferromagnetic phases in which electrons' valley degree of freedom
makes the topological quantum Hall states also display broken symmetry driven by
the exchange interaction between electrons. To accomplish its goals, the program
brings the power of high energy and spatial resolution spectroscopic mapping
with a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) to not only visualize valley quantum
Hall ferromagnets in real space, but also to probe their topological boundary
modes and to tune their properties by changing their carrier density, or using
strain, and proximity with superconductors and magnets. A new class of
interacting 1D Luttinger liquids that form at the topological boundary between
different quantum Hall valley phases is examined during this program. In
addition, the program explores the physics of interactions at low carrier
concentrations to drive stripe, bubble, or fractional quantum Hall phases in an
electronic system (Bi and other surface states) accessible to STM, and visualize
these phases for the first time. The interplay between quantum Hall valley-
polarized phases with superconductivity in special hybrid structures are also
studied. These efforts will explore ways in which Majoranas' "lattices" and
topological superconductivity may emerge when a vortex lattice from a
conventional superconductor is coupled with a two-dimensional (2D) electron gas
with strong spin-orbit coupling in the presence of a quantized Landau level
(LL). A number of different materials will be explored to extend our ability to
visualize Landau wavefunction to other 2D systems. The program will bring
together a wide range of experiments, novel creation of materials and thin film
structures to realize topological electronic phases and associated novel
phenomena that can be directly studied with high spatial and energy resolution
using the STM. The research is made possible by high-resolution STM
instrumentation that have been designed and constructed by the principal
investigator and his research team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.