* 1904818
* Collaborative research:  Mating systems as mechanisms for resilience of species in which the environment determines whether they become male or female
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Mariana Fuentes, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 743,533.00

In some species, including many reptiles, birds, and fish, whether an animal
becomes male or female depends on temperatures they are exposed to during early
life. These species are likely to be affected by environmental changes,
producing too many males or too many females when temperatures increase. How
that might lead to increases or decreases in population abundance is not well
understood. For example, a lack of males may not be a problem if a few males can
mate with many females. Focusing on a population of the green sea turtle, the
research will advance the fundamental knowledge of how the mating behaviors of
these species can buffer against environmental change. This will be done using
field surveys of male and female turtles and their nests, genetic measurements
of parentage, and mathematical models of population change. The results will
advance our understanding of how altered numbers of males and females affect the
long-term population persistence of such species and their capacity to acclimate
or adapt to skewed numbers of males or females. This will substantially improve
frameworks to assess the impacts of environmental change on this type of
species, improving management and conservation outcomes. This is important
because sea turtles are some of the species most vulnerable to the impacts of
environmental change. Other broader impacts of this research include training of
early career researchers from underrepresented groups, public outreach, and
dissemination of results in collaboration with a turtle conservation
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species in which the environment determines
whether they become male or female are predicted to produce too many males or
too many females with environmental change. This will ultimately affect long-
term population viability and limit reproductive output. Despite the fundamental
importance of understanding whether these species are resilient to environmental
change, knowledge of the response of their mating systems and population
dynamics to producing skewed numbers of males or female remains limited. This
research will advance the understanding of how altered production of males or
females affect the long-term population persistence of these species by
combining multiple methods, using the green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas)
population that nests in Brazil as a model. Field observations and genetic
parentage analysis will quantify multiple aspects of the green sea turtle mating
system (i.e., ratio of males to females that are ready to mate at any one time,
ratio of the number of unique males and females that produce viable offspring,
male natal philopatry, and breeding intervals) and linking these to reproductive
success (egg numbers). These data will be used in an eco-evolutionary dynamic
population model to assess persistence and the potential for adaptation. This
research will take advantage of recent technological advancements in wildlife
genetics, bio-logging devices, unmanned aerial vehicles, evolutionary modeling,
and environmental forecasting. The outcome will be the first comprehensive
examination of the potential for the mating system of species in which the
environment determines whether they become male or female to provide resilience
to environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.