* 1904311
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interagency Collaboration and Maternal and Child Wellbeing
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Robert Crosnoe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2021
* USD 12,129.00

The majority of child maltreatment reports received by child protective service
agencies in the United States come from professionals such as teachers,
healthcare providers, and social workers. Data sharing between the child welfare
system and other institutions thus facilitates the investigation of and
intervention in cases of child maltreatment. One consequence of this
collaboration, however, is that families may avoid institutions that provide
necessary resources out of fear of coming into contact with the child welfare
system. This project analyzes under what circumstances institutional engagement
is associated with a greater likelihood of child protective services
involvement, as well as how child protective services involvement is related to
future institutional engagement. Exploring how interactions with the child
welfare system constrain family willingness to access needed services sheds
light on one understudied mechanism in the reproduction of social
stratification. Findings from this project will generate policy and policy
implementation strategies for encouraging appropriate social service uptake and
better collaboration between social service workers and
clients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes both quantitative and
qualitative methods. The quantitative portion of project will analyze data from
the Fragile Families and Child Well-being Study (FFCWS). Currently available
FFCWS data follow nearly five thousand children and their families from the
focal child's birth to age fifteen, with an oversampling of children born to
unmarried mothers. Statistical techniques such as generalized linear models will
be used to estimate associations between child welfare system involvement and
service utilization. In addition, the project involves in-depth, semi-structured
interviews with 40 social service employees. Interview topics will include how
and when respondents decide to report child maltreatment, what evidence they
use, and how professional norms shape these decision-making processes. This
project will provide evidence regarding social service usage among low-income
families, with implications for sociological theories regarding stratification,
family and child outcomes, and maternal contact with the child welfare
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.