* 1904547
* Understanding and Enhancing Electronic Coupling Between Metal Halide Perovskite Quantum Dots Through Surface Molecular Engineering
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jin Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 09/30/2023
* USD 491,271.00

Nanoparticles are extremely small crystals. They can be just a few nanometers in
size, or about 100,000 thinner than a sheet of paper, and they can be formed
from many different types of materials, including semiconductors. When the
electrons are squeezed into very small semiconductor nanocrystals, they become
quantum-confined and new properties emerge, which can be harnessed for use in
new technologies. Before proceeding to applications, researchers must learn how
to pack the quantum dots (QDs) together into solids so that one nanoparticle can
share its electrons with another. With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professors Jin Z. Zhang and Yuan Ping from University of California Santa Cruz
(UCSC) are studying QD solids formed from a new class of semiconductors called
perovskites. Unlike traditional semiconductors, such as silicon, perovskites are
a mixture of inorganic components and organic molecules and this gives rise to
unusual properties. Working with their students, Professors Zhang and Pin are
developing ways to create stable QD solids where the electrons are easily
shared. Their discoveries could impact applications ranging from quantum
computing to solar cells. The project also provides training opportunities for
future scientists in advanced experimental and computational techniques. Through
their "The Sun, Spectroscopy, and Santa Cruz" events held each summer, the
research groups are introducing the project to local high school students and
teachers to enhance public awareness about science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team is developing novel semiconductor QD solids based on metal halide
(MH) perovskites. This research addressws the challenge that charge transport
properties of QD solids are often limited due to weak coupling between QDs,
hindering device applications in emerging technologies. The project is
systematically studying the fundamental factors, such as size, shape and
surface, that determine the electronic coupling between perovskite QDs (PQDs) by
developing designer ligands that enhance both the coupling between the PQDs and
their stability. The coupling between PDQs and interaction between ligands are
characterized using a combination of time-resolved photoluminescence,
transmission electron microscopy, infrared spectroscopy, and ultrafast pump-
probe methods. Unique conductive or aromatic ligand molecules are expected to
both stabilize the QDs and enhance their electronic coupling so that the QD
solids will exhibit strong charge transport while maintaining the novel
properties of the QDs. Computational studies based on state-of-the-art quantum
mechanical methods are exploring the ligand-PQD interaction and inter-PQD
coupling to guide and corroborate experimental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.