* 1904813
* Rethinking the Reactivity of Nanoscale Metal Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* James Mayer, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 490,125.00

Metal-oxide materials are widespread, from rocks in the environment, to
components of fuel cells, to ingredients in sunscreens. These materials are
increasingly used as very small particles (nanoparticles - particles that are a
billionth of a meter in diameter). The behavior and use of nanoparticles often
change after adding or removing just a few atoms. In this research project,
Professor Mayer's group at Yale University is studying how and why hydrogen (H)
and oxygen (O) atoms move onto and out of metal oxide nanoparticles. Hydrogen
and oxygen are ubiquitous, as they are in water (H2O), in air (O2) and in
hydrocarbon fuels like gasoline. Understanding how metal oxides use or provide H
and O could lead to new ideas and perhaps the development of new technologies.
The development of young scientists and the engagement of the broader community
are intertwined goals of this project. Public lectures are planned and a short
classroom program is being developed. Professor Mayer and his team also prepare
week-long workshops and month-long internships are being offered. These
activities emphasize hands-on and discovery-based activities to engage a diverse
group of high school students, especially those from groups currently under-
represented in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Redox (oxidation/reduction)
reactions of metal oxide nanocrystals (MOx NCs) are typically described as
outer-sphere electron transfer processes. However, there is increasing evidence
that many, if not most, of these interfacial reactions are actually inner-sphere
processes, involving the making and breaking of O-H and M-O chemical bonds.
Reactions involving O-H bonds of oxide materials can be described as proton-
coupled electron transfer or hydrogen atom transfer. Proton-coupled electron
transfer to a MOx NC involves protonation of an oxide to a hydroxide and
addition of an electron to a band state or trap state. The inner-sphere redox
reactivity of a variety of MOx NCs is being studied, including the n-type
semiconductors TiO2 and CeO2-x, p-type NiO and metallic RuO2. Oxygen atom
transfer reactions are also being explored. These reactions are not yet well
established for NC/solution interfaces. The experiments take a molecular
approach, utilizing tools from both solution chemistry and materials research.
For example, the nanocrystals are reacted with molecular substrates known to
undergo hydrogen atom transfer and oxygen atom transfer. The hydrogen atom
transfer reactions are providing thermochemical information, which is assembled
into a novel hydrogen-atom affinity scale for nanocrystals. The kinetics of the
reactions are correlated with the thermochemical driving forces to examine rate
vs. driving force scaling relationships. Parallel studies of hydrogen atom
transfer and oxygen atom transfer reactions show the connections between these
basic reaction types. These fundamental studies of individual reaction steps
build a potentially transformative new paradigm for nanomaterial reactivity,
rooted in thermochemistry and kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.