* 1904953
* Collaborative Research: Targeting Turbulence Using Smart Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Robert Handler, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 243,687.00

Approximately 29 percent of all energy consumed in the U.S. is used to transport
goods and people. Most of this energy is used to overcome drag forces produced
by the turbulent flow of gases and liquids; only a modest reduction in drag
would result in large fuel savings. Drag is associated with turbulent flow
creating regions of concentrated vorticity near walls. Previous methods for
reducing the drag forces, such as introducing substances (such as polymers) into
the flow, did not exploit the known structure of the turbulence in a targeted
way. When polymers are injected or bled into the near-wall turbulent boundary
layer, they become distributed randomly, making it impractical in most cases to
use these additives to reduce drag. This work seeks to answer: Can micro-
particles containing a suitable additive and having specific physical properties
be introduced into turbulent flow to achieve much greater drag reduction than
traditional methods? The success of the present approach in reducing drag is
expected to motivate the emergence of technologies focused on the development of
micro-particles that can detect the nature of their own flow environment and
respond by modifying that environment. For example, particles which segregate
themselves into turbulent structures based on their density and subsequently
dissolve will be examined first, but future smart particles might sense local
flow properties, such as flow stain rates, and subsequently direct themselves to
regions of the flow where their effects may be most impactful. It is easy to
imagine how reducing drag on ships, cars, trains, and airplanes would have a
broad impact on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work aims to
specifically target these structures by allowing particles, smaller than the
smallest turbulent length scale and of the appropriate shape or density, to
carry and release drag reducing agents as they collect in a natural way within
or around such structures. Ideally, as one such structure is disrupted,
remaining particles will migrate to the next in a disruptive cascade. Particle
properties (especially particle sizes, densities, polymer properties, polymer
release mechanisms, particle injection locations, and injection rates) and smart
injection techniques that are most effective in reducing drag will be
determined. It is proposed to study this concept using direct numerical
simulation of the Navier Stokes equations (which describe fluid motion) for the
transitional case of turbulent spot evolution and for the fully turbulent flat
plate boundary layer and channel flow cases. These situations cover the
canonical transitional and turbulence internal and external flow regimes
relevant to flow about ships as well as within
pipelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.