* 1904874
* Expanding the Chemical Space of Phage isplay
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jianmin Gao, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2022
* USD 430,908.00

Proteins play important roles in complex human biology and biological
malfunction. The use of chemical tools in biology allows scientists to control
of the behavior of specific proteins. Phage display is a technique used to study
protein?protein, protein?peptide, and protein?DNA interactions. Phage display
uses bacteriophages (viruses that infect bacteria) to connect proteins with the
genetic information that encodes them. Phage display has been limited to the
creation of peptides that occur in nature. This project expands the capabilities
of peptides that can be of use in controlling protein behavior by providing a
new path to making peptides from amino acids that have been chemically altered.
Students from Roxbury Community College and high school students from the
Greater Boston area are actively engaged in the research efforts to use
chemistry to solve biological challenges. Importantly, this project includes
detailed biochemical and structural studies of the ligand-protein binding
mechanisms that may yield new guiding principles for protein recognition by
synthetic molecules and eventually, new treatments for biological malfunction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program
is funding Professor Jianmin Gao at Boston College to develop chemically-
modified phage libraries and explore their potential for targeting proteins that
have eluded small molecules and natural peptides. Phage display, as a
genetically encoded screening platform, has largely limited the displayable
molecules to peptides comprising proteinogenic amino acids, which often fall
short in generating high-affinity probes and inhibitors for proteins that do not
have a well-defined recognition region. Dr. Gao overcomes this limitation by
modifying phage-displayed peptides to present unnatural functionalities. Clever
use of biocompatible and chemoselective reactions for phage modification is
expected to yield novel phage libraries, with each peptide member carrying two
distinct designer functionalities. Building on this innovative technology for
phage modification, Dr. Gao and his research team seek to develop a "ligand
maturation" protocol that allows facile conversion of low-affinity ligands into
potent binders of the target protein in the form of ligand-peptide
conjugates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.