* 1904227
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: (In)visible Work: Analyzing Labor Performed in Agricultural Markets
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Rebecca Schewe, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 11/30/2020
* USD 15,838.00

This project studies the impact of market reforms on household relations and
women's work in agriculture. The project asks: how does economic change shape
gendered institutions such as the household and related labor markets? A central
problem is that a significant portion of agricultural work is not measured
appropriately, and thus unrecorded in official statistics. Four research
questions guide this project: (a) how are official measures of women's work
constructed? (b) what is the impact of economic change in agriculture at the
local level upon one measure of women's work? (c) what role does women's unpaid
work play in the explanation of the links between economic change in agriculture
and paid work? (d) how does economic change affect intrahousehold power
relations and gender norms? This project examines the ways in which regulatory
changes in agricultural policy affect women's work in agricultural production
and marketing at interconnected levels of analysis: national, local, and
household. At each level, the project seeks to show how women's paid and unpaid
work is officially and unofficially defined in agricultural communities, and how
this work is redefined under economic change. The findings from this project
will contribute to a broader understanding of a) women's work--paid and unpaid
activities undertaken within and beyond the household and b) how large-scale
policy decisions translate into decisions made at the family and individual
level. These findings will help generate recommendations on how households' and
women's lives in agricultural areas may be improved by change in formal policies
including those focused on contract farming, deregulation of sales, and
privatization of markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the
processes by which women's work, particularly work in agricultural contexts, is
rendered visible or invisible in the market economy. The project will use a
convergent mixed methods research framework to study the relationship between
economic change and gendered institutions like the household and related labor
markets. Within this framework, quantitative data from censuses and surveys and
qualitative data from primary sources will be collected in the same phase of
data production; both strands of data will then be analysed independently and
merged at the stage of interpretation of results. To collect primary data, in-
depth semi-structured interviews will be conducted with 60 women engaged in farm
work and also associated with farmer producer companies, along with participant
observation on farms and at agricultural markets around a larger urban area.
Findings from the project will inform sociological theories regarding gender in
agricultural work, economic change, and household gender
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.