* 1904126
* Workshop: Support for 2019 AEESP Research and Education Conference: Environmental Engineers and Scientists see Cities in 4-D
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Treavor Boyer, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 03/31/2020
* USD 49,997.00

This grant will support costs for the 2019 biannual research and education
conference of the Association of Environmental Engineering and Science
Professors (AEESP) at Arizona State University. The theme of the conference is
"Environmental Engineers and Scientists see Cities in 4-D." The conference will
include one day of workshops, two days of technical sessions, poster sessions,
plenary speakers, and numerous opportunities to exchange ideas and create new
partnerships. Broader impacts will result from the exchange of ideas, sharing of
best practices, and creation of new partnerships to improve education and
address environmental issues facing society. The broader public will be able to
view much of the knowledge shared at the conference through live-streaming.
Underrepresented minorities will be supported by the conference, thus helping to
diversify the Nation's science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
workforce. A workshop on science communication will facilitate communication of
science to the public, thereby increasing the scientific literacy of the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support the 2019
biannual research and education conference of the Association of Environmental
Engineering and Science Professors (AEESP) at Arizona State University in Tempe,
AZ. The theme of the conference is "Environmental Engineers and Scientists see
Cities in 4-D," with distinct science and education tracks comprising the
different branches of the AEESP community and overlapping complementary fields.
Technical sessions will focus on state-of-the-science wastewater treatment and
resource recovery, resilience and sustainability, urbanization, and
incorporation of data science techniques such as artificial intelligence and
machine learning in environmental engineering. The AEESP conference theme,
plenary speakers, and technical session tracks will enable exchange of knowledge
and forming of new partnerships between AEESP and data science researchers and
educators. Broader impacts of the conference are numerous and originate from the
exchange of ideas to educate the next generation of environmental engineering
and science leaders to improve the well-being of society. Underrepresented
minorities will be supported by the conference, thus helping to diversify the
Nation's science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce. A
workshop on science communication for AEESP members will facilitate
communication of science to the public, thereby increasing the scientific
literacy of the Nation. Major efforts will be incorporated to share the
educational and scientific findings with the public, thus improving scientific
literacy and increasing public engagement with
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.