* 1904571
* Collaborative Research: Addressing Morphological Instability in Topologically Complex Electrocatalytic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Joshua Snyder, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2023
* USD 272,454.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercialization of renewable
energy storage and conversion devices, such as water electrolyzers and fuel
cells, requires advancements in both efficiency and operational longevity.
Performance as well as cost of these electrochemical energy devices is strongly
tied to the electrocatalyst materials that drive the reactions producing energy
or fuel. Electrocatalyst materials development has centered on the design of
nanoscale catalysts that maximize the exposure and usage of precious metals,
i.e. Platinum, of which they are composed. These unique nanoscale architectures,
however, are susceptible to multiple mechanisms of degradation, the rate of
which is typically inversely proportional to the activity of the catalyst. The
goal of this project is to highlight these mechanisms of degradation for
electrocatalysts possessing complex nano-architectures. With a better
understanding of how these materials degrade, mitigation strategies can be
proposed, improving durability and breaking away from the inverse proportional
relationship between electrocatalyst activity and durability. Insight developed
through the proposed work will have a significant impact on the effort to bridge
the gap between highly active and highly stable materials where integration of
these morphologically stable yet complex and active electrocatalysts into
electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices will yield significant
improvements in both precious metal loading and device operational longevity.
The proposed work will provide one PhD student and several undergraduate
students with a broad and interdisciplinary research experience in interfacial
electrochemistry and nanomaterial synthesis for renewable energy technologies.
Through a partnership with the Lindy Center at Drexel, the PI will highlight the
principles of renewable and carbon neutral energy storage and conversion and
promote interest in STEM for grade 4-12 community
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the mechanisms by
which three-dimensional, porous, morphologically complex electrocatalytic
nanomaterials degrade under relevant electrochemical conditions. The products of
this proposed research will highlight the limiting atomic processes and provide
insight for the development of mitigation strategies that maintain morphological
and compositional integrity with negligible impact on the intrinsic activity of
the catalysts. The research objective of the proposed work is to develop a more
detailed fundamental understanding of the convolution of electrochemical
dissolution and surface diffusion driven coarsening for these three-dimensional
nanomaterials that are in a constant state of meta-stability. It is hypothesized
that electrochemical coarsening is driven by a dissolution/redeposition process
rather than a pure surface diffusion driven process. Through a combination of
experimental, local and global measurements, and computational analysis, this
project will qualitatively and quantitatively assess the impact of relevant
operational parameters on the morphological and compositional evolution of
nanoporous materials. This proposed concept has a broad parameter space,
composed of a complex web of intertwined interactions. Computational
manipulation of this parameter space, through kMC, will be used to explore the
underlying physics of electrochemical coarsening: a) the distance along the
surface the dissolved species travels before redepositing, b) response time of
dissolution and deposition, c) flux of local dissolution for a given UPL, d) the
coordination of the preferred defect site, e) flow rate of electrolyte solution
(simply by a time-dependent removal of dissolved species), and f) type of
surface impurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.