* 1904885
* High-Throughput Analysis and Evolution of Stereoselective Enzymes using Flow Cytometry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Jennifer Heemstra, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2022
* USD 390,000.00

Enzymes are among the most efficient catalysts known, and they are responsible
for nearly all the reactions that make life possible. The capability of enzymes
to catalyze chemical transformations can also be harnessed to provide
environmentally benign routes for the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and other
high-value chemicals. However, naturally occurring enzymes must be honed to
function in these non-natural reactions. Key to augmenting enzyme capabilities
is the development of fast, high-fidelity sensing tools that measure the
function of enzymes in large numbers. With support from the Chemical Measurement
and Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry and partial co-funding from the
Biosensing Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental
and Transport Systems at NSF, Dr. Jennifer Heemstra at Emory University uses a
high-speed sequential platform to measure the function of millions of different
modified versions of naturally occurring enzymes generated by her team, thereby
allowing for identification of those enzymes best suited to important non-
natural reactions. This project is developing a user-friendly platform that can
be widely applied to discover new enzymes for constructing these high-value
chemicals. Integrated with this research, Dr. Heemstra develops and broadly
disseminates multi-media resources that help to prepare the future workforce in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Specifically, these resources
provide information and advice on professional skills, including oral and
written communication, pioneering new research ideas, promoting diversity and
inclusion, and professional networking. These resources are freely available to
the general public and utilized by students and researchers
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jennifer Heemstra at Emory University is
using enantiomeric DNA biosensors to enable high-throughput enantiopurity
measurement as a broadly applicable approach to biocatalyst discovery. DNA
biosensors are powerful in their ability to transduce the presence of a specific
small-molecule target into a dose-dependent fluorescence output. Dr. Heemstra
utilizes sensors comprised of each of the two enantiomers of DNA to quantify the
concentrations of the two enantiomers of a target small molecule that are
produced as a result of an enzymatic reaction. This analysis is integrated with
droplet microfluidic technology to enable screening and sorting by flow
cytometry. As a result, large libraries of enzyme variants can be rapidly
screened, and those having the desired levels of stereoselectivity isolated,
thereby accelerating the discovery of new biocatalysts for the synthesis of
pharmaceuticals and other high-value chemicals. This research is integrated with
an undergraduate curriculum in which students learn how to read and analyze the
primary literature and craft original research proposals, as well as publicly
available resources to promote the professional development of early-career
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.