* 1904161
* Workshop: Genome Architecture and Dynamics 2019
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2022
* Jose Onuchic, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 11/30/2022
* USD 295,459.00

The international Summer School and Workshop: Genome Architecture and Dynamics
2019 will address the physics of genome structure and function. This meeting
will bring together 75 researchers and 75 graduate students, drawn from both
biological and physical science, to discuss this topic, broadly construed. The
meeting will take place in the Bulgarian town of Varna and will last six days.
The two initial days will consist of tutorial lectures for the trainees as well
as informal gatherings by the senior participants. Afterward there will be four
full days of scientific lectures on the state-of-the-art of both experimental
techniques and modeling approaches to this extremely exciting topical area. This
award will fund the participation of the US scientists in this meeting as well
as some overall logistical costs. In recent years, there has been growing
excitement about using ideas from physical science to make sense of genome
structure in eukaryotic cells. This workshop will be devoted to the basic
mechanisms underlying chromatin dynamics and to the methods available to
investigate these mechanisms. At the same time, it is clear that basic
understanding will go a long way toward being able to understand, and perhaps
affect for the better, the role of chromatin in diseases such as cancer and in
the aging process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a variety of broader impacts
that will arise from this meeting. For the training aspects, the organizers will
recruit students either directly from the labs of senior participants or through
the Physics of Living Systems graduate network. Next. Bulgaria has a long
scientific tradition, and a visit to the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences reveals
that one of the main focus areas is chromatin structure. The Academy members
welcome the opportunity to integrate their research in this area (and their
students being trained as part of the research) with the overall international
community and have allocated funds for the Bulgarian participants in the
meeting. Thus an additional broader impact will be to broaden the international
community in a manner which would clearly be helpful to
everyone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structure of the DNA molecule and its
associated proteins (commonly referred to as chromatin) is of great interest,
both because of the intrinsic problems of how it can be fit into the nucleus and
go through various stages as the cell cycle progresses and because it has a
major effect on the accessibility of genes and hence couples to cellular
differentiation. The excitement has arisen due both to the increasing
recognition of the importance of chromatin dynamics for cell function and to the
invention of a variety of extremely powerful experimental techniques for
determining chromatin properties. This meeting will bring together many of the
individuals from around the world leading this field and should have the ability
to accelerate focused research in this area for the coming years. The
combination of cutting-edge science will enable the organizers to attract a
large number of leaders in the field and make this meeting a seminal event. The
United States participation in the Summer School and Workshop is supported by
the Physics of Living Systems program in the Physics Division, the Molecular
Biophysics, the Cellular Dynamics and Function, and the Genetic Mechanisms
clusters in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.