* 1904631
* Reshaping Recyclable Thermosets
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Brent Sumerlin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 677,645.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term persistence of many
synthetic materials and the resulting impact on the environment has made clear
the importance of developing new routes to sustainable polymers. This project
aims to address the challenges of sustainability via the design of new, robust
materials with longer life spans that need to be replaced less frequently.
Recyclable and self-repairing materials offer one route for extending the useful
lifetime of a polymeric material. Unfortunately, many of the most commonly
encountered polymers that are readily recyclable and repairable suffer from poor
resistance to solvents or exposure to high temperatures. Conversely, polymers
with enhanced solvent, thermal, and dimensional stability are generally not
recyclable and cannot be rendered self-healing, because their molecular
structure does not allow the mobility required to do so. This project aims to
elucidate the fundamentals that will allow bridging the divide between these two
classically disparate families of materials. By exercising precise control over
key molecular-scale parameters, the factors governing processability,
recyclability, self-healing, and utility will be determined to allow the design
of next-generation materials. A key component of this project involves outreach
and educational activities directed toward local K-12 students as well as
training and professional development of graduate and undergraduate students in
emerging areas of chemistry and polymer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the traditional classification mechanisms
for bulk polymeric materials relies on whether or not the chains that comprise
the material are crosslinked. Crosslinked polymers (i.e., thermosets) may have
significantly enhanced dimensional, chemical, mechanical, and solvent stability
compared to their non-crosslinked analogs (i.e., thermoplastics), but these
attributes are accompanied by an inability to be reshaped or recycled. There is
a significant need for materials that combine the properties of thermosets and
thermoplastics by relying on reversible crosslinks that can undergo exchange by
either an associative or dissociative mechanism. The former method of crosslink
exchange is particularly promising because it allows for network rearrangement
without loss of connectivity (i.e., no change in crosslink density). Networks
that undergo associative exchange have recently become known as "vitrimers." The
goal of this project is the investigation and development of vitrimers that are
accessible via a straightforward method that relies on the curing of vinyl
monomer-derived prepolymers generated by controlled radical polymerization.
Critically, this strategy decouples the network curing and backbone
polymerization steps, allowing for precise manipulation of structure, topology,
and functionality within the chains comprising the network. Three specific aims
will be pursued to (1) interrogate the effect of structural elements of both the
polymeric and crosslinker components of vitrimers derived from vinyl polymers,
(2) determine the role of chain microstructure and topology on vitrimer
(re)processability, and (3) prepare and investigate vitrimers with stimuli-
activatable intrinsic catalysts. Successful completion of these aims will reveal
fundamental structure-property relationships of dynamically crosslinked networks
while generating design principles for vitrimers with unprecedented chemical and
mechanical properties.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.