* 1904426
* Single-Molecule Imaging of the Electrode/Solution Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Bo Zhang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Many electrochemical reactions in the energy and environmental fields result in
formation of gases at electrode surfaces. These reactions include facilitated
formation of hydrogen and oxygen gases from the "splitting" of water, oxidation
of methyl and ethyl alcohol in fuel cells, and charging and discharging events
in batteries. Despite their importance, the initiation and growth of small gas
bubbles on an electrode remain poorly understood due to a lack of proper
analysis tools for imaging nanobubbles. To address this challenge, Professor Bo
Zhang's laboratory at the University of Washington develops a fluorescence-based
electrochemical method to image how and when gas nanobubbles are formed at the
electrode/solution interface. The use of this method has the potential to
promote the development of cheaper and more efficient facilitators (catalysts)
for numerous electrochemical reactions in energy and environmental research.
This work provides a set of integrated educational activities and a unique
training opportunity for graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students to
learn cutting-edge research in electrochemistry and
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemical Measurement and
Imaging Program is funding Dr. Bo Zhang at the University of Washington to
develop a new electroanalytical method to study nucleation and growth of gas
nanobubbles at the electrode/solution interface. By single-molecule labeling and
fluorescently imaging single nanobubbles on an electrode, this method yields
spatially and temporally-resolved information about gas evolution processes on
electrodes that is otherwise unobtainable using many other imaging techniques,
such as scanning probe-based electrochemical microscopies. The ability to map
nanobubble distribution may provide unique information about catalytic
heterogeneity of electrode surfaces, which will help to understand and design
new and better catalytic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.