* 1904826
* A Framework for Predictive Hybrid Models of Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Todd Oliver, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 470,779.00

Design and operation of advanced technological systems rely on the ability to
predict their behavior using reliable computer simulation. Many important
systems including automotive, aeronautic, propulsion, power generation and wind
energy systems involve complex fluid flows. However, their reliable simulation
is hindered by the fact that the fluid flows in these systems are mostly
turbulent. This means that the fluid motion is chaotic and unpredictable. There
are currently no accurate and broadly applicable models to describe the effects
of turbulence on such flows. Recent approaches to computer modeling of complex
turbulent flows could address several fundamental limitations of the previous
models and where they have failed to produce accurate simulations of complex
turbulent flows. Improving turbulence models are therefore necessary for
accurate description of the fluid motion in complex fluid systems. This requires
addressing several outstanding challenges in this field of research. The new
proposed modeling framework is aimed at addressing these challenges to enable
accurate and reliable computer simulation of turbulent flows. This long- sought
capability will allow the development of more capable and efficient fluid flow
systems, like those in the areas listed above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has long
been recognized that Reynolds averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) and large eddy
simulation (LES) models of turbulence have complementary strengths and
weaknesses suggesting their hybridization to produce a more capable model.
However, previous hybridization techniques were found to have fundamental flaws.
A new hybrid modeling approach eliminates these flaws and forms the basis for
the research proposed here. This approach enables the consideration of three
additional turbulence modeling challenges, which when addressed will result in
highly reliable and broadly applicable hybrid RANS/LES models. These challenges
are: the active exchange of energy between the resolved and unresolved
turbulence to allow rapid development of resolved fluctuations; the elimination
of large errors in LES that arise from the strongly inhomogeneous resolution
that is usually necessary in complex fluid systems; and, the generalization of
LES models to account for anisotropy of the unresolved turbulence which
inevitably arises in hybrid simulations of complex turbulent flows. The result
of these developments will be robust predictive hybrid RANS/LES models that will
enable technological advances in many systems that involve turbulent fluid
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.