* 1904981
* The Reactivity of Green Rust Towards Redox-Stable Trace Metals in Reducing Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Evert Elzinga, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 228,951.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry supports Professor Evert Elzinga and his students to study green rust
(GR). GR is an iron-hydroxide mineral that forms in certain natural and
engineered environments such soils along river banks, aquifers, drinking water
lines, and barriers used for groundwater remediation. These minerals are very
reactive and are known to degrade both organic and inorganic pollutants through
reduction/oxidation (redox) reactions. Little is known about the reactions
involved. The goal of this project is to study the chemical reactivity of GR
with a series of environmentally relevant trace metals. The work aims to improve
knowledge of the mobility of metal pollutants in reducing environments and
provide basic insights into the surface chemistry of green rust minerals. The
project provides scientific training for graduate students. Underrepresented
minority undergraduate students from the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) program at Rutgers-Newark are involved in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trace metals of different sizes and valences
(Mn(II), Ni(II), Zn(II), Cd(II), Pb(II) and Cr(III)) are reacted with GR in pre-
equilibrated anoxic suspensions over a range of environmentally relevant
geochemical conditions. Metal sorption is being monitored over time, and
operative mechanisms are determined using synchrotron-based X-ray absorption
spectroscopy. The team studies Fe atom cycling between the aqueous phase and the
GR solid with Fe-55 radiotracers, and monitors the structure and morphology of
GR using X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy analyses. The
research provides educational opportunities and exposure to research to graduate
and undergraduate students, including members of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.