* 1904767
* Conductivity in Nanostructured Precise Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Karen Winey, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 620,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Batteries, particularly those
for portable electronic devices, can contain flammable liquids, such that when a
battery is damaged a fire can ensue. To mitigate this safety risk, batteries
include additional housing and safety features, and while this improves safety
during operation, this strategy also increase the size and weight of the
battery. An alternative strategy is to replace the flammable liquid with a
plastic membrane that allows ions, such as lithium, to pass through without
allowing electrons to pass. Prof. Winey's group has been studying single-ion
conducting polymers that could be valuable for battery applications and for
other membrane applications. In previous NSF-funded work they have uncovered a
variety of new nanoscale structures that arise when the active chemical groups
are evenly placed along a linear polymer molecule. One of these nanoscale
structures, an alternating layered arrangement of ions and crystalline polymer,
was recently found to have exceptional proton transport properties when
hydrated. To capitalize on this finding, the PI has established new design rules
for polymer membranes and built multiple collaborations with synthetic chemists
who are incorporating these design concepts into new polymers. Winey's group
will explore the nanoscale structures and conductivities of these newly designed
polymers as a function of their polymer chemistry and processing to refine and
extend their design rules for single-ion conducting polymer membranes. Given the
current societal challenges related to clean water, energy storage and energy
conversion, the fundamental understanding afforded by this project will have an
important societal impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong interest in ionomers and other polymers
with acid, ionic and polar groups is fueled by their potential ability to
selectively transport charged species, which is relevant to batteries, water
purification technologies, and fuel cells. The prevailing research directions in
the field of solid polymer electrolytes have consolidated around two general
classes of homogeneous materials wherein the ions are uniformly distributed
throughout the material: polymers mixed with salts and single-ion conductors.
The ubiquitous design strategy in these materials systems is based on the
understanding that ion conductivity is associated with chain dynamics and ions
must be dissociated from their counterion. Unfortunately, these approaches have
only limited success in developing suitable polymer-based electrolytes. Winey's
group is exploring an alternative hypothesis, namely that efficient ion
conductivity in polymers can be broadly achieved when the ions are sequestered
into spatially-continuous nanoscale aggregates and the ions dissociate from
their counterions. This project builds upon a promising result from the PI and
collaborators wherein proton conductivity of a hydrated precise polyethylene
with sulfonic acid groups on exactly every 21st carbon is somewhat higher than a
commercial membrane. This precise polyethylene self-assembled into nanoscale
layers lined with the acid groups and separated by a crystalline alkyl spacer.
The high proton conductivity is evidence that the conducting protons are
decoupled from the motion of the much slower polymer backbones. The proposed
project will expand upon this singular finding to establish the merits of the
proposed alternative hypothesis. The planned research combines conductivity
measurements, structural characterization, and molecular dynamics simulations to
rigorously interrogate this hypothesis using new nanostructured precise
polymers. The proposed alkyl polyester sulfonates and telechelic oligomers are
expected to have crystalline domains that direct the assembly of layered
aggregates; these layered morphologies will be aligned in thin films on
interdigitated electrodes to explore the fundamentals of conductivity. Random
percolated structures in precise polyethylenes with short carbon spacers will
also be investigated. The PI and her group will undertake this project with a
set of unfunded collaborators: Prof. Stefan Mecking (Konstanz), Prof. Justin
Kennemur (Florida State University), Prof. Paul Nealey (U Chicago), Dr. Amalie
Frischknecht (Sandia), and Dr. Mark Stevens (Sandia).
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.