* 1904998
* Stimuli-Responsive Porous Molecular Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Ognjen Miljanic, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 456,706.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, Prof. Miljanic and his group
develop and study new materials known as porous molecular crystals (PMCs). PMCs
are solid crystals reminiscent of sponges: they have tiny pores, whose
dimensions are comparable to those of molecules. In most currently known porous
materials, pores are rigid in structure. In these new materials, pores are
designed in a way which allows their shrinkage and expansion in response to
changes in their environment. Specifically, the developed materials respond to
high pressure and to exposure to gaseous chemicals, including environmental
pollutants such as Freons and inhalation anesthetics. The resulting changes in
pore dimensions are accompanied by changes in their optical properties (i.e.
color under visible and ultraviolet light), and such modifications allow their
use in the detection of environmental pollutants. Potential future applications
of these pressure- and chemically responsive crystals are as shock absorbers,
energy-storage materials, sensors, and materials that could catch-and-release
chemicals-both harmful and useful ones-on demand. Additionally, societal
benefits of this project include the education of a new generation of
researchers at the interface of chemistry and materials science, and industry.
Prof. Miljanic and coworkers have established a startup company which eventually
could utilize the porous materials proposed in this work in the recycling of
anesthetics. These efforts are complemented by curriculum enrichment at the
University of Houston through the continued development of an upper-level
undergraduate course on Energy and Sustainability, and the incorporation of 3D
printing into chemistry curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, new classes of porous materials are
prepared and studied. Porous molecular crystals (PMCs) are composed of discrete
molecules which are held together in the solid state only by weak noncovalent
interactions. These connections are flexible, allowing easy changes in the
arrangement of PMCs constituents. As a result, it is anticipated that PMCs will
be responsive to high pressures and guest entry into the pores, which the
researchers are verifying experimentally. The pressure-based changes in the
structures of PMCs are tracked through a combination of solid-state NMR
spectroscopy, mercury intrusion porosimetry, and high-pressure crystallography
at the Argonne National Laboratory. Because of their fluorescent character, such
changes in pore dimensions are accompanied by visible and measurable changes in
emission properties. This optical response can be used to prepare solid-state
sensors for methanol and fluorinated refrigerants such as Freons,
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and hydrofluoroolefins (HFOs). As the final component
of the work, new porous liquid crystals are synthesized and preliminarily
studied. Their basis are shape-persistent macrocycles known as
dehydrobenzannulenes, whose structures can sustain a columnar pore. Synthetic
decoration of these columns with mesogenic groups translates into liquid
crystalline behavior, which in turn is studied through a combination of methods
involving both in-house and synchrotron techniques. Broader impacts of the
proposed work are in the training of researchers at the interface of organic
chemistry and materials science, utilization of PMCs as platforms for the
recycling of anesthetics, and new curriculum offerings at the University of
Houston, which include a course on Energy and Sustainability, and incorporation
of 3D printing into chemistry instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.