* 1904428
* NSF-BSF: Architecting metallic nanoparticles for ultimate strength
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Yuri Mishin, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2022
* USD 359,992.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Material objects with dimensions on
the micrometer or nanometer length scales can exhibit much higher strength than
macroscopic objects. To realize the exciting new opportunities offered by such
objects, it is necessary to understand the laws of plasticity, or material
deformation, in defect-free nano-scale systems. Such laws are largely unknown
and are likely to be different from those in macroscopic metals. The US and
Israeli Principal Investigators will conduct a collaborative research program
that tightly integrates experiments and computer modeling to achieve a deeper
fundamental understanding of the laws and mechanisms of plasticity in nano-scale
metals and alloys. This research will create a theoretical framework for the
design of new nano-scale materials combining the highest-possible mechanical
strength with other service characteristics. This research will impact many
areas of science and technology where mechanical strength is one of the goals of
materials design. The Principal Investigators will disseminate the results of
this project through presentations at interdisciplinary meetings, publishing
overview articles, and by organizing workshops/symposia on broad topics
emphasizing nano-scale phenomena across disciplines. This will include a series
of US-Israel nano-mechanics workshops with broad international participation. To
reach out to broader communities, significant efforts will be put in
popularizing this research using online scientific news outlets. The US
Investigator and the students will visit local (Fairfax Co.) high schools to
give popular presentations including examples of nano-scale phenomena and their
impact on modern technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US and Israeli Principal Investigators (PIs)
propose a collaborative research program that tightly integrates experiments and
computer modeling to achieve a deeper fundamental understanding of the laws and
mechanisms of nucleation-controlled plasticity in nano-scale metals and alloys.
The research will be focused on Ni and several Ni-based alloys strategically
chosen to probe some of the key factors that can impact the particle strength.
Such factors will include the particle size and shape, the surface oxidation
state, the chemical composition of the alloy, the long-range order, and the
phase transformations. This research will create a theoretical framework for the
design of new nano-scale materials combining the highest-possible mechanical
strength with other service characteristics. The PIs will disseminate the
results of this project through presentations at interdisciplinary meetings,
publishing overview articles, and by organizing workshops/symposia on broad
topics emphasizing nano-scale phenomena across disciplines. This will include a
series of US-Israel nano-mechanics workshops with broad international
participation. To reach out to broader communities, significant efforts will be
put in popularizing this research using online scientific news outlets. The US
PI and the students will visit local (Fairfax Co.) high schools to give popular
presentations including examples of nano-scale phenomena and their impact on
modern technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.