* 1904858
* Quantitative Elucidation of the Role of Natural Organic Matter Fractions and Models on the Redox Reactivity of Iron Oxide Minerals
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* R. Lee Penn, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division funds
Professors Lee Penn and Bill Arnold of the University of Minnesota for this
project. They study pollutant degradation reactions that occur on iron oxide
mineral particles in the presence and absence of natural organic matter (NOM).
NOM can be found in most natural waters. It is formed from the decomposition of
plant material and produced by algae and other microorganisms. NOM is a complex
mixture of molecules, with some inhibiting and others facilitating reactions
that occur at the liquid-mineral interface. This means that NOM impacts the
persistence of pollutant molecules in the environment. The types of NOM
molecules in the environment change when exposed to mineral surfaces. The NOM
remaining in the water will evolve with exposure to the minerals in
environmental systems, a process called fractionation. Little is known about how
different fractions of NOM impact the reactivity of iron oxide mineral surfaces.
Answering this question will bridge major gaps between laboratory and field
studies. Results from the collaboration between the investigators will deepen
fundamental understanding of the nature and evolution of NOM in environmental
systems and the impact of NOM on reactions involving common organic
contaminants. The broader impacts of this work include potential societal
benefits caused by improved understanding of the chemical behavior of mineral
surfaces in environmental systems. The major educational component focuses on
high school students through a collaboration with a science teacher from a
Minnesota Public School. Students receive instruction and hands on experience in
using quantitative camera phone colorimetry with simulated water treatment using
straw columns filled with various materials, including mineral coated sands and
carbon produced from biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major project focus is the
progressive fractionation of NOM as a function of exposure to mineral surfaces.
NOM fractionation is accomplished by a combination of chemical and physical
methods. The amount of NOM used in a reactor is normalized to the total organic
carbon. The rate of pollutant degradation is studied in the presence of minerals
and different amounts and fractions of NOM. In addition, mineral particles are
characterized using advanced materials characterization methods before, during,
and after reactions to identify where on the particles the reaction occurs and
how the NOM fractions affect the reaction location. Results enable elucidation
of the nature of NOM fractions that most strongly (and weakly) impact reactivity
and thus the persistence of pollutants. The team uses NOM standards obtained
from the International Humic Substances Society (IHSS) and NOM samples collected
from the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.