* 1904240
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intensive Mothering and Maternal Physical Health
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Sarah Damaske, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2021
* USD 12,159.00

This project explores the health impacts of intensive mothering. Women spend far
more time with their children today than in the past several decades. The high
cost to parenting may create tensions between investment in children and
investment in self. Three principal research questions are addressed: 1) How
intensive mothering beliefs and behaviors affect maternal physical health; 2)
How the effects in 1) vary by social class and employment status; and 3) How the
relationship between intensive mothering and child health is affected by
maternal physical health. Findings will have implications for both formal health
policies and more informal advocacy for maternal self-care.

This study will conduct a longitudinal analysis using panel data from the Avon
Longitudinal Survey of Parents and Children (ALSPAC). This will allow
disentangling of the relationships between modern motherhood, maternal health,
and child health. The project will address past contradictory evidence on
motherhood, social class, and employment status. In addition, it will address
recent debates in the literature surrounding the operationalization of intensive
mothering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.