* 1904559
* Collaborative Research:  Surface Reactivity of Organometallic Precursors in Electron- and  Ion-Induced Deposition of Metal Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Howard Fairbrother, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Professor Lisa McElwee-White of the University of Florida and Professor Howard
Fairbrother of Johns Hopkins University are supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry to
investigate the process of fabrication of metallic nanostructures through the
reactions of chemical reagents with focused electron and ion beams. The insight
and understanding gained through conducting the proposed research inform the
development of approaches for patterning metals into a variety of nanoscale
objects. As electronic devices such as smartphones become smaller but have more
capability, it is important to be able to create very tiny metal structures
whose physical and chemical properties can be tailored for specific
applications. This requires control over not only structure, size and shape but
also chemical composition. Success in achieving the stated objectives of this
project lead to technological advances in nanoelectronics, catalysis and sensor
development. Graduate students involved in this inherently cross-disciplinary
research project are afforded opportunities to interact with industry partners
and international collaborators, thus enhancing their chances for future career
placement. To communicate the excitement of science to the general public,
participants in the project are generating a series of 90-second "Tiny Tech"
radio modules and podcasts that feature real world applications of chemistry and
chemistry-based nanoscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focused charged particles
(electrons or ions) beam induced deposition is an important nanofabrication
technique for the creation of three-dimensional metal containing nanostructures.
Nanofabrication is enabled by decomposing organometallic precursors onto
substrates in a low-pressure environment. This nanofabrication methodology has
been used to repair photoresists, modify prototypes of integrated circuits and
fabricate nanophotonic, nanoplasmonic and nanomagnetic devices. The ability to
control the structure and composition of nanoscale materials is critical for
their function in nanodevices, such as semiconductors and nano-opto-electro-
mechanical systems. In addition to size and shape control, it is also important
to optimize the chemical composition of these nanostructures. For metal-
containing nanostructures this typically means maximizing metal content.
Unfortunately, nanostructures deposited by means of charged particles are rarely
if ever purely metallic. This is particularly true in the case of focused
electron beam induced deposition (FEBID). The reason is that the commercially
available organometallic precursors are designed for use in thermal deposition
processes, such as chemical vapor deposition. This project is addressing the
lack of suitable FEBID precursors and the purity and metallic content in FEBID
nanostructured materials through synthesis and evaluation of new custom
organometallic precursors. The synthesis is guided by mechanistic insights from
surface science. Studies using low energy ion beams are also being initiated.
This is motivated by preliminary findings that suggest a difference in the
surface reactions of organometallic complexes with ions compared to electrons.
The new knowledge generated through conducting this project informs the rational
synthesis of new generation of organometallic complexes with enhanced
performance. In addition, the newly developed precursors are used to investigate
the deposition of new classes of nanomaterials, such as oxides and
nitrides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.