* 1904147
* Workshop/Collaborative Research:  2019 NSF Engineering CAREER Proposal Writing Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Zhijian Pei, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 11/30/2020
* USD 12,455.00

This award supports the organization of a National Science Foundation
Directorate for Engineering Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER)
Proposal Writing Workshop. The workshop will be held in Arlington, Virginia on
April 1-2, 2019, and it is expected that there will be about 300 attendees. The
workshop will take place over one-and-a-half days and will include interactive
sessions on good proposal writing practices, seminars by previous CAREER
awardees, a mock CAREER proposal panel review, and a review session during which
the attendees will have a chance to obtain feedback on project summaries of
their own draft CAREER proposals. The attendees will also have an opportunity to
interact with current NSF Program Directors both in one-on-one and in mock panel
sessions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will help to prepare CAREER
program eligible faculty for careers in education and research by giving them
tools and skills of good proposal writing for submissions to the CAREER program
as well as core NSF programs. The objectives of the workshop include training
for junior faculty with an emphasis on women and underrepresented minorities in
engineering. A special additional emphasis will be placed on encouraging CAREER
program eligible faculty from non-"Research-1" institutions to apply for
participation. The workshop will serve as an introduction NSF for many new
researchers. The workshop will help participants to clarify their research and
education career plans and to understand the need to clearly articulate these
plans to external reviewers. In addition, the workshop includes mock panel
sessions to give participants the experience of simulated panel evaluation
discussions. All of the content and experiences will help attendees enrich their
skills of writing successful research proposals for impactful research that
benefits societal needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.