* 1904145
* Developing Laser Postionization to Enhance Mass Spectrometry Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Luke Hanley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Luke Hanley and Igor L. Bolotin and their group at the
University of Illinois at Chicago are improving laser-based methods to image
targeted chemical species on the surfaces of samples such as animal or plant
tissues, bacterial and fungal biofilms, organic electronic devices, or rocks.
Based on a powerful detection approach know as mass spectrometry (MS), such
chemical images are becoming routinely available, and have led to many advances
in drug discovery, bioengineering, plant biology, microbiology, consumer
electronics, and geology. However, current methods often lack the ability to
provide both detailed molecular structures and high clarity (spatial
resolution). The Hanley/Bolotin group is working to improve the sensitivity of
the technique and therefore the spatial resolution. The research is also
providing opportunities for undergraduate students from underrepresented groups
to work with the team and acquire important job
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI)
and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) are currently the most widely used
strategies for sub-micrometer resolution MS imaging. Both of these methods can
suffer from insufficient signal as the probe size is reduced, differential ion
formation that misses some analytes, fragmentation at higher lateral resolution,
and/or sample charging effects that deform images. The Hanley/Bolotin group is
working to couple laser postionization to MALDI as a means of efficiently
ionizing the large fraction of the desorbed material that is uncharged, thereby
providing signal enhancement needed to improve lateral resolution and improving
detection of species that otherwise ionize poorly or not at all. Vacuum
ultraviolet postionization (using a fluorine excimer laser) and declustering
using gas-phase collisions in the desorption plume are being evaluated as means
of enhancing sensitivity. The team is also assessing whether resolution gains
already demonstrated with sub-500 femtosecond pulses can be leveraged with gains
from changing the laser wavelength and/or declustering. These strategies are all
being evaluated with test samples that include bacterial biofilms. Parallel
collaborative studies with Professor Ian Gilmore at the United Kingdom's
National Physical Laboratory are assessing whether these gains can be extended
to secondary-ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.