* 1904830
* Deformation of Metals under High Pressure: Multiscale Stress Fields, Plasticity, and Phase Transformations
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Valery Levitas, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,001.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Processes that involve high
pressures and plastic deformations are quite common in material synthesis and
technologies, e.g. in high-pressure torsion (or twisting). The main objective of
these technologies is to produce high-pressure phases and nanostructures that
possess unique physical properties important for engineering applications.
However, an understanding of the physical mechanisms and ways to characterize
and control simultaneous evolution of plastic deformations, phase
transformations, and microstructure under high pressure is lacking. The goal of
the project is to conduct the first coupled experimental, theoretical, and
computational multiscale study of non-uniform stresses and strains, plastic
flow, and phase transformations in several technically-important metals under
high pressure and shear deformation. The experimental study will be performed in
a rotational diamond anvil cell, a unique device in which material is compressed
by two diamond anvils to high pressure and then twisted. The transparency of the
diamonds allows for measurements of strains and study of various phase
transformations directly in the loaded sample. The experimental study will be
combined with advanced multiscale modeling, enabling extraction of all
deformational and transformational material properties at high pressure. New
science produced in the project is expected to impact existing and future
technologies for synthesis of the nanograined high-pressure phases. Due to the
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed work, two graduate and two
undergraduate students will be trained to learn, develop, and apply cutting-edge
experimental and computational techniques to a variety of complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Processes involving high pressures and plastic
deformations are quite common in material synthesis and technologies, in nature
(e.g. in geophysics), and in physical experiments. High pressure usually causes
phase transformations in solids and plastic straining significantly changes the
microstructure, thermodynamics, and kinetics of phase transformations. However,
an understanding of the physical mechanisms and ways to characterize
simultaneous evolution of dislocations and phase transformations under high
pressure is lacking. The goal of the project is to conduct the first coupled
experimental, theoretical, and computational multiscale study of stress and
strain fields, dislocational plasticity, and strain-induced phase
transformations in Zr, Fe, Ce, and CeP under high pressure and shear
deformation. The experimental study will be performed in a rotational diamond
anvil cell, a unique device in which material is compressed to high pressure and
then twisted, while providing an opportunity for in situ measurements and study
of various phase transformations and strains. Molecular dynamics and a nanoscale
phase field approach will be used to model stress-field and nucleation at
defects, coupled to the synchrotron X-ray microdiffraction measurements. The
kinetics of strain-controlled phase transformations will be determined in terms
of volume fraction of phases. At the macroscale, the evolution of the fields of
the stress tensor, displacements, plastic strain, and the volume fraction of
high-pressure phases within the entire sample in a rotational diamond anvil cell
will be measured and simulated. As a result, all deformational and
transformational material properties will be determined at high pressure. The
hypothesis that the pure volumetric phase transformations in Ce and CeP are
affected by plastic shear will be checked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.