* 1904514
* Developing Switchable Electrophiles As Specific Covalent Protein Modifiers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Walter Fast, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 700,000.00

At a fundamental level, the majority of medicines bind (or "stick") to a
specific protein target. Most of these molecule-protein binding interactions are
not very permanent, but the more effective drugs have extremely sticky or
irreversible interactions, due to formation of a new, permanent, chemical bond
with their targets. The development of new and better antibiotics and anticancer
drugs is limited to molecule-protein binding interactions that form permanent
bonds between new drugs and protein targets. Professor Walter Fast (University
of Texas, Austin), Professor Fengtian Xue (University of Maryland), and
Professor Dali Liu (Loyola University, Chicago) form a multidisciplinary team
that develops new strategies to make permanent interactions by using the
targeted protein to 'switch on' the bond-forming process. Their study of the
underlying chemical reactions, the chemical interactions made with different
types of proteins, and the three-dimensional structures of these protein-drug
complexes serve as a roadmap for others working in pharmaceutical research. Dr.
Fast's research team uses public outreach and focused efforts to increase
recruitment of a more diverse pool of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) students. The teams is particularly focused on recruiting
students that have limited access to STEM educational opportunities. A
university open house that attracts students from Kindergarten to 12th grade
provides a venue where the link between basic science and pharmaceutical
development is explored. Programs are also offered to provide summer research
opportunities to high school students and their teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program
in the Division of Chemistry at the NSF is funding Dr. Walter Fast's team to
study a new strategy for making selective covalent protein modifiers. Selective
covalent protein modification is a fundamental aspect of many biochemical probes
and therapeutic agents, but there is a limited number of strategies used for
selective modification. This research team uses organic synthesis, chemical
model studies, enzymology, and X-ray crystallography to study the use of
compounds that have greatly enhanced electrophilicity upon protonation, the
latter being selectively induced by protein binding. This team studies the use
of these 'switchable electrophiles' to target enzymes with active-site cysteine
residues, non-catalytic proteins that have less-reactive cysteine residues, and
more broadly, cell extracts in chemoproteomic studies. By determining the
mechanisms of covalent modification and optimizing select examples as affinity
probes, a roadmap is developed for the wider adoption of this strategy in
covalent probe design. The research team also offers a public outreach event,
high school research opportunities, and 'pipeline' school development to
increase the recruitment of a more diverse pool of STEM students to
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.