* 1904077
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Skill-Based Sorting into Neighborhoods and Schools
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Jared Schachner, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 15,886.00

The core objective of this project is to evaluate whether, in an era of market-
based, choice-oriented urban policy, parents' cognitive and socioemotional
skills facilitate access to neighborhood and school contexts conducive to their
children's skill growth and educational attainment. Highly skilled parents
deploy distinct strategies to cultivate their children's intellectual and
socioemotional development, which in turn promotes intergenerational mobility.
Yet we know little about whether and how parents' skills facilitate their
children's access to two domains that also shape intergenerational mobility:
neighborhoods and schools. In an era of housing market and educational
enrollment changes that foster increased choice and information access (e.g.,
Section 8 housing vouchers, school choice policies), do parents' intellectual
and socioemotional skills predict entry into neighborhood and school contexts
conducive to their children's skill growth and educational success? Armed with
more choices and more information than ever before, parents with higher
cognitive and socioemotional skill levels may be more likely to raise their
children in higher-quality neighborhoods and place them into higher-quality
schools, even when comparing parents with similar demographic backgrounds,
economic circumstances, and educational attainment levels. In turn, access to
higher-quality neighborhoods and schools may meaningfully shape children's
subsequent cognitive and socioemotional skill growth and their likelihood of
high school graduation and college enrollment. Findings from investigation of
these propositions will contribute to debates over opportunity and urban
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the questions of this project, two
kinds of statistical models will be built: (1) discrete choice models of
neighborhood and school selection and (2) value-added models of neighborhood and
school effects on children's cognitive and socioemotional growth. The primary
data source includes approximately 1,000 time-varying, geocoded residential and
school enrollment histories, collected over about ten years in the 2000s. These
data will be combined with individual-level measures of cognitive and
socioemotional skills, demographic characteristics, and educational attainment,
as well as time-varying household-level measures of income and wealth and
neighborhood- and school-level quality data derived from census, geographic
information system, and administrative (i.e., state and local government)
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.