* 1904142
* Collaborative Research: 800-Year Trends in Anthropogenic and Marine Biogenic Sources of Arctic Sulfate Aerosol
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jihong Cole-Dai, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 279,945.00

In recent decades, the Arctic has experienced the most rapid rate of warming
around the globe. Satellite observations show that sea ice has been declining
since at least 1980. The Arctic is projected to be ice-free during summer
starting between 2050-2100 C.E. Both the open ocean and sea ice host a range of
microscopic algal or phytoplankton communities, and the response of these algal
communities to melting sea ice can be important to both the marine and
atmospheric environment, but is unknown. This project aims to detect, describe
and understand such response by studying sulfur-containing substances preserved
in a Greenland ice core. Oceanic phytoplankton are the largest natural source of
sulfur aerosol to the atmosphere. Sulfur-containing aerosol has a cooling impact
on climate because it efficiently reflects sunlight back to space. As the
emission of sulfate from combustion of fossil fuels has declined due to
effective air pollution mitigation, natural sources are becoming more important.
However, it is unclear how decreasing sea ice affects the abundance of natural
sulfate aerosol in the Arctic. This project will measure two indicators of the
phytoplankton source of sulfur aerosol in a Greenland ice core record dating
from 1200 - 2006 C.E. These measurements will reveal any trends in the
phytoplankton source of sulfur aerosol resulting from melting sea ice, and will
inform future predictions of Arctic primary productivity and climate. Insight
from this project will prove valuable for forecasting the future response of
phytoplankton emissions and climate-cooling aerosols to melting sea ice. This
award will provide training for two graduate and several undergraduate students
at the University of Washington and South Dakota State University, and will
support outreach activities such as demonstrations at the annual Polar Science
Weekend at the Pacific Science Center in Seattle,
WA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support measurements of the
sulfur isotopic composition of sulfate and the concentration of methanesulfonic
acid (MSA) in a Greenland ice core dating from 1200 - 2006 C.E. Oceanic
phytoplankton emit dimethylsufide (DMS) into the atmosphere. Once in the
atmosphere, DMS is oxidized to the sulfur aerosols sulfate and MSA. Sulfur
isotopes of sulfate originating from DMS oxidation are distinct from other
sources of sulfate, while MSA originates only from DMS oxidation. This project
will provide the first observational constraint on variations in the
phytoplankton source of sulfur aerosol over the past 800 years, with a
particular focus on the last 35 years of the record when we know that Arctic sea
ice has declined. Global model sensitivity studies will complement the ice-core
record by providing insight into the sensitivity of the abundance of Arctic
sulfur aerosol to phytoplankton emissions and transport, and provide
quantitative insight into the climate impacts of this natural source of sulfur
aerosol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.