* 1904326
* Elucidating the triggers of de novo initiation of epigenetic silencing in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* R Keith Slotkin, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2023
* USD 899,874.00

In addition to genes, the genomes of all organisms contain parasites, called
transposable elements, that can selfishly mutate the cell if not controlled.
This project seeks to understand the very first steps that cells use to "turn
off" genomic parasites. New molecular tools will be generated and delivered to
the biological community, together with new data to reveal the "off-switch"
mechanism, so that the switch can be targeted, avoided, or used as a research
tool. In addition, the project will prepare the next generation of biologists to
join the future scientific workforce by mentoring and training researchers at
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels. The project will also expose
hundreds of STEM-minority middle school students to research science and the
scientific method to facilitate community interaction and empower a more diverse
STEM future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chromatin modifications, such as DNA
methylation, play important roles in genome maintenance and expression by
providing heritable epigenetic information that is transmitted across cellular
generations. For cells, this mechanism is prudent, as it obviates the need for
each cell and generation to determine de novo (for the first time) which regions
of the genome should be expressed vs. silenced. However, this mechanism has made
it difficult for researchers to determine the rules governing how patterns of
chromatin modification are initiated. The goal of this project is to identify
these rules. Using Arabidopsis thaliana as a model organism, the research
includes developing new molecular tools to study the initial trigger of small
RNA production, a step which is essential for directing chromatin modification.
Then the new tools will be used to test whether known proteins involved in small
RNA metabolism can trigger de novo silencing and to discover new proteins that
function at the trigger point. The tools should have broad utility in the field,
and the research is expected to deliver transformative insights to unlock the
ability to target, avoid, or engineer de novo chromatin modification in
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by two programs in the
Biological Sciences Directorate: Genetic Mechanisms in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences and Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.