* 1904784
* A new tool for the analysis of glycan recognition by lectin
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Joseph Kwon, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 508,712.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Drs. Hung-Jen Wu and Joseph Kwon from Texas A&amp;M
University to develop a next-generation glycoarray tool that can be used in the
study of the complex interactions between glycans and lectins, both of which are
biomolecules found in living systems. More specifically, lectins are proteins
that recognize and bind glycans, which are carbohydrate molecules; the binding
between lectins and glycans plays an important role in a wide range of
physiological and pathological processes. Lectin-glycan binding has several
important features. Firstly, it is not highly specific; a lectin often binds to
different glycan structures with different affinities. Most lectins bind to
glycans via multivalent interactions, i.e. multiple binding domains of a single
lectin simultaneously interact with multiple glycan molecules. Moreover, glycans
attached to lipids or membrane proteins can diffuse on two-dimensional cell
membranes. These features distinguish the lectin-glycan interactions from
classic bimolecular interactions such as those between antibodies and antigens.
Existing methods for lectin analysis miss these essential characteristics, and
thus often fail to describe some unexpected phenomena in glycobiology. The goal
of this research project is to establish a next-generation glycoarray tool that
fills this critical need and makes possible the discovery of the lectin-glycan
recognition principles. The project also involves the development of a project-
based learning program that focuses on supporting the learning by high school
students of chemistry and nanoscience topics. The students participants are
engaged in hands-on experiments and interactive activities. Drs. Wu and Kwon's
team is converting the educational program to an open-access web-based course
for teachers with the goal of increasing the impact of their STEM outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Wu and Kwon are developing a high-throughput
nanocube sensor array to quantitatively measure lectin-glycan interactions in an
environment that mimics the cell membrane. In addition, a kinetic Monte Carlo
simulation is being developed for modeling complex lectin-glycan interactions.
This novel glycoarray tool that integrates analytical assay and computational
modeling allows one to measure fundamental microscopic binding parameters, which
in turn can be used in the prediction of lectin functions on complex cellular
surfaces. The tool makes possible the simultaneous examination of the influence
of semi-specificity, multivalency, and ligand diffusion on lectin-glycan
recognition. The analysis of the lectin-glycan recognition pattern becomes
highly accessible, flexible, and inexpensive. End users can conduct measurements
in their own laboratories without specialized equipment by following a step-by-
step guide included in the sophisticated modeling software. The detection tool
is compatible with a variety of glycan-binding species, including toxins,
bacteria, viruses, and cancer cells; consequently, it can benefit a wide range
of scientific communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.