* 1904183
* III: Small: Collaborative Learning with Incomplete and Noisy Knowledge
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Quanquan Gu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2021
* USD 350,919.00

The accelerated growth of Big Data has created enormous amount of information at
the macro level for knowledge discovery. But at the micro level, one can only
expect a handful of observations in most individual users. This hinders the
exploration of subtle patterns and heterogeneities among distinct users for
improving the utility of Big Data analytics at a per-user basis. The objective
of this project is to develop a set of algorithmic solutions to perform online
learning in a collaborative fashion, where personalized learning solutions
actively interact with users for feedback acquisition and collaborate with each
other to learn from incomplete and noisy input. This project amplifies the
utility of statistical learning in many important fields, such as healthcare,
business intelligence, crowdsourcing, and cyber physical systems, where
automated decision models are built on diverse, noisy and heterogeneous
supervision. The research activities will be incorporated into teaching
materials for student training and education in the areas of information
retrieval, machine learning and data mining. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
consists of three synergistic research thrusts. First, it develops a family of
contextual bandit algorithms to perform collaborative online learning over
networked users. Dependency among users is estimated and exploited to
collaboratively update the individualized bandit parameters. Second, it develops
principled solutions to optimize task-specific and general loss functions for
online learning, which enables the collaborative learning solutions reach more
important real-world applications, such as information retrieval and user
behavior modeling. Third, it models and differentiates the reliability of the
sources of feedback to optimize the overall online learning effectiveness, which
is especially important in the applications such as health informatics,
crowdsourcing and cyber physical systems. Expected outcomes of the project
include: 1) open source implementations for the developed online learning
solutions; and 2) evaluation corpora that will enable researchers to conduct
follow-up research in related domains.