* 1904628
* Three-Dimensional Manifolds, Heegaard Floer Homology and Knot Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Zoltan Szabo, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 308,000.00

Some of the central objects studied in the project are knotted circles in the
three-dimensional space. These mathematical objects are used to study more
complicated three- and four-dimensional spaces called manifolds that form the
foundations of an area of mathematics known as low dimensional topology.
Building on the principal investigator's prior work with Peter Ozsvath, this
project will use modern gauge-theoretical and topological methods to study
various open problems and conjectures related to these spaces, investigate
recent methods and developments, and develop new invariants for knots and links.
The project also aims to enhance graduate student research by introducing them
to different areas of low dimensional topology and teaching recent methods in
knot and link Floer homology and Heegaard Floer theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heegaard Floer homology and knot Floer homology
constructions use methods from Topology and Symplectic Geometry through the
study of Heegaard diagrams and holomorphic disks in symmetric products of a
Heegaard surface. There have been some recent breakthroughs in knot Floer
homology, and the principal investigator will apply these new algebraic and
symplectic techniques to study problems in Low Dimensional Topology.
Specifically, the PI plans to generalize bordered Floer homology methods to
links, with potential applications to the Thurston norm and other topological
questions; develop tools to compute the master complex for knot Floer homology
using the Pong algebra; study the double point knot Floer homology developed by
Lipschitz; and use the HF mixed invariant to study exotic smooth structures on
4-manifolds. Other projects include investigating the Berge conjecture, cosmetic
surgery conjecture, and mutations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.