* 1904421
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Forest Ecosystem Responses to Interacting Bark Beetle and Fire Disturbance are set up by Regeneration in the First Year
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* John Frank, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Ford Ballantyne
* 01/31/2021
* USD 164,998.00

Over the past two decades, forests in the western US have experienced increases
in bark beetle infestations and higher incidence of forest fires. The resulting
tree mortality produces ecosystem responses that affect water quantity and
quality, carbon storage, and nutrient cycling, with implications for future
forest production and health. Understanding how these two stresses affect
forests is critical to the management and availability of water in the western
US. This award will significantly contribute to ecosystem models that predict
where and how fast carbon, nitrogen and water move in these forests. Results
from this study will be shared with regional water and forest managers using the
Wyoming Water Forum. Underrepresented and first-generation pre-college students
will be involved in the project through the University of Wyoming "Summer
Research Apprentice Program".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
quantify carbon and water fluxes in relation to post-beetle fire intensity,
partitioning these fluxes into contributions from the understory plants,
overstory plants, and soil. The researchers will further assess the interactive
effects between post-beetle fire and vegetation regrowth, specifically in regard
to soil water and available soil N. The researchers will take advantage of a
recent fire that burned through a beetle-affected lodgepole pine forest in
Chimney Park Wyoming. The heterogeneous distribution of burn severity and
existing pre-burn data provide a unique opportunity to understand the physical
and biological processes that control the water, carbon, and nitrogen cycles
within a forest ecosystem following sequential and interacting disturbances. The
researchers will measure ecosystem pools and fluxes of carbon dioxide, water,
and nitrogen in forest patches of different post-beetle burn intensities (bark
beetles only, bark beetles plus understory fire, bark beetles and stand
replacing fire) using eddy covariance, sap flow, electrical resistivity
tomography, vegetation surveys, and biogeochemical techniques. This study will
leverage existing equipment and benefits from an extensive pre-disturbance data
set. This award will develop predictions and attribution to biological (e.g.
transpiration controlled by plant conductance) and/or physical (e.g. soil
evaporation and interception from bare branches) drivers in these
forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.