* 1904414
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Surveillance and Citizenship for People on Pretrial Release
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Erin Eife, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,990.00

Because people in the United States are thought to be innocent until proven
guilty, there has recently been much controversy over social bias in pretrial
processes. In response, current restructuring practices often include bond
reform, which can result in decreases in pretrial incarceration, but also
usually leads to increases in other measures of surveillance, such as electronic
monitoring, 24-hour curfews, or random drug tests. We know very little about how
surveillance practices during the pretrial stage can impact access to political,
civil, and social citizenship, although we do know that these practices are
stratified by social group. This project studies how people who are released
pretrial still experience methods of surveillance and why certain people are
more likely to experience harsher measures of surveillance than others. By
better understanding how surveillance influences an accused person's life and
who is more acutely impacted by this surveillance, this project will provide
insight into how the criminal legal system stratifies citizenship even before an
individual is convicted of a crime. Further, findings from this project will
inform governmental policy regarding the treatment of accused people who have
yet to stand trial. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project use two sources of data:
ethnographic courtroom observations and in-depth interviews. The project will
include six months of courtroom observations in a large city in order to
understand which types of cases result which types of disposition and
surveillance in the context of pre-trial release. The project will also conduct
60 in-depth, semi-structured interviews with people accused of felonies but who
are on pretrial release. Data from these interviews will reveal details
regarding pretrial conditions and how these conditions have influenced
respondent economic and social statuses, as well as access to political rights.
All data will be analyzed with MaxQDA for two cycles of coding. The first cycle
will focus on open coding and the second cycle will focus on theoretical coding.
Findings from the project will contribute to sociological theories regarding
incarceration, surveillance and risk, and social citizenship within the context
of United States democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.