* 1904076
* Novel Transverse Spin Hall Effect Induced Phenomena in Single Ferromagnet and Magnetic Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* John Xiao, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,906.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next generation memory chips
demand ultralow energy consumption, which is currently mostly wasted in
'writing' information into these chips. This project aims to develop an
efficient 'writing' method by discovering novel properties in magnetic
materials. It is well-known that when an electrical current passes through a
magnetic thin film, a voltage develops at two sides of the magnetic film
transverse to the electrical current. This so-called anomalous Hall effect is
broadly used in magnetic field sensors. By asking the question of what happens
at the top and bottom surfaces of the magnetic films, it was discovered that the
magnetization directions, like the direction from south Pole to north pole of a
refrigerator magnet, of the magnetic film are tilted out of the film plane at
both surfaces. The principle behind this effect will be investigated and the
effect will be used to develop a much more efficient and less energy consuming
'write' process for next generation memory chips. Research based education and
outreach are also an integral part of this project. Leveraging newly established
state-of-the-art Nanofabrication Facility at University of Delaware, several
experiment modules will be developed in order to teach about magnetic device
fabrication. This project is not only interesting in scientific and technical
developments, but also will have long lasting impacts on work force training for
maintaining the United States' technological edge in the global economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) can convert a charge
current into a spin current, enabling electrical control of magnetization. A
quintessential example of SOC-induced transport in a ferromagnetic conductor
(FM) is the anomalous Hall effect (AHE), in which an electric current
perpendicular to the magnetization generates a transverse spin current and
charge accumulations on the surface. Applying similar considerations to the
configuration of a current parallel to the magnetization, SOC should also give
rise to a transverse spin current with spins orthogonal to both the
magnetization and spin current. The transverse spins precess rapidly about the
magnetization direction and exert torque on the magnetization as they dephase,
in analogy with the spin transfer torque. This transverse spin Hall effect
(TSHE), named to distinguish from the SHE in a heavy metal, is experimentally
confirmed and it leads to anomalous spin-orbit torque (ASOT) on the top and
bottom surfaces of a FM. This project aims to understand (1) the mechanisms for
ASOT, (2) the TSHE-induced spin orbit torque (SOT) behavior on a ferrimagnet
(FiM) with perpendicular anisotropy (PMA), particularly at the angular moment
compensation temperature at which the spin dynamics are governed by the
antiferromagnetic coupling, and (3) the spin dynamics induced by ASOT in a
single FM and SOT in a PMA FiM. This proposal is built on recent experimental
breakthroughs in revealing ASOT behaviors in a single FM as well as a MOKE-based
SOT characterization technique that was upgraded with time-resolved and
temperature capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.