* 1905632
* Novel Simulation Strategies For Predicting Polymer Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Scott Milner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 376,278.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theory,
computation, and education with an aim to advance understanding of polymeric
materials. Polymeric materials are long chain-like molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How sharp is that polymer interface? Important things
happen at interfaces between different polymers. For example: hard plastic parts
are stiff and tough to shatter, because they contain tiny droplets of rubbery
polymer dispersed in a second, stiffer polymer. The rubbery droplets absorb
impacts; without them, the plastic would crack when hit. This trick works
because at the surface of the droplets, long polymer chains on each side of the
interface intermingle enough to knit the interface together. Otherwise, the part
could break easily, with the droplets pulling away from the stiff material as it
cracked. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another application for which polymer interfaces
are crucial is in polymer-based solar cell materials. These materials are the
subject of intense research focus as alternatives to "hard" silicon-based
photocells, with potential advantages including flexible materials and easier
production; they are made like plastic sheeting in a chemical plant, not like
computer chips in a billion-dollar ultraclean fab facility. Here, the interface
is between special "donor" and "acceptor" semiconducting polymers. These donor-
acceptor interfaces help pull apart pairs of opposite charges produced when
sunlight is absorbed by the polymers, so the charges can be "harvested" as
electricity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For rubber-toughened plastics, the interface
needs to be a bit broad; for photocells, the interface needs to be sharp. For a
given pair of polymers A and B, the interfacial width is controlled by how
strongly the A and B chain repeat units repel each other. This repulsion depends
on the chemical structure of A and B, which synthetic chemists can vary with
amazing variety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;But how strongly will polymers of
structures A and B repel each other? If this can be predicted, it could help the
chemist decide what structures to make. The PI's research group has developed a
new way to use computer simulations to predict the strength of repulsion between
pairs of polymers, as a complement to challenging experiments. The PI's method
relies on the idea that the more A and B repel each other, the more work is
required to mix A and B together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To compute the work of
mixing, a trick inspired by CGI animation is used: start with a simulated sample
of pure A chains, and gradually "morph" half the chains into B chains, measuring
how the energy rises as the morph progresses. By comparing the work required to
prepare an A-B mixture by morphing half the chains, to the work to make a pure
sample of B chains, by morphing all the chains, the work required to mix A and B
chains can be measured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bigger the work of mixing is,
the narrower the interface will be between demixed A and B material. In fact,
the interface width is governed by a compromise between energy and entropy.
Flexible polymer chains on either side of the interface have two conflicting
desires: to avoid contact with the "other" chains, and to wander about freely.
The greater the cost for repulsive contacts, the more restricted are the
wanderings of chains across the interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the new
"morphing" simulation method, the PI can predict interfacial widths for polymer
pairs from chemical structure alone. This powerful tool will help polymer
chemists and engineers design more effective polymers for solar cells, as well a
host of other applications in advanced
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theory, computation, and
education with an aim to advance understanding of polymeric materials. With
continuing improvements in computer power and recent advances in simulation
techniques, it is finally becoming possible to predict key material properties
for real polymers from their chemical structure. This project will develop and
exploit new approaches to predict three kinds of properties:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. interfacial tensions between polymer crystals, melts,
and substrates, which are central to predicting nucleation barriers and
designing nucleating agents; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. chi parameters between
polymer pairs, which are necessary for predicting miscibility, microphase
separation, and strength of interfaces between immiscible polymers; and
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. entanglement length for flexible, semiflexible, and
stiff polymer chains in melts and solutions, which is the central parameter in
the modern theory predicting flow behavior of polymer melts and solutions from
chain architecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most polymers crystallize very
reluctantly. Practical processing relies on nucleating agents and flow-induced
crystallization to achieve high nucleation rates, resulting in materials with
smaller spherulites and improved properties (optical clarity and strength).
Predicting nucleation rates starts with classical nucleation theory, which
describes the critical nucleus in terms of its free energy and tension with
surrounding melt. Correspondingly, nucleating agents provide substrates for
nuclei to form, with interfacial tensions that favor crystal over melt. To
predict nucleation rates and design nucleating agents, it is critical to predict
tensions between polymer crystals, melts, and substrates. In this project, new
simulation methods will be developed to do that, for chemically realistic
chains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting chi from chain structures is a grand
unmet challenge for polymer theory. To account for how real molecules pack and
interact, simulation is the right approach. Since chi measures the excess mixing
free energy, free energies must be obtained from blend simulations. The PI has
developed a new method, that computes the work to "morph" one kind of chain into
another. The PI will extend this method, from simple bead-spring chains to real
chains in atomistic detail. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple attempts have been
made to construct theories for how the entanglement length scales with chain
volume, flexibility, and concentration. Real polymer melts are well described by
Lin-Noolandi scaling, stiff chains by Morse scaling. Everaers presented a
scaling ansatz consistent with Morse but not LN. This project will develop a new
scaling theory that unifies these approaches, and comprehensive simulations to
measure entanglement across flexible and stiff chain melts and solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shale gas revolution is leading to substantial new
investment in U.S. polyolefin plants. Better nucleating agents to improve
properties of these low-cost ubiquitous polymers could lead to increased use as
lightweight, energy-saving structural materials. Chi parameters between donor
and acceptor chains in semiconducting polymers are hard to measure, but are key
attributes in the design of heterojunction interfaces in next-generation polymer
photovoltaics, which are the subject of intense research focus as potential
complementary materials to hard silicon-based photocells, and may help enable
the U.S. and the world to confront climate change and transition to a less
carbon-intensive energy economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.