* 1905301
* RUI: Elucidation of Matrix Effects in Laser Ablation Elemental Analysis through Absolute Quantification of Ablated Mass
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Merten, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 489,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Jonathan Merten and his group at
Arkansas State University are pursuing research that aims to make the
measurement of the chemical elements around us easier, faster, cheaper and
"greener." Elemental analysis is important to many fields, including geologic
exploration, electronics, manufacturing, agriculture, energy, defense, and
health. Typically, the measurement requires that the sample be dissolved in
expensive and powerful acids before measurement, a process that can take hours
and generates chemical waste with high costs for safe disposal. The Merten group
seeks to improve understanding of alternative laser-based methods which are
safer and much faster. Specifically, they direct pulsed lasers at samples to
generate tiny plasmas hotter than the surface of the sun. Through better control
and understanding of the plasma formation process, they are working to improve
the laser-based measurements. Dr. Merten and his undergraduate students are also
reaching out to the Northeast Arkansas community through programs at the
Arkansas State Museum, which serves a rural population in Northeast Arkansas
from its location on the campus of Arkansas State University. This work has the
potential to provide &gt;5000 participatory interactions with the public using
free-form laser-ablation experiments performed in a class I, safety-interlocked
laser setup at the museum, increasing public knowledge of and interest in
spectroscopy and improving the STEM pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser-
ablation (LA) analytical methods, including laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy
(LIBS) and LA inductively coupled plasma analyses require little or no sample
preparation and are rapid and (in the case of LIBS) portable. Unfortunately,
they are extremely prone to matrix effects, which are difficult to understand
because of the inhomogeneous plasma?s small size and rapid evolution. The Merten
group has developed a technique that allows mapping of the LA plasma with high
spatial and temporal resolution. By spatially mapping the atomic absorption
spectrum, it is possible to calculate the mass of the gaseous plasma. This
"spectral massing" procedure is being used to improve understanding of the post-
ablation plasma directly and dynamically, thereby enhancing understanding of the
ablation process and its relationship to the signal in elemental analysis
methods. Such understanding of the total atomized mass and its stoichiometric
development is critical for LA analytical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.