* 1905374
* Mechanistic investigation of DNA cleavage and specificity in CRISPR-Cas9
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Giulia Palermo, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Giulia Palermo from the University of California,
Riverside, to investigate the molecular basis of DNA cleavage and specificity in
the CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat)-Cas9
system through computational methods. The CRISPR-Cas9 technology is a method
that makes precise modification of the genome of an organism (including that of
humans) possible. The technology is based on the use of a nuclease, an enzyme
capable of cutting the double stranded DNA, and an RNA molecule that is bound to
the enzyme and guides the enzyme to the site in the DNA where the cut is to take
place. This research seeks to understand the mechanism by which the enzyme
functions using computational methods developed by Dr. Palermo and her
collaborators. The results of this study may aid in the development of more
efficient genome editing technologies and their applications in biological
research, biofuels production, and the development of drought-resistant crops
with enhanced nutritional value. The project involves an outreach and mentoring
program, which includes hands-on sessions for high school students from
underrepresented minority groups and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRISPR-Cas9
is a bacterial adaptive immune system that is revolutionizing basic and applied
life sciences by enabling a facile genome editing technology. This project
provides detailed understanding of how this system edits and manipulates nucleic
acids, which is of importance for improving the genome editing capability. This
research project seeks to characterize the mechanism of DNA cleavage and
specificity of the Streptococcus Pyogenes (Sp) CRISPR-Cas9 system by using
state-of-the-art computational methods. The project employs a mixed quantum
mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) approach and ab-initio Molecular Dynamics
(MD) simulations (using the Born-Oppenheimer and Car-Parrinello approaches) in
combination with free energy methods to investigate the catalytic mechanism of
DNA cleavage in CRISPR-Cas9. These methodologies may elucidate the catalytic
role of metal ions, which are critical for the enzymatic processing of DNA.
Classical MD and enhanced sampling techniques are employed to investigate the
mechanism of DNA specificity, characterizing the conformational changes arising
from the binding of altered DNA sequences and how they affect the catalysis.
Theoretical investigations are performed in collaboration with experimentalists.
The new theory assists in the interpretation of experimental data and makes
possible predictions that can be tested in the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.