* 1905532
* Magnetic Resonance Study of Novel Phases and Dynamics in the Strongly Correlated Spin-Orbit Coupled Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Vesna Mitrovic, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The technological drive to find new materials
with controllable desired properties for advance applications in information,
sensing, and energy technologies, requires understanding of the new forms of
quantum matter. A central issue in quantum materials research is study of the
combined effects of strong electronic interactions with local entanglement of
spin (the magnetic moment of electron) and orbital degrees of freedom, so-called
spin-orbit coupling. Predicting emergent properties represents a huge
theoretical problem since the presence of the spin orbit entanglement implies
that the spin is affected by its orbiting an atomic nucleus, and therefore the
spin of an electron is not well defined. Existing theories propose the emergence
of a multitude of exotic quantum phases, distinguishable by either local
charge/orbital or local spin properties. This award supports research on
extensive study of these emergent phases using local microscopic measurements,
designed to concurrently probe spin, charge/orbital, and lattice properties. The
transformative goal of this research is to identify an appropriate theoretical
framework for describing systems with both strong correlations and SOC and so
promote the discovery of materials with designed properties. The researchers at
Brown University and National High Magnetic Field Laboratory simultaneously
probe magnetic and orbital/charge properties while subjecting the samples to
applied magnetic field and varying the amount of electronic charge, to tune
competing interactions. A strong educational component is imbedded in the
project by establishing a challenging training ground for students, both
graduate and undergraduate, who will be involved in the scientific, modeling,
and technical developments. The work at the National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory and other international user facilities will be of particular benefit
in training students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This
research program focuses on the experimental investigation of emergent orders in
strongly correlated electron systems with varying amount of spin-orbit coupling
(SOC) using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques with the goal to
decipher the complex interplay between different interactions that leads to the
emergent quantum states of matter. These NMR measurements are designed to
concurrently probe spin, charge/orbital, and lattice degrees of freedom (DOF) at
the relevant low energy scales for an extensive study of these emergent phases.
Initial emphasis is on double-perovskites materials, investigated by NMR on
nuclei with finite quadrupolar moment. The microscopic nature of orbital and
magnetic states is inferred by correlating these findings with the dynamical
effects associated with low energy quasiparticles. Furthermore, the comparison
of experimental data to theoretical models (and simulations) is carried out, in
order to build a comprehensive understanding of the ways in which the spin,
lattice, charge, and orbital DOF cooperate, compete, and/or reconstruct in
complex materials to produce novel phenomena and/or magnetic states. Specific to
the stated goals, the competing interactions are tuned by external parameters,
such as magnetic field, and coordinated variations in chemical pressure, charge
doping, and strength of SOC. To achieve these objectives, the research team is
developing a novel NMR approach based on the use of NMR concepts from quantum
information science (QIS) to untangle spin and orbital degrees of freedom, and
measure separate linear response in the spin and charge channels. The study is
extended to topological Kondo insulators to provide a general understanding of
intrinsic properties arising from the interplay of strong correlations, SOC,
multi-orbital, and multi-valence DOF. The transformative goal of the research
project is to help identify an appropriate theoretical framework for describing
systems in which correlations and SOC are of comparable energy scale and neither
can be treated perturbatively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.