* 1905246
* Mathematics and Statistics Across the Curriculum: Empowering Non-STEM Students to Appreciate and Use Quantitative Modeling
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2023
* John Sieben, Texas Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 06/30/2023
* USD 298,542.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources, this Engaged Student Learning (Exploration and
Design) project aims to serve the national interest in undergraduate mathematics
education. It aims to do so by improving attitudes, awareness, and use of
quantitative modeling by undergraduate students in STEM and non-STEM majors.
This project will investigate how students outside of math-intensive majors
respond to mathematical and statistical modules that are embedded within their
courses and that focus on topics that are relevant to the course. The project
design team, consisting of mathematics faculty paired with faculty from
participating disciplines, will design technology-based modeling modules to
incorporate in undergraduate non-mathematics courses. To ensure authenticity,
modules from non-STEM disciplines will be selected by participating non-STEM
faculty members and students. Enabling student experiences that address relevant
problems with quantitative methods will have the potential to create awareness,
appreciation, and use of these methods. As such, this project has potential to
be a gateway for non-mathematics undergraduate students into quantitative
applications in disparate areas of undergraduate study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this three-year project include to: (i) improve the attitudes of
faculty and students toward use of quantitative methods in non-mathematics
classes; (ii) increase use of modeling outside of mathematics courses; and (iii)
develop a dynamic online archive of peer-reviewed modeling modules. The project
will study the incorporation of quantitative literacy applications in a range of
courses with non-mathematics undergraduate majors, including social and applied
sciences, arts, humanities, and biology undergraduate courses. The research
design of the project will include comparing class sections that do not
incorporate quantitative modeling modules with those that do, using pre- and
post-tests of students in these classes, who serve as their own controls. Data
analysis will include use of repeated measures MANOVA, MANCOVA, regression, and
non-parametric analyses. The project has the potential to support the broader
national use of statistical and quantitative methods outside of STEM disciplines
and enhance undergraduate students' critical thinking skills as well-prepared
citizens. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.