* 1905582
* Unraveling the Formation of Two-Photon Polymerized Materials at the Nanoscale
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Eric Potma, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2023
* USD 371,183.00

This project supports fundamental research on an emerging method for the
fabrication of microstructures, called two-photon polymerization (TPP). In TPP,
a focused laser beam writes three-dimensional polymer structures of any
configuration, enabling the fabrication of intricate objects and devices at a
length scale many times smaller than the thickness of a human hair. Developments
in TPP have been hampered by the inability to improve the repeatability,
structural integrity, mechanical properties and further downsizing of the
written structures. These limitations are chemical in nature, but deciphering
the chemical composition at such small length scales has remained a significant
challenge. In this project, this hurdle is overcome by using a new approach
capable of generating detailed chemical maps of TTP microstructures. Using a
light-based analytical method called tip-enhanced Raman scattering, a close-up
view of evolving chemical changes in TTP microstructures is obtained with
nanometer precision. By unraveling the hitherto hidden chemical and structural
changes at the nanoscale, TTP procedures can be much improved, making a large-
scale implementation of TTP technologies possible. This project thus accelerates
the translation of TPP from academic labs towards large-scale industrial
applications. The project also provides training to a specialist and two
undergraduate students who have the opportunity to acquire sought-after skills
in high-end instrumentation. In addition, this project includes an outreach
effort to middle school students in the community, in which students have the
chance to produce micrometer-sized versions of 3D objects of their
choosing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-photon polymerization (TPP) is a popular
technology for the fabrication of micro-structures, yet the industrial use of
TPP has been hindered by poor consistency between written structures limiting a
large-scale implementation of this additive manufacturing technique. Variations
in the degree of conversion, solvent permeation, voxel overlap, and material
inhomogeneities are not well understood, giving rise to a low overall
repeatability. The root of these problems is insufficient knowledge of the
polymerization process at the nanoscale. This project addresses several
longstanding questions regarding the photo- physics and photo-chemistry of TPP
that have limited a broader implementation of the technique. The project focuses
on outstanding questions about the time-sequenced process of photo- initiation
followed by polymerization as well as the resulting nanoscale morphology and
chemistry. The excitation dynamics, radical formation and resin interactions of
photoinitiators are studied by ultrafast spectroscopy experiments, and the
degree of cross-linking, material inhomogeneities and solvent permeation at the
nanoscale are studied by tip-enhanced Raman scattering. The insights acquired in
this work enable an optimization of key TPP parameters, producing new guidelines
for photoinitiator development, directions for controlling the degree of
polymerization, new laser illumination strategies of improving resolution and
management of the pyrolysis process at the nanoscale. Consequently, the
deliverables in this project accelerate the translation of TPP from academic
labs towards large-scale industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.