* 1905325
* Probing Microstructure-Martensitic Transformation Couplings in Metamagnetic Shape Memory Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2023
* USD 499,999.00

Non-Technical Summary: Shape Memory Alloys (SMAs) undergo reversible shape
changes, mediated by re-arrangements in their atomic structure, as a result of
the application of forces and/or by imposing changes in temperature. Some types
of SMAs also respond to magnetic fields and in some cases the reversible shape
change is accompanied by dramatic changes in the magnetic properties of the
material. These SMAs are known as meta-magnetic SMAs- 'meta' in this case
indicates 'beyond' conventional magnetic behavior- and the very strong coupling
between mechanical and magnetic fields make them ideal for sensors, actuators,
and even solid-state refrigeration. Beyond their practical applications, meta-
magnetic SMAs are fascinating materials because their shape-change behavior is
extremely sensitive to minute changes in their configuration, which can in turn
be changed by different processing techniques. While many groups have proposed
different mechanisms by which heat treatments induce changes in the behavior of
meta-magnetic SMAs, most explanations rely on changes to global properties of
the alloys, such as the overall degree of order/disorder in their atomic
configuration. Recent work by the PIs and others suggest that more local effects
(i.e., microstructure) may play an unexpected role. This award supports a
combined experimental/theoretical effort that seeks to elucidate the role of
microstructure evolution on the response of these systems. The knowledge gained
can be used to increase the degree of control over the behavior of meta-magnetic
SMA-based devices. This award also supports the training of undergraduate (UG)
and graduate students in state-of-the-art experimental and computational
materials techniques. The PI and Co-PI currently lead an REU program on Multi-
functional Materials and students recruited into this program will be mentored
by graduate students involved in the project or undergraduate research projects
related to meta-magnetic SMAs. Moreover, the PhD students involved in the
project will receive training in materials science, informatics and design
through enrollment in an interdisciplinary graduate training program (D3EM)
directed by the PI. Elements of the research produced in this project will also
be used as case studies at the Texas A&amp;M Computational Materials Science
Summer School, co-organized by the PI for over eight
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: The PIs propose an
experimental/theoretical program to elucidate the underlying microstructural
mechanisms and the corresponding length scale effects on the martensitic
transformation (MT), in NiMnIn-based meta-magnetic Shape Memory Alloys. Meta-
magnetic SMAs exhibit a wide range of complex phenomena resulting from the
interplay between microstructure, configurational disorder and several phase
transitions (ordering, ferromagnetic, ferroelastic/martensitic). Recent work by
the PIs has demonstrated that NiCoMnIn alloys show complex, non-linear, non-
monotonic dependence of the MTs, as well as their suppression and re-appearance,
on small compositional changes and heat treatments. This behavior, however,
cannot be explained by changes in global (thermodynamic) degrees of freedom,
such as, vacancy concentration or overall degree of order/disorder. The
underlying hypothesis of this project is the existence of a very strong
connection between mesoscale microstructural features and the phase
transformation behavior of meta-magnetic SMAs. The main goal of this project is
to establish a fundamental understanding of the underlying microstructural
mechanisms responsible for the observed complex chemistry and heat treatment
dependence of multiple phase transitions in NiMnIn-based meta-magnetic SMAs
through the close coupling of experiments and simulations. Advanced synthesis
and characterization will be combined with state-of-the-art multi-scale
computational materials science frameworks to understand the connection between
microstructural features and the martensitic
transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.