* 1905770
* Collaborative Research: NSF-BSF: Understanding Semiconducting Polymers in High-Dielectric-Constant Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Harald Ade, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2023
* USD 375,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research into 'plastic'
semiconductors has led to materials that can harvest the energy of the sun and
convert it into electricity. Yet, current devices made with such semiconducting
plastics are complex and require two materials to efficiently convert light into
electricity. The current project explores whether eventually this structure
could be simplified, possibly yielding devices based on a single material. For
this, the effect of the local environment on the electronic and optical
properties of the plastic semiconductor will be systematically investigated
using model systems to test theories that predict that more efficient devices
could be produced by making the local environment of the plastic semiconductor
more polar. The fundamental insight achieved in this project will allow to
design and produce new plastic semiconductors, improve the efficiency and
potentially the stability of plastic-based solar cells, and will likely simplify
their production so that they eventually could be printed similar to the way
newspapers are printed. These all are factors that would improve the economic
viability of plastic semiconductors in a range of applications and, in turn,
would contribute to reduced greenhouse gas emission and facilitate
implementation of concepts such as zero-energy housing and low-water-intensity
farming based on solar cell integrations into
greenhouses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned work aims to significantly advance our
fundamental understanding of how high-k environments affect the optoelectronic
properties of polymer semiconductors. While the effective dielectric constant,
k, of functional polymers can be manipulated via chemical design or the
surrounding of the polymer, changes in molecular structure to create a high-k
polymers also affect other features, including polarity, molecular packing,
phase behavior, and electronic properties. As a consequence, few direct
structure/function relations have been experimentally established to date. In
this project, various current complications that have hindered the delivery of
structure/function interrelations will be circumvented via i) separating the
polymer self-assembly during processing from the introduction of the high-k
material as much as possible, to allow for a clean before/after comparisons, and
ii) pursuing new self-assembly strategies to create molecular hybrid materials
and blends. These approaches allow to tune the lengthscales and specific
interfacial areas of the self-assembly and, in turn, provide means to
disentangle sought-after optoelectronic effects from other factors that might
impact optoelectronic properties/materials performance. The knowledge gained
during the project will be applied to polymer solar cells, which generally rely
on donor:acceptor bulk heterojunctions to achieve efficient exciton splitting. A
main goal of the project is to delineate if there is ever a pathway to
significantly lower the exciton binding energy (and thus realize efficient
exciton splitting in organic solar cells) by modifying k in the vicinity of
relevant semiconducting polymer backbones or if one really needs to modify the
backbone itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.