* 1905294
* Electrochemical Electron-Anion Exchange
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Scott Warren, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 463,807.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Lithium-ion batteries have
been a dominant technology in portable electronics and vehicles, but further
developments in batteries require the exploration of alternate approaches. This
project takes a divergent approach to battery materials by exploring exchange of
ions other than lithium. Specifically, this research explores the exchange of
anions, which, so far, have received little attention. To provide fundamental
understanding into the use of anions, this project seeks to discover materials
that can transport and store anions. In addition, the project seeks to
understand the mechanism of anion movement. The project uses computational
predictions of anion movement to aid materials discovery. In addition, the
project experimentally validates these predictions through materials synthesis
and characterization. By combining computation and experiment, this work
provides a deeper understanding of new types of materials that will ultimately
impact society by improving electric vehicles and portable electronics. The
project advances education and diversity by involving underrepresented students
in the research and by teaching the broader public about the scientific
discoveries made in this research through several outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal develops a fundamental understanding of electrochemical electron-anion
exchange, a process in which the electrons in a material are replaced by anions
under electrochemical control. This exchange process has not been studied
previously but has the potential to yield batteries with favorable
characteristics. This research project combines data mining and predictive
modeling, synthesis of new materials, and advanced characterization toward the
objectives of: (1) identifying design rules for materials that can exhibit
electrochemical electron-anion exchange, (2) understanding how composition and
structure influence the rate of anion diffusion, and (3) understanding how
composition and structure influence the rate and mechanism of electron
diffusion. These three objectives will provide fundamental understanding into a
new class of materials, both in terms of their structure and dynamics. This new
understanding will accelerate the development of future classes of batteries and
other electronic devices. This project is also improving scientific education by
developing several programs. These include: (1) an outreach effort to increase
the number of undergraduates from HBCUs who apply to graduate school, (2)
involving underrepresented undergraduates in this research project, (3) creating
a new writing program to give graduate students instruction on the writing of
scientific manuscripts and grants, (4) engaging children and the general public
in the research on 2D materials through hands-on demonstrations, and (5)
involving high school students in the research, especially those from
underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.