* 1905996
* Ordering of Block Copolymer Systems with Enhanced Molecular Interactions and Diffusional Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2024
* Alamgir Karim, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2024
* USD 702,716.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers are a class of
multicomponent polymeric materials used for advanced applications in a wide
range of nanotechnologies, ranging from membranes for cleaning oil spills to
optical manipulation of light in fiber optics to fundamental elements of
transistors and high-density data storage elements. Practical realization of
such applications of block copolymer materials typically require that they form
geometrically ordered structures, such as cylindrical or lamellar (sheet-like)
microstructure and more complex geometries. While block copolymers can form
these ordered structures intrinsically by self-assembly at molecular scales,
obtaining ordered structures over macroscopic scales useful for applications
requires providing the block copolymer with sufficient molecular mobility via
processing methods. Thermal and solvent vapor processing methods are currently
used, however, they can be slow and often not possible due to concerns of
thermal degradation. The research here develops and examines in-depth a rapid
processing approach that involves immersing the block copolymer into multi-
component solvent mixtures that offer a controllable balance of swelling, non-
swelling and block-interactions-tunable solvents. A successful research will
pave the way for continuous roll-to-roll industrial processing for large-scale
self-assembly of block copolymer structures for various applications. The
research will promote participation of women and minorities through several
educational and outreach activities, develop a polymer nanotechnology course
with a laboratory module for Chemical Engineering and Materials Science graduate
students, and engage high school students in laboratory research with internship
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers consist of chemically bonded
monomer sequences whose ability to self-assemble renders them applicable for
various potential nanotechnology applications, ranging from nanophotonics to
nanoelectronics to nano-porous membranes. To accomplish these ordered self-
assembly-driven microstructures requires advanced processing methods for
controlled morphology and long-range order with minimal defects over macroscopic
scales. While thermal and solvent vapor annealing (SVA) are established methods
of block copolymer ordering, the work here will enable ordering of block
copolymers annealed by a newly developed method involving its immersion in a
mixture of solvents, while at the same time elucidating molecular-level
understanding of the resulting morphology. Termed Direct Immersion Annealing, or
DIA, the method has already demonstrated promise for rapid ordering of 2D
cylinder-forming block copolymer films with unique control over domain spacing.
The present work will examine DIA induced ordering of block copolymer films to
study 1) chemical-potential controlled partitioning of solvent mixture within
BCP blocks and activation energy of ordering, 2) role of intrinsic block
copolymer morphology (1D, 2D, and 3D) on domain collapse in dry state, 3) ionic-
liquid as a processing aid for enhanced ordering and targeted transport of
functional nanoparticles selectively within BCP block domains, 4) fundamental
kinetic and thermodynamic differences between DIA and SVA, and 5) effect of
substrate surface energy on DIA-induced orientation and morphology of BCP films.
Workforce aspects will involve the training of women and minorities through
several educational and outreach activities, developing a bridging
undergraduate-to-graduate polymer nanotechnology course, and provide scientific
internships to high school students to learn about polymers, from a basic to an
advanced level. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.