* 1905267
* Flavins as Carbon Transfer Agents in Enzymology
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Bruce Palfey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 09/30/2023
* USD 480,000.00

Flavins are derivatives of vitamin b2 that have long been known to help enzymes
move electrons in biological reactions. Interestingly, it is now becoming
apparent that flavins can sometimes serve as carbon-carriers. With this award,
the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr.
Bruce Palfey, University of Michigan, to investigate this newly recognized and
not well understood type of reaction of flavins. This work is focusing on the
way the protein thymidylate synthase controls the transfer and modification of a
single carbon atom in an important biochemical reaction that is needed for DNA
synthesis. A large number of bacteria use this type of reaction in the pathway
to synthesize their DNA, so this project is elucidating a fundamental chemical
process that is widespread but poorly understood. The project draws on a variety
of chemical methods, some involving advanced technologies that allow very fast
processes to be observed. The participants in the project, such as
undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows, are receiving training in a unique
blend of interdisciplinary scientific techniques, strengthening the capabilities
of our technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flavin enzyme-chemistry is now
extending well beyond the canonical borders set by reduction and oxidation using
the transfer of hydride equivalents, thiol/disulfide interchanges, single-
electron transfers, and reactions with O2. Among the surprising new findings are
enzymes that make iminium adducts with reduced flavins. These iminium adducts
undergo a variety of fates depending on the particular enzyme. A flavin-
dependent thymidylate synthase (thyX) forms thymine using a methylene derived
from methylenetetrahydrofolate (CH2THF) and reducing equivalents derived from
pyridine nucleotide. Recent evidence implicates the reduced flavin-iminium
adduct as the carbon-transfer agent. Key reactive intermediates are being
trapped and their chemical structures are being determined by NMR spectroscopy.
Synthetic flavins are being used to learn about key transition states from
linear free energy relationships and to gain insight into factors that favor
carbon-transfer over possibly competitive hydride transfer. Proton transfers,
which must be critical in controlling the transfer of electrophilic carbon, are
being studied in detail by transient kinetics in the carbon-transfer route
leading to thymidylate. Taken as a whole, this project is defining the catalytic
strategies and challenges that many enzymes are now recognized to
face.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.