* 1905092
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Fit between Producers and Consumers in Traditional Society
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Matthew Liebmann, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 25,200.00

Dr. Matthew Liebmann and Eric Johnson of Harvard University will investigate the
relationship between production in the core of an expanding state and
consumption on its colonial borders. Recent work in archaeology reveals the many
ways that humans use "foreign-made" objects to forge meaningful social
identities. Yet this focus on identity tends to downplay important economic
interdependencies between production and consumption. Researchers will analyze
the archaeological remains of shell bead manufacturing centers New Jersey
between 1750 and 1900 CE. At these sites, Euro-Americans produced shell beads
for export to Native American consumers on the Great Plains. How did
interactions on the borders of an expanding American state impact
industrialization in New Jersey? What factors led to the successes and failures
of making and selling products to indigenous consumers? And how did Native
consumers use Jersey-made beads to achieve their own social and political goals?
Today, much of the American manufacturing sector relies on the tastes of
consumers who live outside the country's boundaries. The forces that drive
industry - and the success or struggles of workers - are often tied to distant
political and cultural factors beyond the immediate understanding of producers.
By investigating the effects of state policies on the fortunes of both early
American industrialists and Native nations, this research offers key insights
into the relationship between the economy, state policy, and international
affairs. The archaeological excavations conducted by this project will provide
opportunities for student training in scientific methods of archaeology.
Researchers will engage publically with community stakeholders through local
historical societies and the New Jersey State Museum in an effort to show how a
local American industry was intimately tied to indigenous cultures, economies,
and conflicts on the Great Plains.

Researchers will examine changes over time between production and consumption in
order to determine the factors that influenced the rise and fall of an American
industry. Shell beads have been made in North America for thousands of years,
but by the American Revolution, Irish and Dutch settlers in northern New Jersey
became the major exporters of beads for the fur trade. Combined with analysis of
existing museum collections, excavations in New Jersey will target "proto-
industrial" and "industrial" shell bead manufacturing sites to gather
archaeological data in the form of debris, waste, bead blanks, tools, and
finished beads. These will be examined along with historical accounts, factory
ledgers, and fur trade records to track elements of "industrialization" such as
efficiencies, technologies, standardization, and scale of output.
Archaeological, historical, ethnographic, and portraiture data will be used to
track broad regional trends in Native uses of shell beads throughout the 19th
century. How were beads worn by different tribes, genders, and ages? In what
contexts, and to what end?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.