* 1905572
* Collaborative Research: Coordinated In-situ Dynamic Experiments and Atomistic Modeling of Surface Segregation in Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Guofeng Wang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Surface segregation phenomena - the enrichment
of one element at the surface relative to the bulk - have enormous consequences
in many areas of materials science because most engineering materials are alloys
either by design for improving properties or by impurities remaining after
processing or by contamination from the surrounding. Often, minor compositional
modifications that occur locally in a material can lead to drastic changes in
properties such as corrosion resistance, catalytic function, fracture strength,
and interfacial adhesion. This project seeks to uncover the dependence of
surface segregation on controllable parameters such as bulk composition, surface
orientation and morphology, and external stimuli as well as the microscopic
mechanism of the surface segregation process. The fundamental insight will have
considerable practical importance for a wide range of material systems,
properties, and reactions because segregation not only modifies surface
chemistry and composition but also the atomic structure and strain state in the
surface and subsurface regions in multicomponent materials. The fundamental
knowledge of the prototypes of basic processes controlling surface composition
and structure evolution will open up new perspectives of designing alloys with
desired surface properties by manipulating bulk properties of the alloy and
their interplay with the surroundings. As part of this research program,
students at the graduate and undergraduate levels will learn about new
microscopy, spectroscopy and computational techniques as well as work on
materials issues that are at the forefront of current materials research. The
training of students in the broader area of materials science will result in
future leaders that are better equipped to solve the complex energy and
environmental problems that face society. Results from this project will also be
incorporated into undergraduate- and graduate-level courses and high school
outreach programs to advance nanomaterials-related
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Although phase
diagrams delineating the thermodynamic conditions for phase/structure selection
in bulk alloys are well established, the composition and structure of an alloy
surface can be significantly different from those of the bulk due to the surface
segregation of the alloying element. A microscopic understanding of many
physical and chemical processes taking place at the surface of multicomponent
materials requires as a prerequisite atomic-scale understanding of surface
segregation induced compositional and structural evolution. Despite this
importance, the atomic processes governing the onset, promotion, and termination
of surface segregation under practical conditions are largely unknown. This
project employs atomistically informed approaches toward a mechanistic
understanding of surface segregation phenomena by gaining transformational
knowledge of surface compositional and structural dynamics of alloys. The
research is based on a combined atomistic experimental and computational program
with tightly integrated feedback loops, including quantitative in-situ metrology
that uses complementary forefront techniques for dynamically measuring surface
composition, structure and chemistry of the alloys under realistic environment
conditions and closely coordinated atomistic modeling ranging from first-
principles calculations to large-scale molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo
simulations. The comprehensive understanding will shed light on many
multicomponent systems due to a shared set of prototypical basic processes
governing surface segregation, including thermodynamic driving forces, interplay
between chemical ordering and elemental segregation, and kinetic obstacles of
atomic exchanges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.