* 1905407
* Structure Regulation of Ionic Copolymers: Unlocking Ionic Clusters through Solvent Shear Adaptation, a Computational-Experimental Insight
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Dvora Perahia, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 435,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on ionic
copolymers, a family of macromolecules comprised of segments that enable ionic
transport, tethered to ones that can enhance mechanical stability. Such polymer
materials show promise as membranes for use in innovative technologies, for
example, light-weight clean energy generation and storage, water purification,
and biomedical applications. However, scientists cannot yet control the
structures these polymers form during their processing into membranes. This
presents a significant roadblock since these structures determine the properties
of the polymer films, and hence control their potential use for devices. The
membrane structure is governed by interactions among the polymer blocks and
between each of the blocks with the solvent, as well as processing conditions.
The barrier to controlling the structure stems from the tendency of the ionic
segments to aggregate and form regions that remain trapped and "lock" the
polymers during membrane formation. Using computational tools supported by
experimental studies, the project will determine the structure evolution of
ionic co-polymers in elongational flow and as the solvents evaporate. The
working hypothesis is that "unlocking" the ionic clusters without "locking" the
rest of the blocks, through solvent tuning under flow, will enable the formation
of controlled, well-defined structured membranes of ionic co-polymers. With
advanced computational tools, coupled with structure determination techniques,
the project will provide fundamental insights into polymer processing. This
knowledge will directly promote the progress of science and technologies that
will advance the economic health and prosperity of the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the grand challenge of understanding ionic polymers under dynamic conditions,
the research will strive to capture the time evolution of the structure of ionic
block co-polymers in solutions in elongational flow and as solvents evaporate.
The study will capture polymer processing fundamentals, using non-equilibrium
molecular dynamics simulations, supported by selective neutron studies. The
working hypothesis of the proposed research is that "unlocking" the ionic
clusters without "locking" the hydrophobic blocks will enable the formation of
controlled well-defined structures in ionic copolymer membranes. This process is
achievable by manipulating a solvent-flow manifold that will control the
structure of ionic copolymers and consequently their properties. A set of well-
defined diblocks and triblocks that contain polystyrene sulfonate ionizable
blocks, in solutions of selective solvents for each of the blocks and theta-
solvents for all blocks, will be studied in elongational flow and as the
solvents evaporate. The study will resolve the parameters that lead to the
"unlocked-unlocked" state for all blocks under dynamic conditions, and its
effect on the overall structure of the neat ionizable phases. Understanding the
delicate balance of several highly incompatible blocks and their interactions
with solvents under quiescent conditions and under flow fields presents
experimental and computational challenges. However, the convergence of
computational studies and experimental efforts following the structure evolution
of ionic co-polymers solvent-flow response will provide the required multi-time-
length-scale insight essential to drive the structure of ionizable
copolymers.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.