* 1905974
* Chiral Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* William Irvine, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2024
* USD 565,480.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Innovation in materials science is driven by
the introduction of new paradigms for the organization of matter. This research
project involves the study of a new kind of liquid formed when millions of
magnets - each a fraction of a human hair in size - are made to spin. This
table-top model system is a window into a new paradigm sitting at the interface
of hard and soft condensed matter, in which the material properties emerge from
the effect of drive on microscopic constituents of a meta-fluid. Such fluids
break new symmetries (time-reversal) enabling them to have new properties which
are explored in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;While it is known that topological physics can be applied to
solids built out of rotating components, the physics of time-reversal and parity
symmetry breaking remains almost untapped in fluids. The research team is using
a system of spinning magnets to create a cohesive chiral fluid whose
hydrodynamic description breaks parity and time-reversal symmetries. The
deceiving conceptual simplicity of activating a fluid by spinning its building
blocks hides the deep consequences this has on its properties. For example, the
breaking of time-reversal symmetry is speculated to give rise to new transport
coefficients, such as Hall or 'Odd' viscosity, that are absent from canonical
treatments of classical fluids but present in theoretical treatments of quantum
hall electronic systems and plasmas. The broad applicability of hydrodynamic
descriptions means that the discoveries in this project transcend the specific
experiments in which they are made. The goal is to elucidate the physics of
compressible and incompressible chiral flows, yielding fundamental insights on
one hand and a new tool to design out-of-equilibrium meta-fluids on the other.
Beyond scientific advances, this project enables training of students and
undergraduates, with an emphasis on under-represented minorities in cutting-edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.