* 1905634
* High-Field Terahertz Driven Photocarrier Dynamics in Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Yun-Shik Lee, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2023
* USD 379,551.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study the
movement of electrons in semiconductor materials when exposed to electromagnetic
waves with short pulses but large energy. Better knowledge of the fundamental
science of this interaction could lead to making electronic and photonic devices
that operate at high-speed. Naturally occurring electromagnetic waves fill up
space of everyday life, so it is important to understand how electrons in
semiconductors react when exposed to high-energy electromagnetic waves. This
research team will employ extremely short electromagnetic pulses with large
energy to investigate the movement of electrons in materials with nanometer-
scale dimensions such as carbon nanotubes, graphene and vanadium dioxide. The
outcome of this project could uncover new knowledge crucial for developing
devices for quantum information processing and for the next generation high-
speed electronic and photonic devices. This project will also educate and train
graduate and undergraduate students, giving them profound knowledge that will
prepare them for employment in high-tech industries. The summer outreach
activities in the project include optics demonstrations and research experience
for high school students and minority students in the Portland Community College
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;High-field electron
dynamics in nanomaterials in the terahertz (THz) regime is an uncharted subject,
yet the importance of field-control of nanostructures cannot be emphasized
enough considering its potential application to high-speed electronics and
quantum information processing among other areas. This project aims to
understand ultrafast photocarrier dynamics in nanomaterials driven by intense
terahertz pulses, where the terahertz field is strong enough to make substantial
changes in the electronic band structure of the material. The research team
investigates ultrafast insulator-to-metal transition in a strongly correlated
material, vanadium dioxide, driven by strong THz pulses and femtosecond laser
excitations, and characterize the dynamics of correlated electrons in highly
non-equilibrium states. It also studies the microscopic mechanisms underlying
the high-field photocarrier dynamics in low-dimensional materials, such as
carbon nanotubes, graphene and molybdenum disulfide, under extreme conditions
where the THz field is strong enough to induce band-to-band tunneling. Time-
resolved optical and THz spectroscopy is employed to observe and to coherently
control the extreme non-equilibrium dynamics of many electrons with sub-
picosecond resolution, while exploiting the field enhancement and subwavelength
confinement in THz plasmonic devices. This research project lays the groundwork
for the potential applications to ultrahigh-speed electronics and photonics such
as field-effect transistors, optical modulators, wireless interconnects, and
frequency converters. The fundamental understandings and experimental methods
obtained from this research is valuable information for studying high-field
light-matter interactions in various material systems such as anharmonic phonon
dynamics in solids, nonperturbative dynamics of superconductors, and nonlinear
vibrations in molecules. The field enhancement and subwavelength focusing in
terahertz plasmonic devices can be applied to imaging and sensing applications.
The students working on the research project will gain profound knowledge about
the fundamental science and technical skills to conduct experiments using state-
of-the-art optoelectronic instruments. The project involves undergraduate
researchers working on their senior thesis or participating in REU activities
and support outreach activities inspiring young minds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.