* 1905782
* Role of Interface Interpenetration and Domain Size on Dynamic Coupling Across Dissimilar Polymer Domains
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Connie Roth, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 678,314.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced materials design for
technological applications such as ion conduction, filtration, photoelectric
generation, or composite reinforcement is focused on combining different
material components at the nanoscale level. This creates systems where nearly
all parts are near an interface making the resulting performance primarily
dependent on the local material properties near these interfaces. Recent
observations have demonstrated an unanticipated strong coupling of dynamics
across dissimilar polymer interfaces established during final materials
processing and interface formation. The planned research aims to understand what
controls this dynamical coupling across dissimilar polymer domains and how
interfaces mediate this behavior. Experiments on simplified systems using a
series of different techniques will be carried out to investigate what property
changes take place in multilayer systems during interface formation and how they
alter the dynamics across the material. Integrated with this research will be
education of students as well as outreach. Outreach efforts by the PI involve a
partnership with Emory's Carlos Museum education programs to develop STEAM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics) programing for teachers
and school groups covering scientific concepts used by ancient cultures such as
historical water management strategies. In collaboration with the Museum's Chief
Conservator, undergraduate research projects will characterize polymer resins
and their applications used in artwork conservation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
planned research aims to understand what controls dynamical coupling across
dissimilar polymer domains and how interfaces mediate this behavior. Experiments
on simplified systems using a series of different techniques will be carried out
to investigate what property changes take place in multilayer systems during
interface annealing that alter the dynamics across the material. Comparison of
results using multiple experimental techniques on a given system will provide a
fuller picture of the relevant phenomena and thus facilitate improved
understanding. Experiments on multilayer films with varying layer thicknesses
will be done using the following techniques: quartz crystal microscopy to
investigate changes in shear wave propagation across dissimilar polymer
interfaces upon progressive interface annealing, ellipsometry to study changes
in physical aging due to the impact of glassy-rubbery polymer interfaces, and
differential scanning calorimetry to compare glass transition breadths and
temperature-dependent heat capacities. Results from these techniques will be
correlated or contrasted to localized depth-dependent measurements of the glass
transition temperature using fluorescence on equivalent systems. The goals of
this project are to address which experimentally measurable factors change
during interface formation leading to dynamical coupling between different
polymer domains, and how finite domain sizes (changing boundary conditions)
alter this phenomenon. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.