* 1905790
* Connecting Junction Molecular Orientation to Excited State Structure and Dynamics in Organic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Brian Collins, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 499,737.00

Printable electronic devices based on flexible organic-based materials have the
potential to revolutionize how we renewably harvest and store energy. The
arrangement of plastic molecules at interfaces between layers can determine
whether the device performs well. However, there is currently limited knowledge
of how such arrangements govern device performance. In this project, solar cells
and light emitters printed from plastic inks are studied. These devices have
important interfaces where power is generated and light is emitted. This project
involves varying the arrangement of the molecules at these interfaces, monitored
by powerful X-ray techniques. Correspondingly, power- and light-generating
processes are measured and related to the arrangement of the molecules. The
result will be a new capability to tailor molecule arrangements at interfaces to
maximize device performance. Such a capability will enable flexible and
printable technologies to dramatically reduce the cost of energy. Students
involved in this project will take part in the Science Ambassadors Program by
developing a plastic solar cell lab for high school students. This activity will
demonstrate both the fundamental science and the potential of these
technologies. The interdisciplinary and collaborative nature of the project will
provide the students with expertise to communicate diverse viewpoints that will
be required of the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optoelectronic properties in printable organic
devices could be tailored for revolutionary applications through simple
processing techniques that engineer interfacial structures, but there is a gap
in knowledge to realize this goal. This gap is due to the difficulty in
quantitatively resolving buried organic interfacial nanostructure and directly
correlating this to fundamental device processes. In the proposed work, a suite
of recently developed resonant X-ray nanoprobes will be used to quantify
molecular orientation, aggregation, and mixing local to buried organic
interfaces. These measurements will be combined with advanced studies of excited
state structure and dynamics on the exact same device - eliminating
uncertainties related to sample variability. The objective is to define
quantitative relationships on how molecular ordering at buried organic junctions
controls excited state dynamics connected to performance. It will be
accomplished by systematically investigating all structural cases in planar
junctions and extending this information to printed 3D heterojunctions. Our aim
is not only to establish the general concepts, but to define the functional form
of these relationships to enable designed properties in high-performing organic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.