* 1905621
* Collaborative Research: Assembly of non-lipid components by heterogeneous membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Benjamin Machta, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 220,234.00

Non Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-lipid components coupled to
lipid membranes directly interact with one another but also feel effective
interactions through the membrane. In particular, phase transitions in non-lipid
components vary significantly from the bulk when a subset of components is
membrane-coupled. Some past work has explored these differences for membranes
that are themselves homogeneous. The objective of the current study is to
explore systems in which both membranes and non-lipid components are capable of
experiencing miscibility phase transitions. These systems represent novel
biomaterials in which membrane-based signals are actuated to non-membrane
processes, similar to common themes in signaling pathways. The research will use
thermodynamic simulations and experiments in two well-defined model systems: one
incorporating polyelectrolytes that form liquid phases in the bulk, and a second
utilizing engineered DNA origami tiles that assemble into two dimensional
lattices when coupled to membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lipid membranes form boundaries between animal
cells and their environments and define some subcellular compartments, such as
the cell nucleus and mitochondria. These membranes are primarily made of lipids,
soap-like molecules that spontaneously form into fluid, flexible sheets that act
as boundaries to large or charged molecules. Cell membranes also contain
embedded proteins, which are more complicated molecular machines that carry out
an array of biological functions. Within cells, the material properties of the
membrane helps to organize some embedded proteins, and contributes to the
assembly of larger structures that are tethered to the membrane. Cells take
advantage of this coupling to transduce signals across membranes, or to sense
chemical or mechanical changes to membrane properties. This project draws
inspiration from cells to develop minimal systems to explore the fundamental
concepts that underlie these biological processes. Researchers will explore the
two well-controlled systems of charged polymers and engineered DNA origami tiles
tethered to membranes, and will identify how membranes influence the
organization and assembly of non-lipid components and how the organization of
non-lipid components impact membranes. The long-term goal is to inspire new
materials that can sense and respond to a wide range of environmental stimuli.
The researchers will communicate their findings through publications, conference
presentations, public lectures, and by incorporating research into undergraduate
curricula. The principle investigators will train undergraduate and graduate
students for careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.