* 1905636
* RUI: Investigation of Strongly Correlated Electron Behavior in Rare-Earth Related Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Pei-Chun Ho, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 404,121.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project supports materials science
research of rare-earth related materials at a minority-serving undergraduate
institution. The primary focus is on the synthesis and characterization of
superconducting and small-gap semiconducting rare earth filled skutterudite
compounds, with the goal of understanding their underlying mechanisms. Many
versatile technical applications result from the rare-earth materials of
interest, for examples, superconducting materials can be used for energy
conservation and energy storage; quantum magnets and topological insulators can
be used in high performance electronics and quantum computers. The research in
the principal investigator's laboratory allows direct participation of
undergraduate and master-degree-program students in the experimental condensed
matter physics, giving them hands-on experience at the early stage of their
academic life. The practical experience of research and placement provided by
this project not only can train students to develop good fundamentals, critical
thinking, work ethics, and troubleshooting skills to become independent
scientists, but also encourage students to pursue higher education and careers
in the fields of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project
supports experimental research in the strongly correlated electron phenomena in
rare-earth related materials. These phenomena arise from a subtle interplay
between competing interactions, either electronic or magnetic. They can be
controlled through tuning the experimental parameters such as temperature,
magnetic field, chemical substitution. The rare-earth compounds under
investigation can be used as model systems to probe the localized and the
itinerant nature of the electron states and test the existing theories for
strongly correlated electron physics. These can be achieved through the
synthesis of high-quality single crystals and the establishment of transport and
thermodynamic properties. In the rare-earth filled skutterudite systems
Pr1-xNdxOs4Sb12, the principal investigator (PI) is aiming to understand the
unconventional nature of the superconductivity in PrOs4Sb12 by the effect of
neodymium substitution. Furthermore, in the light of the PI's recent discovery
of the exotic temperature-magnetic-field phase diagram of CeOs4Sb12, it
indicates a valence transition and possible multiple phases. The PI plans to
continue in examining the electronic behavior of SmOs4Sb12, CeOs4Sb12, the hole
doping compounds of Ce1-xPrxOs4Sb12 and Ce1-xNdxOs4Sb12 in order to investigate
the potential of topological insulating behavior in these systems. Eventually,
the results of the proposed projects can help us understand the quantum critical
behavior in PrOs4Sb12 whether its superconductivity resides near a quantum
critical point associated with antiferromagnetic or ferromagnetic ordering, or
something else such as quadrupole degree of freedom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.