* 1905519
* Non-linear THz optical effects as a probe of Berry's phase in topological materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Norman Armitage, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2023
* USD 503,490.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Most of what we know about materials comes
from their response to perturbations at their favorite (natural) frequencies.
For instance, the pitch of sound from a plucked violin string depends on its
length, the tension in it, and its thickness. In a similar way, the behavior of
atoms in materials depends on the natural frequency, which, for many solid
materials, fall in the Terahertz spectral range, a very difficult range to
access technically until recently. This project takes advantage of recent
dramatic technical advances in Terahertz frequencies to probe new materials
called topological materials. These materials have been predicted to possess
properties that make them useful for developing electronic devices for quantum
information technology. This project also includes a broad initiative in
education and outreach. The work is of particular educational value in training
students with unique skills to prepare them as the work force in high tech
industries. The research team will play active roles in the Johns Hopkins
Physics Fair- an outreach activity which brings hundreds of people each year
through Hopkins' labs during a Saturday event and exposes them to various
physics demonstrations and activities. The team will also give demonstration
shows at the Physics Fair and work with under-resourced local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to
investigate a number of topological and other material systems that have
important Berry phase effects using nonlinear optical response. Topological
states of matter have been of central interest in condensed matter physics in
recent years, yet we are lacking unique measures of many of these systems'
electrodynamic properties. Theory has indicated that the nonlinear response of
these compounds can give unique insight into the essential Berry phase structure
of their underlying wavefunctions. Measurements will emphasize the extended THz
range (here 0.1 - 40 THz [0.4 - 165 meV]) where generally responses target the
low energy emergent degrees of freedom, but experiments will use a full
complement of photon energies up through the near infrared. Experiments will be
performed on both topological materials and trivial materials with important
Berry phase effects. Materials include topological insulators, Weyl semimetals,
Dirac semimetals, and 2D transition metal dichalcogenides. We will explore the
nonlinear response of these system to both linear and circularized polarized
radiation in a number of specific configurations that are designed to elucidate
their Berry phase structure (Berry curvature and Berry connection) in these
compounds. Many theoretical predictions exist, but experimentally, this is an
almost completely unexplored area, which aside from its intrinsic importance has
the potential to give major new insight into what might have been considered a
mature area -- the nonlinear response of solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.