* 1905947
* High-Speed Rolling Nanoscale Motors
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Khalid Salaita, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2022
* USD 505,458.00

Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division
of Materials Research to Emory University is intended to develop new principles
for creating nanomachines that can consume chemical energy to produce mechanical
work. Modern machines, which include force-generating motors, enabled the
industrial revolution and are foundational to human civilization. Miniature
micromachines are used in countless devices including cell phone microphones,
implantable biosensors, and airplane accelerometers. Further miniaturization to
the nanometer scale would enable the design of machines that can manipulate
biomolecules and other nanomaterials for applications in medicine, biological
research, and material development. Such machines are typically difficult to
build because of their small size. However, a recent boom in the field of DNA
origami, where DNA is folded into precise three-dimensional structures, now
provides the ability to build and test the properties of virtually any three-
dimensional structure. In this proposal, the team will study nanoscale DNA
machines and investigate the design rules to enhance the speed and endurance of
these motors. The potential impact of the project could be in developing more
efficient nanoscale motors that have applications such as sensing, computation,
and drug delivery systems. This project will integrate research efforts with
outreach activities designed to advance the public understanding of nanoscale
machines. Educational activities include K-12 outreach to recruit
underrepresented students into STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
investigate the properties of dynamic force generating DNA nanomachines.
Biological motor proteins dynamically alter their interaction with a track
through ATP hydrolysis-fueled conformational changes and display directional
motion over distances of many microns at micrometer/sec speeds. Recapitulating
these functions in synthetic materials is a fundamentally challenging problem
that holds the potential to impact several fields. This includes the next
generation of synthetic muscles, drug delivery systems, and sensors.
Accordingly, the fundamental question driving this proposal is whether it is
possible to create artificial molecular motors capable of translocating
directionally at high velocities and over long distances. To date, the most
promising synthetic motor systems involve DNA-based machines, owing to their
predictable and tunable Watson-Crick base pairing. The lab of the PI has
discovered a new class of synthetic DNA-based motors that move at a speed that
is 1000 times faster than the state-of-the-art. Because the mechanism of motor
transport depends on Watson-Crick base-pairing and catalytic hydrolysis of RNA,
these motors can be potentially miniaturized to the nanometer length scale.
Preliminary experiments support this hypothesis. The project will specifically
test the mechanism of how DNA nanomotors dynamically translocate across a
surface. This will require the integration of DNA origami assembly coupled with
single molecule fluorescence imaging techniques. The research, education, and
outreach efforts will be integrated though their emphasis on developing studying
dynamic force-generating biomaterials. Several K-12 outreach activities that
include leveraging the existing Student Educational Experience Development
(SEED) program at Emory will be implemented as part of the broader impacts of
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.