* 1905803
* Enabling fast and efficient nonaqueous ion (co-)intercalation for high energy density charge storage via systematic interfacial design
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Joaquin Rodriguez Lopez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 547,321.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the principles of how ions move
into lithium-ion battery electrodes is crucial in making reliable and safe
batteries that store energy by storing lithium. However, big knowledge gaps
remain in the understanding of how these principles apply to other ions such as
potassium, sodium, and magnesium; all of these ions are crucial components of
exciting next-generation batteries. This project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, introduces ultra-thin electrodes, which
are composed of a few atom-thick flat layers of carbon, so-called few-layer
graphene (FLG), as a platform for identifying problems during the storage of a
broad range of ions. Because FLG is so thin, experiments can be performed very
quickly. On this project researchers use techniques for seeing through FLG
easily, and perform reliable quantum calculations mimicking their behavior. This
allows them to swiftly evaluate ion storage performance and to learn fundamental
principles impacting battery systems at large. This project aligns to NSF's
mission of promoting the progress of science and advancing national prosperity
by creating new knowledge on strategic materials for energy storage, such as
batteries. This helps the USA to remain at the forefront of science. In order to
contribute towards these greater objectives, the PI and co-PI, both identifying
with Hispanic communities, offer programs that enrich and make a positive impact
on student's learning and scientific life. This is achieved by providing direct
educational and research opportunities to undergraduate and K-12 audiences
through laboratory experiences and training, and through computational and
social media resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program at NSF, is to address challenges in the fundamental understanding of
interfacial phenomena faced during ion intercalation on graphitic hosts. While
several studies have addressed lithium intercalation kinetics and mechanisms,
comparatively fewer have done so on other alkali ions, anions, and multivalent
cations. The scope of this project is to use a versatile platform consisting of
few-layer graphene (FLG) electrodes which enable high-fidelity, fast, and
efficient electrochemistry to address this knowledge gap in a timely manner. FLG
electrodes improve experimental throughput with true interfacial selectivity,
allowing to swiftly identify and overcome interfacial kinetic barriers. Studies
are complemented with insightful compositional analysis, in situ
characterization, and robust quantum simulation methods for providing a deep
understanding of the intercalation process. This project generates knowledge on
the impact of heteroatom surface modification and ion co-intercalation on the
kinetics and mechanisms of ion insertion for next generation batteries in an
accelerated manner. The identification of PI and co-PI with Hispanic audiences
and other underrepresented minority groups helps preparing them to tackle future
challenges in energy technologies through demonstrations, laboratory
experiences, and social media tools. This project aligns to NSF's mission of
promoting the progress of science and advancing national prosperity by providing
fundamental understanding of strategic materials for energy storage, creating
transformative knowledge for allowing the USA to remain at the forefront of
science, and contributing to NSF's 10 Big Ideas by growing convergence research
through interdisciplinarity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.