* 1905757
* Tuning Plasmonic and Magneto-Plasmonic Behavior in 4-d Transition Metal Doped Indium Oxide
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Geoffrey Strouse, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,999.00

Incorporation of atoms that donate electrons into metal oxide nanocrystals leads
to new properties. These nanocrystal metal oxides are important for optics,
photocatalysis, quantum computing, and flexible electronics. Computational,
synthetic, and optical techniques will be employed to control the interaction of
light (photons) and electrons in a magnetic field. The intentional placement of
magnetic and electron donating atoms within a metal oxide nanocrystal will lead
to an ability to intentionally control carrier densities within the metal oxide
using light. Light will cause the electrons to oscillate. This oscillation will
allow the electrons to be coupled with a magnetic field providing a route to
materials for quantum computing. The choice of the donor atom, its
concentration, and its location within the nanocrystal controls the color of the
light used to couple the electrons. The effort will train students at the
forefront of electronic and photonic materials. A collaborative educational
experience for undergraduate students from universities focused on
underrepresented students will be established. Research into electronic and
photonic materials will be explored jointly with the investigators at Florida
State University and the collaborative schools through distance-
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emergent plasmonic and magneto plasmonic
properties will arise from changes in carrier mobility and densities near the
Fermi level in metal oxide semiconductor quantum dots. The changes are size and
site (core vs. surface) dependent. The research addresses three prevailing
questions in regards to plasmonic quantum dots (QDs), 1) Will a plasmonic
response be observed when 4d n-type donors are incorporated into In2O3 QDs and
will the effective mass be systematically tuned as a function of 4d energy
level? 2) What is the role of donor site location on the plasmonic activation or
deactivation of an aliovalent dopant? and 3) Can the electronic and magnetic
properties for QDs co-doped with electronic and magnetic dopants be coupled? Aim
1 interrogates the impact on carrier densities and carrier mobilities arising
from the 4d donor orbital energy levels relative to the conduction band minimum
(CBM) in In2O3. It is anticipated the plasmonic response will be Type I for Mo,
Type II for Nb, and Type III for Zr donors. In Aim 2, measurement of the carrier
densities and the influence of site of donor incorporation will be evaluated
using solid-state magic angle spinning (MAS) NMR techniques correlated with
optical methods. The aim will evaluate the prediction that the carrier density
at the Fermi level and plasmon properties arise primarily from dopants within
the core of the QD. In Aim 3, perturbation of magnetic exchange interactions in
Sn,Cr:In2O3 will be investigated for a system co-incorporating an electronic
(n-donor) and a paramagnetic (Cr(III)) donor. The aim will test the
computational hypothesis that coupling of the magnetic exchange and plasmonic
features can arise for shallow donors. The application of experimental and
computational modeling methods (density field theory), will lead to the
development of rational design criteria for producing new plasmonic and magneto-
plasmonic responses in these new materials. The activities will train students
at the forefront of research and develops the educational and research
infrastructure for students at all levels. A research collaboration using
distance-learning strategies will be established to enhance the educational
experience of undergraduate researchers from University of North Georgia and
Florida A&amp;M University. The distance learning approach includes remote
access to instrumentation and remote meetings with the principle investigator to
review research performance and results. The effort is termed the Plasmonic Army
and uses distance learning strategies to share research and to improve the
learning outcome for undergraduates interested in advanced research activities
in areas typically not found at a small University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.