* 1905097
* Controlled Synthesis of Polypeptides from Non-Purified N-Carboxyanhydrides
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Paul Braun, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 236,000.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jianjun Cheng of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign is developing
fast, inexpensive and simple routes for the preparation of synthetic
polypeptides using amino acids as the starting materials. Polypeptides are
important biopolymers; They consist of long chains of amino acids linked
together by a particular kind of a chemical bond called a peptide bond or link.
All living organisms are composed of polypeptides. This research allows for the
large-scale preparation of polypeptide materials in several hours instead of
days. Even more importantly, this new synthetic protocol eliminates the need for
purification of starting materials which is often necessary in order to
eliminate numerous side reactions that limit the chain length of the desired
polypeptides. Successful advancement of this new method has the potential to
impact the synthetic peptide synthesis, as well as several other scientific
disciplines. Research activities provide undergraduate and graduate students
with valuable educational experience in synthetic polymer chemistry. The
knowledge of polymerization chemistry and applications will be disseminated to
underrepresented undergraduates and K-12 students through the Discover
Engineering Summer Camp programs and Engineering Open-House Program at
University of Illinois. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on
developing the open-air method for controlled synthesis of polypeptides from
non-purified N-carboxyanhydride. Special emphasis is placed on water-free
conditions and the elimination of purification steps involving monomers,
initiators and catalysts. These steps are often critical in polymer synthesis in
order to minimize chain transfer or termination reactions which severely
decrease the degree of polymerization of the polypeptides. Each reaction
component is carefully analyzed through systematic studies. These
polymerizations are applicable to a wide range of amino acids and enable the
synthesis of polypeptides with high molecular weights. The in situ purification
can potentially be applied to other polymerization techniques to simplify the
procedures and lower the materials synthesis costs. This innovative research has
a potential to advance industrially-important rapid syntheses of
polypeptides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.