* 1905217
* Exciton Dynamics in Colloidal Lead Sulfide (PbS) Nanosheets
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Liangfeng Sun, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

Semiconductors play a central role in many modern technologies, from computer
chips to light emitting diodes (LEDs). A key property of a semiconductor is its
band gap, which is the smallest energy an electron in the crystal can absorb.
While the band gap depends on the type of semiconductor, it also depends on the
size of the crystal. As the crystal shrinks, the electrons become confined in
smaller and smaller volumes. When it reaches only a few nanometers in size, or
about 100,000 times thinner than a sheet of paper, its band gap can be very
different. One can use this confinement effect to make LEDs of different colors
simply by changing the size of the particle, rather than the material itself.
However, while semiconductor nanostructures that emit visible light are common,
the advancement of new materials for infrared light has remained a challenge.
With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Liangfeng Sun at Bowling Green State
University is studying electrons confined in lead sulfide (PbS) nanosheets.
Working with his students, Professor Sun is developing methods to grow PbS
nanosheets with precise control over their dimensions. They use sophisticated
experimental methods to study their confined electrons. Their discoveries could
lead to more efficient solar cells and better semiconductor lasers. The project
also provides training opportunities for future scientists in advanced
experimental techniques. In addition, the project is engaging undergraduates
from Central State University, an historically black university in Wilberforce,
Ohio, as well as introducing high-school students to nanomaterial
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is studying the radiative
recombination rates, charge transfer, exciton-exciton interactions, and
resonance energy transfer processes as a function of the nanosheet structure
(sheet area, thickness, co-facial contact, and comparison to quantum dots).
Steady-state spectroscopy and electrochemical methods are used to elucidate
static properties such as energy levels, transition line widths of emission and
absorption spectra as a function of size and temperature. Time-resolved
spectroscopic techniques (fluorescence and transient absorption on the
picosecond and femtosecond time scales, respectively) are used to investigate
exciton dynamics in these novel structures. The research activities include:
synthesizing high-quality PbS nanosheets with tunable thickness and lateral
size, studying the dynamics of a single exciton in isolated nanosheets, studying
the dynamics of the interacting multiple excitons in a nanosheet, and
investigating the exciton dissociation and charge transfer from nanosheets to
charge acceptors. The research group also investigates the exciton resonance
energy transfer between the nanosheets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.