* 1905135
* Assemblies of Metal Nanoparticles and Single Quantum Dots with Low-Power, Ultrafast Nonlinear Optical Response
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Matthew Pelton, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2024
* USD 642,484.00

The ability to continue to build faster, more powerful computers is reaching a
limit set by the amount of energy needed to run the computers. It may be
possible to overcome this energy barrier by replacing electronic components,
which use electrical current to process information, with photonic components,
which use light to process information, but only if ultrafast, ultrasmall, and
ultra-low-power photonic devices can be built. This project develops one class
of these devices, which can serve to control the flow of light in future all-
optical computers. This is accomplished by using chemical means to produce
nanometer-scale metal and semiconductor particles and to induce strong optical
interactions among the particles by assembling them into controlled hybrid
arrangements. These scientific goals are integrated with efforts to broaden the
diversity of the scientific workforce, through the involvement of high-school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in cutting-edge research, particularly
students from underrepresented groups, female students, and
veterans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to produce
assemblies of metal nanoparticles (MNPs) and single quantum dots (QDs) with
nonlinear optical response at ultralow incident powers. The nonlinearity arises
due to near-field optical interactions among the nanoparticles and is
qualitatively different from the response of the components separately.
Assemblies of colloidal QDs and MNPs with strong interparticle interactions are
fabricated through the chemical synthesis of QDs and anisotropic gold
nanoparticles (nanorods or bipyramids), the selective covalent binding of single
QDs to the ends of the MNPs to form MNP-QD-MNP trimers, and the separation of
these trimers from smaller and larger assemblies. Optical functionality is
verified by correlated linear and nonlinear optical spectroscopy and electron-
microscope imaging of individual assemblies. Experimental results are compared
to numerical simulations, enabling detailed understanding of structure-property
relationships and optimization of the nonlinear
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.