* 1905265
* Achieving the Full Phase Space of Inorganic Natural Products and Beyond in Nanocrystal Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Janet Macdonald, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Nature, through geology, has created an inspiring array of crystals with a wide
range of properties (color, porosity, and mechanical strength, etc.). The unique
properties of different types of crystals are a result of not only their
chemical compositions, but also the precise and specific arrangement of the
constituent atoms. As nanosized crystals (of dimensions of only about 1/1000
times the width of a strand of hair), these diverse properties could lead to
applications as far reaching as earth abundant and active industrial catalysts,
new cancer treatments, magnetic storage media, better batteries, and inexpensive
and efficient solar panels. Before any of this is possible, the routes to
synthesize these crystals at the nanoscale must first be discovered because the
extreme conditions of geology cannot be easily replicated in the chemistry
laboratory or industrial facilities. The research group of Professor Janet
Macdonald at Vanderbilt University seeks to understand how the precise
placements of atoms in nano-sized rocks can be controlled. Experiments are
designed to interrogate what happens to organic molecules and metal atoms when
they react and how to control the precise placement of atoms in these nano-sized
rocks. The ultimate goal is to make all the phases of crystals that geology
does, and possibly be able to design and prepare crystals with new phases. The
project also examines how the surfaces of small pieces of iron oxide pigments
bind to granite surfaces in the remarkably durable rock paintings of the
Anishinaabe, an indigenous people of the United States and Canada. The goal here
is to rediscover the lost technique for rock art and return it to the
Anishinaabe. The project supports the training of researchers in high school,
undergraduate and graduate student levels. Established and new connections
encourage Anishinaabe researchers to take part in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project uses libraries of organic
molecules that contain sulfur and selenium atoms as precursors to obtain the
diverse crystals made of these materials. A wide, sweeping and systematic study
of the phase-controlled synthesis of iron, cobalt, nickel and copper
chalcogenide nanocrystals is being performed. Libraries of organochalcogenides
are employed to separate the roles of kinetic rates from the decomposition
mechanisms in phase-determination. Organic reaction products are identified to
decipher the mechanisms of decomposition of the organochalcogenides on the
metals and deduce the impact of these mechanisms on phase control. In a second
aim, organoselenol and diselenide chemistry facilitates polytypic selection in
the transition metal chalcogenides. In situ solution 1H and 77Se NMR
spectroscopy of nanocrystal reactions are used to understand how the
organochalcogenide chemistry influences the polytypism in nanocrystal synthesis.
In the final thrust, adherence of hematite pigments to silica is studied under
varied application conditions precisely controlled using laboratory chemicals.
Translation of these studies to naturally sourced materials
follows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.