* 1905492
* Collaborative Research: Towards a Predictive Theory of Microstructure Evolution in Polycrystalline Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Katayun Barmak, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Most technologically useful materials - spanning the length scale from meters to
nanometers, from aircraft to microprocessors - are polycrystalline. Crystals are
materials with ordered arrangements of atoms. Polycrystalline microstructures
are composed of a myriad of small monocrystalline cells/grains separated by
grain boundaries/interfaces. Grain boundaries play a crucial role in determining
the properties of materials across a wide range of scales. These properties
include mechanical strength and ductility, electrical resistivity, magnetic
hardness, etc.; they strongly impact the performance of materials in engineered
systems. A grand challenge problem in the engineering of polycrystals is to
develop prescriptive manufacturing process technologies capable of producing an
arrangement of grains that yields a desired set of materials properties. One
method by which the grain structure is engineered is grain growth or coarsening
of a starting structure. This project is aimed at developing a predictive theory
of grain growth through close integration of experiments, simulations, and
mathematical models. The project will involve interdisciplinary research and
will enhance the infrastructure of engineered materials and systems through the
development of new, predictive and prescriptive experimental, analytical and
computational tools that will help in the design of material microstructures
with predictable properties. The new knowledge and tools that will emerge from
the proposed program will have an impact on the performance and reliability of
polycrystalline materials used in engineered systems. This project will also
directly impact workforce development through training and education of graduate
and undergraduate students in the proposed research. In addition, the
investigators will engage in outreach activities that include training of
underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grain growth can be viewed
as the evolution of a large metastable network, and can be mathematically
modeled by a set of deterministic local evolution laws for the growth of an
individual grain combined with stochastic models to describe the interaction
between them. Hence, to develop a predictive theory, a broad range of
statistical measures for microstructure evolution during grain growth will be
investigated using experiments, simulation, and mathematical modeling. The main
goal of this effort will be to identify/derive possible stochastic processes
that drive the evolution of various statistical measures, understand possible
links between them, and establish connections to materials properties. As a part
of the project, tools from mathematical analysis, partial differential
equations, statistics, scientific computing, numerical analysis and high-
performance computing will be closely integrated with experimental data and
experiments. The convergence of experiments, numerical simulation and
mathematical modeling through an integrated synergistic approach is the hallmark
of the proposed program, and it is essential in order to improve upon existing
models of grain growth and guide the design of new
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.