* 1905912
* Thermodynamic and Dynamic Control of Nanoparticles in Polymer Matrices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Russell Composto, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 620,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer nanocomposites, mixtures of
flexible long-chain molecules (polymers) and hard functional particles, are
found in everyday applications from automobile tires to paints and adhesives. To
promote the progress of science, the focus of this project is to study polymer
nanocomposite coatings that have the potential to improve the ability of solar
cell devices to utilize a broader section of the solar spectrum allowing for
more efficient energy production. The fundamental issue that the project seeks
to address is how to combine dissimilar materials in such a way that the
properties can be varied by controlling how well the particles are distributed
In addition to experiments, computer simulations will be used to guide the
selection of polymer and particles and to help interpret experimental results.
Block copolymers, which are two different polymer molecules tied to each other,
will be manipulated to create horizontal and vertical alternating domains (like
a stack of cards) that contain nanoparticles of complementary functionality. To
determine the location of particles and size of aggregates, state-of-the-art
characterization tools will be used. This research will produce phase diagrams
that allow for the determination of environmental conditions that promote good
mixing between the polymer and particles. Besides producing a well-educated,
scientifically skilled workforce, the integration of research and education
benefits society at several levels. For example, graduate and undergraduate
students will participate in annual public events including Nanotechnology Day
at Penn, Philly Materials Day, and the Philadelphia Science Festival. An
additional exciting outreach program is Girls in Engineering Mathematics and
Science Camp (GEMS), a weeklong day-camp that introduces middle-school girls
from the Delaware Valley to Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to understand the fundamental principles that control the
spatial distribution and assembly of nanoparticles (NPs) in block copolymers
(BCPs) and to understand the thermodynamics and phase separation pathways of
polymer nanocomposites (PNCs). The overarching goal is to perform systematic
studies that build on expertise in polymer and NP diffusion as well as NP
assembly in PNCs. &lt;br/&gt;(1) The first aim is to tune the nanoscale
separation between plasmonic NPs and upconverting nanoplates/nanospheres in
horizontally and vertically aligned lamellar BCPs. By functionalizing the NP
with polymer brushes, the two NP species will be located in alternating BCP
domains. The effect of domain spacing and particle loading will be investigated.
PNC field-theoretic simulations (PNC-FT) will be used to determine the free
energies of these PNCs and predict the cylinder-to-lamellar phase transition.
&lt;br/&gt;(2) The second aim is to study the thermodynamic behavior of binary
(A/NP) and ternary (A/B/NP) PNCs. The phase diagrams will be mapped out using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) on isothermal samples as well as the new
in situ X-ray scattering capabilities. As in the first aim, PNC-FT will provide
guidance for selecting materials parameters and help interpret results.
&lt;br/&gt;(3) The third aim is to investigate phase separation dynamics of
binary (A/NP) PNCs to elucidate the fundamental parameters that determine
aggregate size and percolating morphologies in kinetically trapped systems. PNC-
FT modified to include dynamics will guide experiments and provide insight into
the balance between thermodynamics and dynamics that dictate the final
morphology. Particle diffusion will be measured using Rutherford backscattering
spectrometry. Polymer brush relaxation and ion diffusion through percolated
morphologies will also be measured. In summary, although fundamental in nature,
the proposed work has the potential to create PNCs with enhanced upconversion
luminescence and fast ion mobility, which is of importance for solar energy and
energy storage devices, respectively. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.