* 1905311
* Mechanistic Investigation on Carrier Protein Recognition in Quorum Signal Synthases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Rajesh Nagarajan, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 466,860.00

Bacteria synthesize and release specific chemicals that signal to the local
microbial population that it has reached a level sufficient to change their
behavior from acting as individual cells to a multicellular mode. The bacterial
population is said to reach a quorum level and the signaling chemicals are
called Quorum Sensing (QS) signals. When a quorum population is achieved,
bacteria turn on cooperative, "group-beneficial" social traits that include
biofilm formation (for example plaques on teeth), toxin secretion and
development of resistance to antibiotics. The specificity in QS signals made by
the enzyme acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL) synthase requires that this protein
selectively recognizes and reacts with a specific helper protein (an acylated
acyl-carrier protein) to avoid creating non-specific signals. With this award,
the Chemistry of Life Processes is funding Dr. Rajesh Nagarajan at Boise State
University to investigate the molecular interactions of the carrier protein and
AHL synthase that direct the synthesis of correct quorum sensing signals. This
project utilizes a combination of biochemistry, enzymology and nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) tools to determine the molecular details for how two different
AHL synthases selectively recognize native over non-native compounds for the
acyl-carrier protein. Results from this study help guide the design of quorum
sensing specific inhibitors as potential ways to disrupt bacterial growth. The
educational plan of this project provides interdisciplinary training in cutting-
edge research for high school, undergraduate and graduate students and
integrates evidence-based research methods into the laboratory curriculum. The
plan for outreach engages low-income, rural and first-generation college
students at Boise State University in research, and offers a hands-on, direct
research opportunities for high school science teachers in the laboratory. This
project helps to connect Dr. Nagarajan's laboratory with local high school
science teachers and high school classrooms to encourage students to consider
careers in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acyl carrier proteins serve as
indispensable cofactors in several primary and secondary metabolic pathways that
include the biosynthesis of fatty acids, polyketides, quorum sensing signals and
nonribosomal peptide natural products. In general, the molecular basis on how
acyl carrier proteins are able to interact with a multitude of enzyme partners
and yet retain specificity for each enzyme is a poorly understood research area.
This project addresses how two different AHL synthases recognize their cognate
carrier proteins to impart fidelity in quorum signal synthesis. The methodology
used in this study should open new doors for a broader investigation on
differences in carrier protein recognition between enzymes involved in primary
and secondary metabolism. Finally, small molecules that interrupt intercellular
communication could also serve as useful chemical probes to investigate the
social communication among bacterial communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program of
the Chemistry Division, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.