* 1905575
* Collaborative Research: Transfer Printed, Single-Crystalline Si Nanomesh Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Hui Fang, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 09/30/2021
* USD 271,217.00

Non-technical description: Stretchable electronics have emerged as promising
platforms for many important areas such as bio-mimetics, health monitoring,
biomedical therapeutics, and soft robotics. This project investigates a set of
foundational materials science problems to, for the first time, establish a new
electronic materials platform - Si nanomeshes - for next-generation stretchable
electronics. The transformative aspect of this project arises from the broad
utility of the resulting design and engineering knowledge for nanomesh
electronic materials, having profound impacts to not only fundamental materials
science but also a broad range of applications in human-electronic interfaces
and smart robots. The collaborative team also utilizes this project to integrate
creative educational activities with cutting-edge research at multiple levels
through: (1) engaging K-12 students via summer research and exhibiting at
Oklahoma WONDERtorium Children's museum; (2) actively attracting undergraduate
students for early research; and (3) the continuous curriculum development at
both Northeastern University and Oklahoma State University to expand capacity in
the soft electronic materials field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: Stretchable electronics research has long been facing the dichotomy
between device performance and density. In the past decade, there has been
significant progress in realizing stretchable semiconductors, however, existing
approaches are still incomplete when high-density, high-performance stretchable
electronics are needed. On the basis of strong preliminary results from the
research team, the principal investigators hypothesize that with tailored
nanomesh geometries and engineered sidewall surface states, Si nanomeshes can
achieve simultaneously large stretchability, high mobility and high reliability
that are needed for high-density stretchable electronics. Through both
theoretical and experimental investigations, this project aims to investigate
and establish the interrelationship of structure-processing-properties of Si
nanomeshes for stretchable devices. Key structure variables to investigate
include in-plane nanomesh pattern, out-of-plane materials stacking and sidewall
surface states, while main properties targeted are mechanical flexibility,
stretchability, and carrier transport mobilities. The project then achieves Si
nanomeshes with desired mesh patterns through viable top-down approaches, prints
and fabricates sidewall engineered Si-nanomesh based stretchable devices. A set
of combined optical and electrical characterizations systematically investigate
the properties of sidewall-engineered Si nanomeshes under stretching and
scaling. Besides potential applications for high-performance stretchable
electronics, this semiconductor nanomesh concept provides a new platform for
materials engineering, and is expected to yield a new family of stretchable
materials having tunable electronic and optoelectronic properties with
customized nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.