* 1905392
* Southeastern Regional Robert Noyce Conference: Removing Barriers in STEM Teacher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Madhuri Mulekar, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,499,897.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), the
Southeastern Regional Noyce Conference aims to serve the national need of
strengthening the network of STEM preservice teachers, early career teachers,
and STEM teacher educators. The project has the potential to advance teachers'
STEM content knowledge, as well as their knowledge of effective teaching
practices. This professional development can help the teachers better meet the
needs of their students. The conference can also contribute to the efficacy of
Noyce projects and the ability of the awardees to sustain the activities beyond
the award period. The conference will include activities that address vital
concerns of early career educators in mathematics and science, including
infusing STEM concepts into the curriculum and understanding of diverse needs
and cultural competency. The conference will engage participants in professional
development specific to the needs of their content area. Additionally, the
conference will provide opportunities for community development and mentorship,
and thus have the potential to promote teaching improvement and psychosocial
wellbeing among early career educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southeastern
Regional Noyce Conference, hosted by the University of South Alabama, aims to
provide participants with a deeper understanding of the content and pedagogy
that supports STEM learning for students from low-resourced and high poverty
areas, resulting in empowering participants to meet the needs of all students.
Each year of the three-year project, the conference will serve approximately 300
members of the Noyce community. Ongoing project activities that will supplement
conference efforts include research experiences for regional Noyce scholars and
in-service teachers, formation of a community of Noyce regional PIs and
scholars/fellows through the Noyce buddy program, and cultural competence and
awareness professional development. The Southeast region includes 10 states:
Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Georgia, Florida, South Carolina, North
Carolina, Virginia, and Tennessee. Potential benefits to society include
equipping Noyce scholars with knowledge and experiences, as they develop into
teachers, so that they can improve the educational experiences of thousands of
children. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.