* 1905651
* Ultra-short-period superlattices of half-metallic and semiconducting Heusler alloys by combinatorial molecular beam epitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Frank Tsui, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2024
* USD 341,848.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is to investigate novel
synthesis and characterization of artificially structured layered compounds for
the science and applications of information technologies. The artificial layered
compounds (ALC) consist of 4 to 7 elements tailored atomic layer by atomic layer
thus forming nanoscale chemical compounds that are not available in nature or by
other known synthesis methods. They correspond to a new archetype of
ferromagnetic materials, which can be engineered to possess novel tunable
electronic and magnetic functionalities desired for future quantum information
technologies. The research will be focused on exploring the synthesis and
characterization of the ALC, investigating the atomic scale structures, and
probing the electronic and magnetic properties. The objectives are to realize
the ALC with the desired properties and functionalities, elucidate the nature
and interplay between structures and properties, and develop means to control
and fine-tune these properties through atomic scale synthesis. The potential
impact is significant, because the work can establish a pathway for realizing
and controlling the electronic and magnetic effects in a new class of materials.
The work will not only explore novel materials that can be readily integrated
into today's silicon-based technologies, but also can lead to general
understanding of the fundamental processes in these complex artificial
materials. Education is another key objective of the work. Students will be
trained in a wide range of interdisciplinary cutting-edge activities from
synthesis to characterization, while the individuals will specialize in several
state-of-the-art techniques. These areas are of critical importance
scientifically and technologically, especially for future advanced technologies,
and in order to maintain the leadership role of the US in these areas,
investments in human resources and expertise are critically needed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is to investigate novel MBE synthesis and characterization of ultra-
short-period (USP) superlattices (SLs) consisting of half-metallic and
semiconducting Heusler compounds on Si/Ge substrates. USP (defined as one to two
primitive-cell size of the constituent compounds) corresponds to a new archetype
of ferromagnetic SLs. Such an archetype enables non-equilibrium engineering of
band structures and interfacial states but has not been explored experimentally.
The aim is to realize more robust and tunable ferromagnetic half-metals (HMs)
accompanied by a large and tunable uniaxial perpendicular magnetic anisotropy
(PMA). This combination of functionalities and tunability is not present in any
currently known materials but is extremely desirable for future quantum
information technologies. The research will be focused on exploring the MBE
synthesis and characterization, investigating the structural and chemical order,
and probing the electronic states, spin polarization, and magnetism. The
objectives are to realize robust and tunable ferromagnetic HMs in SLs with at
least one non-HM constituent, and elucidate the nature of the minority spin gap
and related phenomena, realize PMA in the all Heusler SLs, and elucidate the
nature and interplay between structure, magnetism, and interfacial states, and
develop means to control and fine-tune spin-dependent states and magnetic
anisotropy. The potential impact of the work is significant, because it can
establish a pathway for realizing and controlling spin polarized effects and
magnetism in Si-compatible epitaxial systems. The work will not only explore
novel spin polarized materials that can be readily integrated onto Si-based
platform, but also can lead to general understanding of fundamental processes in
these complex artificial materials. Education is another key objective of the
work. Students will be trained in a wide range of interdisciplinary activities
from synthesis to characterization, while the individuals will specialize in
several advanced techniques. These areas are of critical importance
scientifically and technologically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.