* 1905818
* Determination of Fundamental Structure-Topology-Morphology-Properties for Naturally-derived Recyclable Polymer Materials Designed to Address Environmental and Societal Challenges
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Karen Wooley, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global plastics pollution
problem is at a critical point. Polymer materials (plastics) impact society in
everyday products that facilitate safety, health and welfare, and also beauty,
pleasure and convenience. Although some plastic materials are meant to be
durable and possess long-term stability (e.g. tires, plastic parts for
automobiles, helmets, etc.), the full polymer life cycle should be considered
during the initial design stages, to incorporate mechanisms for recyclability
once the function of the material has been completed. The negative environmental
effects of plastic accumulation and persistence are becoming of increasing
importance. The expected broad impact of this work will be in the advancement of
naturally-derived polymer materials that are designed to possess complexities
that allow for them to exhibit unique properties, and have in-built mechanisms
for their depolymerization and recycling. A focus will be upon constructing the
materials to behave as super-absorbent and tough hydrogels, and rigorous studies
will be conducted to determine the effectiveness of the polymer materials to
meet needs associated with global water resource challenges, and technological
challenges of reducing friction, biofouling, and ice formation. Significant
outcomes of this work are expected to be an advanced knowledge and awareness by
future generations of scientists who will consider the full life cycle of the
technologies that they develop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART
2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective is to conduct
fundamental studies that lead to advanced understanding of the composition-
structure-topology-morphology effects for dual covalently and non-covalently
(supramolecularly) crosslinked polymer materials, with an interest in developing
mechanically-robust functional polymers that are derived from natural feedstocks
and designed to exhibit hydrogel, anti-fouling, anti-icing, pollutant
sequestering and other behaviors for diverse applications that address societal
challenges, while also being recyclable to limit adverse environmental impacts
of the materials long-term. Glucose will serve as the primary building block
from which topologically-complex slide-ring polymer networks will be
constructed, having both covalent and supramolecular interactions to result in
dynamic, mechanically-robust hydrogel behaviors, with further extension to
polymeric high internal phase emulsion (polyHIPE) materials for superabsorbency
and high porosity. Fundamental studies will be performed to determine the
properties of the intact materials, followed by investigation of their
intentional depolymerization-based recyclability and long-term hydrolytic
degradability. It is hypothesized that systematic investigation of networks that
combine components of covalent linkages, supramolecular host-guest interactions,
slide-ring topology and polyHIPE morphology will enhance the fundamental
understanding of composition-structure-topology-morphology-properties
relationships and lead to advanced materials that are capable of ultra-high
water uptake kinetics and capacity, while exhibiting dynamic, responsive
physicochemical and mechanical behaviors for broad applications. Importantly,
techniques to build such materials from naturally-sourced feedstocks and with
in-built depolymerization and disassembly routes will be developed to advance
sustainability and recyclability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.