* 1905066
* Solution-Grown Ternary Dichalcogenides: Toward Earth-Abundant Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Javier Vela, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,409.00

Semiconductors are key to many technological applications including energy
conversion, telecommunications, and light emitting devices. Unfortunately, many
semiconductors contain toxic elements, such as lead or arsenic, while others
contain relatively scarce elements or elements that are found only in specific
regions on the Earth. With the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry, Professor Javier
Vela at Iowa State University investigates Earth-abundant semiconductors that
could have useful properties for the generation of electricity from varied
sources, ranging from sunlight to waste heat recycling. In addition to improving
sustainability, this project aims to broaden participation by recruiting and
training the next generation of highly qualified and diverse scientists.
Internships for students from a Historically Black College and University (HBCU)
and a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), and participation in the Iowa State
University's Science Bound and Preparing Future Faculty programs help advance
basic research and education while addressing major societal
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objectives of this grant are to
develop the colloidal synthesis of NaBiE2 (E=S, Se) semiconductors, unveil the
surface chemistry of NaBiE2 nanoparticles, and investigate structure-property
relationships of NaBiE2 semiconductors and their devices. Synergy between
spectroscopy and computations enables direct observation of the lowest energy
superstructures that result from the mixed cation sites in the rock salt
lattice. By unlocking a new class of low cost and environmentally friendly
ternary semiconductors, this research leads to vertical improvements in the
fundamental understanding and practical application of these compounds. This
understanding helps advance the chemical knowledge of nanoscopic structures,
their surface chemistry, and functionalization. In this way, this research
promotes sustainability through transformative approaches to nanomaterials
synthesis using Earth-abundant elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.