* 1905963
* Chemical Mechanisms of Inorganic Phototropic Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Nathan Lewis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 540,000.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;Controlled patterning of materials is
important for semiconductor integrated circuit fabrication, 3-D electronics,
advanced functional biomaterials, optical materials, and catalyst supports. In
this project, jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and
Electronic and Photonic Materials Programs in the Division of Materials
Research, Professor Nathan S. Lewis of the California Institute of Technology
seeks to develop and exploit a fundamental understanding of inorganic
phototropic growth. In conventional lithography, materials grow where light is
present, whereas in phototropic growth, the materials grow toward the light
source. By manipulating the wavelength, intensity, and polarization of the light
beams provided by sources as simple as ordinary light bulbs or LEDs, inorganic
phototropic growth can spontaneously produce complex, self-organized nanoscale
patterns that can be controlled in three dimensions in real time. Such
scientific research is foundational to national competitiveness in materials
research, information, optical-communications, nanotechnology, and chemical-
sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet the objective of this project, the Lewis
Group is exploring the range of materials that exhibit inorganic phototropic
growth, examining the generality of the phenomenon by expanding phototropic
reactivity to light-induced controlled etching of materials, and using
phototropic growth to create materials with unique three-dimensional properties.
The experimental work is being integrated with modeling and simulation to
develop a mechanistic understanding of inorganic phototropic growth. The
research will be integrated with solar energy and materials-discovery outreach
programs led by Caltech, specifically the Juice from Juice and Project SEAL
hands-on science modules for use at the high-school level throughout the
country, with special emphasis on school districts comprising underrepresented
groups and diverse student populations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Nathan S. Lewis of the California
Institute of Technology is examining the mechanisms underlying inorganic
phototropic growth, i.e., the production of spontaneous, self-organized
mesostructures aligned along the direction of a polarized, incoherent, uniform
intensity light beam during electrodeposition of semiconductors. The
morphologies are determined by the inherent optical response of the electronic
processes within semiconductors stimulated by the tunable properties (e.g.
wavelength, polarization, and direction) of the light present during the
electrodeposition. The process is adaptive: if the light is moved or otherwise
changed, subsequent growth adapts to the changed conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, this phenomenon has been demonstrated
experimentally only for amorphous or polycrystalline chalcogen and chalcogenide
materials. This project will investigate whether inorganic phototropic growth
can be extended to other materials and how lattice structures and optoelectronic
properties influence the mechanisms of inorganic phototropic growth. The work
will also investigate how substrate-electrolyte interfaces affect the early-
stage development of the ordered nanostructures by studying nucleation of Se-Te
alloys on substrates with varied electronic properties. In addition, phototropic
growth will be exploited to design and synthesize complex three-dimensionally
structured materials with desired functionality, such as chiral metamaterials
and plasmonic materials with tailored optoelectronic properties. The
experimental observations will be used in conjunction with development of a
mechanistic simulation tool that combines full-wave electromagnetic calculations
with Monte-Carlo-based mass addition to predict the structures produced by
phototropic growth of a variety of semiconductors under arbitrary optical
inputs. This project is jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry and Electronic and Photonic Materials Programs in the Division of
Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.