* 1905675
* Engineering Cytoskeletal Active Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Zev Bryant, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 565,882.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Living organisms spontaneously
execute complex shape changes and motions. These properties are enabled by the
unique materials within biological organisms. Many of the biological molecules,
some of which have the capability to act as molecular motors to convert chemical
energy into mechanical work. When these motors work in concert, they build
fluids and solids with internal forces that spontaneously flow and change shape.
In this proposal, the investigators will use molecular engineering to create
synthetic molecular motors not found in nature with the goal to discover new
types of behaviors and control over active materials. This work will enable new
classes of materials that can recapitulate behaviors of living cells, including
directed motion and division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of this proposal is to
engineer active soft materials whose structure, mechanics and transport
properties can be controlled by tuning the activity of constituents. Active
materials constitute a broad class of systems that contain distributed stress-
generating elements which underlie their spontaneous motion, pattern formation
and shape changes. Within living cells, ensembles of mechanochemically active
proteins support morphogenic processes at cellular and tissue scales with
precise spatiotemporal control. A common structural motif of cytoskeletal
materials are collections of biopolymers and molecular motors (e.g. actin
filaments with myosin motors and microtubules with kinesin motors). The proposed
work will exploit recent advances in molecular motor engineering to construct
active materials with controllable sources of active stress that can be
spatiotemporally modified. This will enable understanding of how molecular-scale
properties of mechanoenzymes regulate the emergent biophysical and material
behaviors of the resultant contractile gels and extensile fluids. The work
proposed here will develop versatile new experimental platforms to engineer and
study spatially structured active materials. Applications of this work is
envisioned to construct new classes of autonomous and force-sensitive materials.
Moreover, these studies will shed light on the materials design principles
properties that underlie cell motility, division and shape. The broader impacts
of this work will create new knowledge at the interface between materials
science, synthetic biology and cell biology, train an interdisciplinary work
force and improve diversity in the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.