* 1905142
* Garden State LSAMP Bridges to the Doctorate at Rutgers University, Newark
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Barry Komisaruk, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on PhD matriculation and completion.
BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher education
contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2018-2022 Strategic
Plan, namely to "foster the growth of a more capable and diverse research
workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the Nation." The
vision of this grant is to provide a national model to produce underrepresented
scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
performance site for this LSAMP BD Activity is Rutgers University, Newark, one
of the eight college and universities included in the Garden State Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (GSLSAMP). The project will recruit a cohort
of 12 qualified LSAMP fellows and support them financially, academically and
socially through their graduate program using an innovative flexible structure
that is individualized to the desires and needs of the fellow. In addition to
providing substantial financial support to enable students to focus full time on
graduate-level course work and research, the project provides an integrated set
of best practices designed to advance BD students toward completion of doctoral
level studies. The best practices include tracking/monitoring, critical point
interventions, Graduate Research Fellowship Program and other support workshops,
bridge-to-the-bridge orientation, post-doctoral application workshops and
others. The optional activities include opportunities with the Minority
Biomedical Research Support program, GSLSAMP, the Newark STEAM coalition
ecosystem and the wealth of professional, educational, outreach and research
STEM opportunities in the New York metropolitan area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.