* 1905239
* Photochemical Reactions of Particulate Mercury Species at the Water-Particle Interface in Aquatic Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Kevin O'Shea, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 424,189.00

In this project, Drs. Yong Cai, Guangliang Liu, and Kevin O'Shea at the Florida
International University are funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences
Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry to study the reactions of mercury (Hg)
that is associated with particles in aquatic environments. These particulate Hg
species (pHg) are very common in natural waters, and they are often thought of
as unreactive and not very mobile. However, they do react under the influence of
sunlight (photochemical reactions) and need to be considered for an accurate
description of Hg cycling, especially the air-water exchange of Hg. This project
aims to provide a basic understanding of these photochemical reactions and
explore the role of pHg in the air-water Hg exchange. The project has a broad
range of benefits to research, education, and outreach at a Hispanic Serving
Institution. It provides training for PhD and undergraduate students.
Underrepresented minority students gain research experience. The curriculum
development of the unique Environmental Chemistry-focused PhD track program is
being enhanced. The project also promotes public awareness on Hg contamination
and health risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the aquatic particles are
semiconducting and photosensitizing in nature, the investigators focus on the
photochemical reactions of pHg involving electron-hole pairs and reactive oxygen
species. They define the reaction pathways of pHg phototransformations and
quantify the kinetics of photochemical reduction of oxidized Hg species and the
oxidation of elemental pHg. They also study the mechanisms related to the pHg
photoreactions. Experiments using model iron, titanium, and manganese oxide
particles of different band gap energies and field-collected particles are
combined with quantum chemistry calculations. The bandgap energies analysis uses
spectrometric measurements. Particle chemical composition and optical properties
are determined using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) and
scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The analysis of elemental and oxidized Hg in
the dissolved and particulate phases is based on an isotope dilution, purge and
trap, thermal desorption, and ICP-MS method. The research is expected to clarify
the involvement of pHg species in Hg photochemical transformation and the role
in air-water Hg exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.