* 1905334
* Broadband Two-Photon Absorption Spectroscopy for High-Repetition-Rate Lasers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Christopher Elles, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 01/31/2024
* USD 397,788.00

Broadband Two-Photon Absorption Spectroscopy for High-Repetition Rate Lasers
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Christopher Elles and his group
at the University of Kansas are working to develop and implement new laser-based
methods to measure and characterize the properties of molecules. The activation
of molecules using intense laser pulses has important applications in many
research fields, ranging from microscopic imaging of biological samples to the
development of high-density optical data storage media. However, the best
methods currently available for these applications are only accessible to
research groups with specialized technical expertise, which are not necessarily
the groups who make the materials. Working with both graduate and undergraduate
students, Professor Elles is developing new techniques and instrumentation that
will make these sophisticated measurements more widely accessible to the
research community. By simplifying the process for characterizing the properties
of laser-activated molecules, this work enables more rapid development of new
compounds and new technologies, including diagnostic and therapeutic biomedical
applications. The project also includes an integrated educational outreach
program to help current and future high school science teachers develop new
teaching materials that incorporate key concepts from contemporary research and
address the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team is developing more widely accessible methods for measuring
broadband two-photon absorption (2PA) spectra using high-repetition rate
femtosecond lasers. Current methods to measure 2PA spectra, including z-scan and
two-photon excited fluorescence (2PEF), are limited to single-wavelength
measurements and are not easily implemented by groups that do not specialize in
nonlinear spectroscopy. To overcome these limitations, the group is working to
design an integrated, one-box spectrometer that can be coupled with any existing
femtosecond pulsed laser system to quickly and easily obtain accurate 2PA
spectra, providing a valuable new tool for molecular spectroscopy. The team is
working to develop new capabilities that include accurate absolute 2PA cross-
sections, single-shot data acquisition, and on-the-fly imaging of 2PA
spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.