* 1905990
* Molecular Spin Qubits in a One-Dimensional Host
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Xuedan Ma, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 479,649.00

A rule of thumb for modern computer technology is that approximately every two
years, the number of transistors on a microprocessor chip doubles. This rate of
improvement is described by Moore's Law, and has started to falter for a variety
of reasons. One new paradigm that may permit continued rapid growth is quantum
computing. Quantum computing exploits the laws of quantum mechanics and may
solve certain problems that are essentially intractable with conventional
computers. The key fundamental unit in a quantum computer is the so called
quantum bit (or qubit), in analogy to the classical binary bit. This research
aims to understand electron spins in low-dimensional materials and develop a new
type of qubit based on these electron spins. A close collaboration between the
two universities in this project helps promote partnership between the
institutions. This research activity provides interdisciplinary training for the
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers involved in this project in the
areas of material science, quantum optics, and nanophotonics. It also serves as
an exciting opportunity for the training of our next-generation workforce in
quantum information science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spin of a single electron
is a natural candidate for qubits due to its capability to store and process
quantum information. A key challenge in operating an electron spin as a
functional qubit is to turn on and off its coupling to the external environment
with full control. By establishing a spin-photon interface in the qubit
materials, it is possible to efficiently manipulate and readout the spin states
using optical techniques. This approach has been successfully implemented in
studying several types of naturally occurring defect qubits in bulk materials.
To move beyond spin qubits in bulk materials and allow design and control of the
qubit systems on the atomic scale, the research team adopts a bottom-up approach
to develop molecular spin qubits integrated in low dimensional materials. The
full synthetic control of the molecular qubits enables effective tuning of their
electronic structures. Molecular design and composition control also allow
addressing physical processes that drive spin decoherence. Combining first-
principle theory calculations and experimental studies, this research aims to
develop a new type of molecular spin qubits that interface optical photons. The
material platform established in this research advances understanding of
chemistry-enabled qubits and their application in quantum
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.