* 1905108
* Collaborative Research: Verification Mentoring Workshop at Computer Aided Verification 2019-2021
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Roopsha Samanta, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 04/30/2024
* USD 66,800.00

This grant will enable students to attend the Verification Mentoring Workshop
(VMW 2019) which will be co-located with the International Conference on
Computer Aided Verification (CAV), to be held in New York City, July 23-26,
2019. CAV is one of the premier conferences in computer science, dedicated to
the advancement of the theory and practice of computer-aided formal analysis
methods for hardware and software systems. The purpose of Verification Mentoring
Workshop is to provide mentoring and career advice to early-stage graduate
students, to attract them to pursue research careers in the area of computer-
aided verification. Funded students will benefit greatly from the opportunity to
engage in the critical technical, professional, and social exchanges that both
conferences foster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer-aided verification covers a
broad range of applications, from ensuring the correctness and safety of
computer systems, to improving design and development productivity. The funded
students will attend CAV, a top conference where they will learn about current
research problems and interact with leaders in the field, and the VMW workshop
which will focus on mentoring and career advice specific to early-stage graduate
students who aim to pursue research careers in the area of computer-aided
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.