* 1905362
* Graphene Nanoribbons Through Directed Self-Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Yves Rubin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

Professor Yves F. Rubin of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
University of California-Los Angeles is supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Division of Chemistry to
develop a novel synthetic approach for the preparation of graphene nanoribbons
from small organic molecule starting materials using only light and heat. The
project addresses a unique synthesis method which promises to expand the toolbox
for polymeric and two-dimensional materials while creating a variety of graphene
nanoribbons of controlled compositions and widths. Graphene is one of the
thinnest and strongest materials known. It exhibits excellent electricity and
heat conduction and light absorption properties. This project addresses the
challenges and limitations of preparing graphene nanoribbons with various
chemical groups incorporated during the fabrication of the next generation of
nanoelectronic devices and technologically important applications. The students
involved in the project are trained in organic synthesis, material
characterization and device fabrication. A student exchange program with the
Department of Materials Science and Engineering at UC Merced (an Hispanic
serving institution) promotes research collaborations that are beneficial to a
diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students from both institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project offers a new approach to making graphene
nanoribbons with structures that would otherwise be difficult to access using
currently-available, bottom-up synthesis methodologies. The approach utilizes
the topochemical polymerization of 1,4-diarylbutadiyne monomers to build the
corresponding polydiacetylenes, which are then converted thermally to graphene
nanoribbons in a separate, quantitative step via a series of cyclizations and
dehydrogenations. This approach has a strong advantage in that the graphene
nanoribbon synthesis can be carried out without the use of any reagent other
than light and heat. The availability of a number of self-associating
1,4-diarylbutadiynes, including heterocyclics, assures the creation of a variety
of graphene nanoribbons of controlled compositions and widths varying between
0.5 - 2.0 nm, depending on the alkyne precursor used. The project resolves one
of the synthetic challenges for preparing graphene nanoribbons by completely
removing external chemicals during the two main chemical transformations
involved in the synthesis, thus allowing for the preparation of graphene
nanoribbons in situ in electronic devices. The sought-after graphene nanoribbon
products are expected to have properties similar to silicon with bandgaps
varying between 0.5 and 2.5 eV, depending on nanoribbon composition, structure
and width.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.