* 1905737
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Jammed granular matter within networks of pins: Structure, elasticity, plasticity and rheology under shear
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Brian Utter, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 11/30/2023
* USD 284,901.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Granular Materials are ubiquitous in daily
life. By “granular” one means not only hard objects like salt, rice, or sand;
but also soft objects like bubbles, and living entities like cells and
pedestrians. Dense granular materials can behave dramatically by clogging,
avalanching, or suddenly solidifying into a disordered “jammed” structure. This
research project asks the question: How do these phenomena manifest themselves
when the grains are in contact with a fixed framework? In this research, the
framework is a lattice of diminutive obstacles, or “pins”. (In two dimensions,
one might think of the pins in a Pachinko game.) Pins influence both when a
sudden transition occurs in a granular packing, and the structure and dynamics
of the jammed solid which forms. Beyond its theoretical interest, this project
has applications like utilizing obstacles for the prevention of jamming of
particles or people; and making new jammed materials which are more elastic and
less bulky. The influence of pins on the material’s structure and dynamics is
studied both with experiments as well as computer simulations. The principal
investigators are four faculty members, with an experimental and a computational
physicist at each one of two institutions which offer only undergraduate degrees
in physics. Their students work directly with faculty to experience
computational and/or experimental research in a field that is both theory-rich
and highly practical. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Packings of granular materials, as for example in industrial
supply lines or in living organisms, exhibit striking changes in structural or
flowing behavior such as abrupt rearrangements, collapses and sudden blockading
of channels. Such changes are due to geometrical frustration, as grains
experience clogging and jamming transitions. Deformation and flow are largely
determined by system-spanning force networks, which broker a compromise between
external forces and torques, confinement, and internal granular interactions.
While there have been many studies of dense granular matter, there have been few
on the rheology of granular systems which include an effect reminiscent of
confinement: frozen degrees of freedom in the form of localized pinning sites
internal to the system. This project, which addresses critical, open questions
on spatial correlations of stress and flow fields, is a systematic study of how
the presence of such pins, either in the form of a lattice or a disordered array
(hence, quenched order or disorder) influences structure and flow. Activities of
the principal investigators include determining the phase diagram for this novel
order/disorder transition; calculating elastic moduli, local stress fields and
parameters characterizing the force network as influenced by pinning geometry;
use of particle-scale tracking to describe packing structure and kinematics due
to microscopic rearrangements under shear; and first steps toward extending
these insights to active granular matter. The work entails both numerical
simulation and experiments through a collaboration between four investigators at
two primarily undergraduate institutions. Experiments involve planar, simple,
and Couette shear using two-dimensional assemblies of photoelastic
grains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.