* 1905701
* Expanding the MOF Toolkit to Access New Solid-State Functionality:  Porous Materials based on Phosphines, Arsines and Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2025
* Simon Humphrey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 837,205.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This research program, which is supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, involves the preparation and
studies of new porous materials, whose unique properties provide fundamental
advances for our future energy needs. Porous materials are critical in many
large-scale industrial applications, ranging from water purification to the
separation of the components of air, and from the capture of toxic chemicals to
the production of fuels. However, to make existing processes more efficient and
environmentally-friendly, it is essential to improve the properties of materials
that perform these functions. The Humphrey group at the University of Texas
Austin is working to design and synthesize new porous materials that can
incorporate a wide range of well-defined metal species inside their pores. At
present, chemically reactive metals cannot be easily or systematically
incorporated into most porous materials. Providing a general solution to this
problem leads to materials that can capture certain valuable chemical species
with greater selectivity and higher capacity. The research team comprised of the
PI, graduate students and undergraduate researchers works together to prepare
model materials, which are studied using state-of-the-art characterization tools
to obtain fundamental information about their properties. Throughout this
process, the research team collaborates with theoretical chemists and scientists
at beamline facilities to gain a deeper understanding of how structure can
affect function. This project integrates an innovative undergraduate educational
program, called the Austin-International Framework (AIF). The AIF provides a
fully immersive, scholarship-supported international exchange experience to UT
Austin undergraduate scientists; students are given the opportunity to broaden
their horizons by witnessing first-hand the global nature of science via a
semester of study and research in porous materials development at one of several
overseas universities of international acclaim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of this project, which is supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, is to prepare new
metal-organic framework (MOF) materials based on unexplored classes of ligands,
and to gain an in-depth understanding of their solid-state properties. The field
of MOF research continues to expand at an increasing rate, as new potential
applications of this novel class of porous materials are discovered. The
potential boundaries of MOF chemical complexity remain unknown. However,
advances in this regard are slow, restricted by the reliance of MOF discovery
using chemically similar organic components. The Humphrey group significantly
expands the MOF 'toolkit' by showing that phosphine, arsine and chalcogenide
ligands can impart genuinely new solid-state functionalities. The resulting MOF
micropores are decorated with structurally well-defined Lewis bases, which can
be exploited as post-synthetic attachment points for low-valent, low-coordinate
metal species that impart advanced solid-state functionalities (i.e., small
molecule chemisorption, chemical bond activation). In essence, the target MOFs
are crystalline, atomically-precise solid-state ligands. This is a challenging
project, but the resulting materials provide new avenues to systematically
incorporate a broad range of metal species of industrial relevance into uniquely
confined micro-pore environments. From a fundamental perspective, these
materials advance the frontiers of chemical reactivity in MOFs and provide ideal
models on which to perform detailed characterization studies pertaining to
stronger gas adsorption processes. From a technological perspective, new
materials that enable selective adsorption and activation of gases are important
for future applications in atmospheric remediation and the production of
renewable fuels. In addition to providing research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students at UT Austin, this project also integrates
an innovative undergraduate educational program, called the Austin-International
Framework (AIF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.