* 1905833
* Design and Characterization of Two-Dimensional Electron Gas with Strong Spin-Orbit Coupling Based on Transition Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Qi Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 427,856.00

Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the demands for faster and smaller
electronics, the challenge of power dissipation, finite size effects, and
several other factors places a serious limit on the future device
miniaturization. Spintronics, which utilizes the electron spins instead of
charges, has emerged as one of the candidates for the future generation of
electronics. Traditionally, spin current is generated by using magnetic
materials, which requires a magnetic field to manipulate its orientation. To
significantly reduce the power consumption and incorporating multi-
functionality, using an electric mean to control and manipulate spins is highly
desirable. Spin Hall effect, which is due to an effect called spin-orbit
coupling, can generate spin current from the charge current without using
magnetic materials. This effect is characterized by spin-charge conversion
efficiency which scales with the spin-orbit coupling strength in a material.
Recent experiments demonstrated an unprecedented efficiency of spin-charge
conversion in a two-dimensional electron gas system at a transition metal oxide
interface. This project aims to develop and study new two-dimensional electron
gases engineered at selected metal oxide interfaces with very large spin-orbit
coupling and high mobility. The research focuses on understanding the
fundamental quantum phenomena in relationship to interface engineering as well
as enhancing the spin-charge conversion efficiency. The project provides
scientific training for graduate and undergraduate students. The principle
investigator also seeks to continue the tradition to engage in several programs
specifically for recruiting and advising under-represented minority graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rashba spin-orbit
coupling is central to many emergent phenomena and has been actively explored
for spintronics as it can enable the generation of spin current from a charge
current through spin Hall effect. Recent demonstration of unprecedented
efficiency in spin-charge conversion in a SrTiO3 based interface two-dimensional
(2D) electron gas has put the oxide interfaces at the forefront for spin-
orbitronics. It is believed that the combined factors of Rashba effect and high
mobility has resulted in the very large effect, which exceeds that of
topological insulators, even though the spin-orbit coupling strength is not
large in the system. This project aims to develop high mobility and 2D
confinement of the electron gases with large Rashba effect from 5d transition
metal oxides with much larger spin-orbit coupling than that of SrTiO3 (3d
electrons) to achieve larger spin charge conversion efficiency. Furthermore,
novel magnetic and topological phases have been predicted in the (111)
orientation of 5d metal oxides which will be studied. Based on the preliminary
results of achieving electron gases at KTaO3 (001) based insulator interfaces,
2D electron gases with high mobility will be developed and studied in several
metal oxides through materials engineering. Quantum transport measurements will
be conducted at low temperature and high magnetic fields to probe the details of
the band structures, Rashba splitting, and exotic phases. Spin current
generation and detection using spin Hall and inverse spin Hall effect and spin
diffusion length will be studied. Spin charge interconversion in oxide electron
gases can work at room temperature and gate tunable, making it one of the most
promising materials for spin-orbitronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.