* 1905853
* Real Time Quantification of Diffusion and Alloying in Atomically Thin Capillaries
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Eric Stach, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical description: Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been the subject
of intense scientific investigation as their atomically thin nature leads to a
wide variety of novel optical and electronic properties. While numerous
fundamental physical property investigations and device demonstrations have been
performed, there is still a significant knowledge gap in understanding how
relevant processing and operation conditions such as structural confinement
(encapsulation), high temperature and large current flows affect their structure
and performance. Such conditions are commonly encountered during high
performance device operation in modern microelectronics. Understanding these
properties is therefore critical for understanding the alloying and doping,
heterojunction and contact formation, as well as electrical and thermal failure.
This project helps understand the fundamental thermodynamic processes and
transformations that these materials undergo under extreme physical confinement
and temperatures by direct visualization and spectroscopic analysis with an
electron beam inside an electron microscope. These experiments are then coupled
with nanoscale optical imaging techniques to correlate the structural
transformations with optical and electronic property changes. These
investigations advance our fundamental knowledge, and help frame design rules
for synthesis, processing and device operation considerations. This project also
includes next generation workforce preparation by training graduate students in
forefront materials synthesis, state of the art microscopy and optical
spectroscopy. It also entails workforce development for undergraduate students
via the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center's research experience
for undergraduate student program. Finally, the research outcomes, and
specifically interactive models, are disseminated to the broader public via
public lectures, science outreach activities and undergraduate as well as
graduate class room education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The
research goals of this project is to investigate structural phase
transformations and diffusion phenomena in van der Waals layered two-dimensional
chalcogenide systems. A combination of near-field optical spectroscopy and in-
situ transmission electron microscopy methods, combined with unique sample
preparation on pre-patterned substrates are used to investigate the impact of
structural confinement, current and temperature. The samples are prepared via
mechanical exfoliaton and stacking, as well as via chemical vapor deposition
growth. The work exploits the ability to layer atomically-thin layers of these
chalcogenides and their vertical heterostructures and then encapsulate them in
inert and refractory layers such as graphite or boron nitride. In addition, the
ability to laterally stitch and grow in-plane heterostructures via chemical
vapor deposition further permits investigation of in-plane diffusion and
segregation upon passage of current or upon heating to elevated temperatures
both with and without encapsulation. To investigate the structural evolution,
high-frame rate image acquisition is used in-situ to produce quantitative data
from electron micrograph images. Since the structural evolutions and in-
homogeneities are expected to be on a sub-visible light wavelength scale,
nanoscale, tip-enhanced optical photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopy is used
to correlate them with in-situ electron microscopy data. These experiments allow
quantitative understanding of how 2D chalcogenides and their heterostructures
evolve under physical confinement, high current density and high temperatures,
all relevant for high-performance device operation. These experiments allow
further assessment of the mechanisms of diffusion and phase transformations
processes at these extreme conditions and their impact on optoelectronic
performance which provides insight into strategies to engineer both materials
and devices for robust and high performance operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.