* 1905751
* Measuring the Dynamics of Excitons in 1D Semiconductor Quantum Wires with Quantum State Resolution
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Richard Loomis, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical Description: In photovoltaic (PV) devices it would be ideal for
every photon that impinges on the device to be absorbed and for at least one
electron and one hole to be separately collected as current and electricity with
little or no loss of energy within the system, regardless of the color of light
or energy of the photon absorbed. PV devices that incorporate semiconductor
nanoparticles (NPs) as the absorbing medium offer the advantages of tunable
absorption energies through size control and large absorption efficiencies. When
light with energy in excess of the band gap of the semiconductor NPs is
absorbed, the photogenerated electrons and holes relax down to the lowest-energy
states. The efficiency for the charge carrier relaxation depends on numerous
factors, including the densities of electron and hole states, the roles and
rates of different energy-transfer mechanisms, the temperature, and the chemical
environment of the NPs. The research team is synthesizing NPs with varying
sizes, shapes, semiconductor materials, and chemically passivated surfaces.
Several optical spectroscopy and microscopy techniques are being implemented,
and new models are being developed to characterize the relaxation dynamics in
the semiconductor NPs. The ultimate goals of the research activities are to not
only characterize the relaxation dynamics of the carriers, but to develop novel
nanostructures with properties that are optimal for the light-to-electricity
conversion of PV devices. The research project is highly interdisciplinary, and
graduate and undergraduate students, especially those from underrepresented
backgrounds, are gaining the expertise needed to become the next generation of
scientists. The educational mission of the principal investigator extends beyond
the research team as educational videos on the physics of light and on the
importance of alternative energy sources are being developed and disseminated to
the public and local schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The
relaxation dynamics and efficiencies of photogenerated electrons and holes in
semiconductor nanoparticles (NPs) ultimately limit the yields of photovoltaic
devices that incorporate NPs as the absorbing medium. The goals of the research
are to accurately characterize the intraband relaxation dynamics (IRD) and
mechanisms for carrier relaxation in semiconductor NPs. Specific research
activities that include nanoparticle synthesis, electron microcopy and imaging,
and optical spectroscopy in both the time- and frequency-domains are
characterizing the IRD of the electrons and holes. The team is paying particular
attention to the roles of dimensionality and the densities of states on the
rates and efficiencies of electron and hole relaxation to the band edge.
Carriers in one-dimensional semiconductor quantum wires (QWs) and belts (QBs)
can have translational kinetic energy and delocalization along their lengths.
This dimensionality gives rise to a continuum of states that can be accessed
during carrier relaxation. These one-dimensional NPs contrast those of widely
studied zero-dimensional quantum dot (QD) and two-dimensional quantum platelet
(QP) systems. Time-resolved transient absorption experiments are performed on
NPs with contrasting dimensionality to identify the role of the states, kinetic
energy, and momentum on the carrier IRD. A new model, quantum-state
renormalization is being developed to help unravel the dynamics from complicated
transient absorption spectra recorded on ensembles of the NPs. The efforts are
complemented through a long-standing collaboration with the synthetic group of
William E. Buhro (Wash. U.) and a new collaboration with the ultrafast
spectroscopy group of Martin Zanni (U. Wisconsin).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.