* 1905986
* Optical Spin Orientation and Transport in Layered Mono- and Di-Chalcogenide Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Nathaniel Stern, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,114.00

Non-technical description: Electronic devices for computing logic are
traditionally based on the charge of electrons, but as scaling this technology
becomes increasingly difficult due to heat and size constraints, new physical
systems are necessary for improving logic devices. One possibility to tackle
this problem is to utilize an electron's "spin" rather than its charge, which
requires less energy and produces less heat. Translating this approach to
emerging nano-scale materials is likely to reveal approaches for miniaturized
low-power spin-based electronics functioning at the smallest length scales
possible. This research focuses on understanding how to orient and transport
spin and spin-analogs in nanomaterial systems that harness the advantages of the
ultimate atomic-scale limit of single layered crystals. These efforts could have
broad impact by making the advantages of layered atomically-thin materials
available to spin-based devices, thereby helping to smooth adoption of these
exciting materials for nano-scale technologies that surpass the functionality of
existing well-understood bulk systems. The supported activities facilitate
mentoring of the next generation scientific workforce fluent with the
intersection of optics, quantum materials, and nano-science. This research
integrates into pedagogical improvements to curriculum that promote scientific
interest and enthusiasm for diverse students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The ability to use light to orient spins and induce spin currents
has been a key tool in the study of spintronics in bulk materials. By studying
several classes of non-centrosymmetric crystals that are already known to
support spin-related phenomena, this research translates the advantages of
optical methods used in three-dimensional spintronics to reveal novel effects in
low dimensions. Going beyond previous work exploiting light to control spin,
this project investigates several unanswered questions, including (i) how
optically-excited spin transport evolves over low-dimensional interfaces, and
(ii) can the non-centrosymmetric crystals common in two-dimensional materials
enhance the ability to control optically-induced information. To address these
questions, this research explores spin orientation and transport phenomena using
two distinct, but complementary, approaches. The first theme exploits the unique
atomic-scale interfacial and heterostructure capabilities of layered van der
Waals materials to understand spin-valley currents. This activity aims to
measure interface effects of the valley Hall effect in opto-electronic devices.
The second thematic direction of this research explores predictions of favorable
spin properties in few-layer mono-chalcogenides that suggest suitability of this
material class for traditional optical spin orientation methods. This theme aims
to measure optically-induced spin dynamics in indium selenide and control
transfer of spin polarization between electron and nuclear spin ensembles.
Research carried out toward these goals advances understanding of spin transport
and optical orientation and expands the tools available for spin manipulation in
two-dimensional materials, thereby creating opportunities for highly tailored
miniaturized opto-electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.