* 1905204
* Collaborative Research: Mechanism of Ste24, a Novel Integral Membrane Zinc Metalloprotease that Promotes Catalysis Within an Intramembrane Chamber
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Mark Distefano, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2023
* USD 342,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Drs. Christine Hrycyna from Purdue University and Mark
Distefano from the University of Minnesota to define how the yeast S. cerevisiae
integral membrane protein Ste24 functions. Ste24 is the founding member of a
novel class of membrane proteases, enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of
proteins; these reactions cleave the original proteins. What is unique to Ste24
is that it cleaves proteins at two different sites one after the other (rather
than cleaving the proteins at only one site as the majority proteases do) and it
only cleaves proteins that are attached to specific lipids. Ste24 is unique not
only in reactivity but also in structure; for example, in contrast to the other
of intramembrane proteases described to date, it has a large, water-filled,
intramembrane barrel-shaped reaction chamber that is capped at both ends. The
proposed studies examine how a substrate enters and exits the chamber of Ste24,
how it is being recognized, and how Ste24 mediates the proteolysis. This work
creates opportunities for graduate students to both understand the structure and
biochemical function of the Ste24 protease, as well as become versed in the use
of methods and tools for working with membrane proteins, studies of which are
central to an emerging frontier of science. Furthermore, the research program is
integrated with an outreach program that exposes high school students from
economically-disadvantaged backgrounds and their teachers to modern questions
and techniques in membrane protein biochemistry and molecular biology via
participation in hands-on research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
aims to understand the mechanism of action of Ste24 at the molecular level using
an array of novel chemical probes and biochemical methods. The manner in which
Ste24 binds and mediates the proteolysis of a-factor substrate precursors inside
the intramembrane chamber is determined using structure-guided mutagenesis,
enzymatic assays, synthetic peptide substrates and inhibitors, photoaffinity
substrate-analog probes, time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy, and
computational modeling. Furthermore, the research focuses on the identification
of which of the four large portals that lead to the interior of the chamber are
used for the entry and exit of a-factor from the enzyme using site-directed
mutagenesis and biochemical assays. These studies provide a better understanding
of the mechanism of action and substrate specificity of Ste24 and reveal new
fundamental properties unique to this conserved family of
proteases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.