* 1905862
* Negative Thermal Expansion Near Structural Quantum Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Jason Hancock, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 444,934.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The effect of thermal expansion can be seen
throughout the physical world in varied contexts, from sidewalk cracks to
icebergs. While all materials exhibit this basic property, the vast majority of
materials expand when heated. However, recent new material discoveries have
revealed cases of negative thermal expansion (NTE), a peculiar phenomenon of
heat-induced volume contraction. This team recently observed that strong NTE
occurs in some materials when more than one atomic lattice structure is stable
at very low temperatures. This circumstance is an example of a quantum phase
transition, where anomalous material behavior is often observed in different
contexts. This work is of general interest in the pursuit of exploiting quantum
properties of matter to advance technology and impact society. Research pursued
uses multiple experimental techniques including X-ray scattering and optical
spectroscopy to measure magnetic and electronic responses under various
conditions around structural Quantum Phase Transitions which exhibit NTE. The
research heavily involves undergraduate researchers who pursue independent
projects related to science and education while gaining exposure to research in
both university and national lab settings. New curricular reform efforts in
introductory physics courses will involve elementary quantum concepts taught at
the level of wave mechanics while rollout of a massive new educational reform
initiative commences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The
research activities of this award designed to explore the basic science of NTE
materials and address the apparent connection between NTE and structural quantum
phase transitions. This award supports a broad effort to explore this connection
and unusual physical effects in select NTE materials. Primary experimental
techniques include laser-based optical experiments to generate and measure sound
pulses, high resolution inelastic X-ray scattering, and magnetic susceptibility
on single crystals and powder samples of select NTE materials, incorporating
low-temperature strain control in some experiments. Additional aspects of the
project include creating opportunities for undergraduate student participation
in university- and national laboratory-based experimental condensed matter
research with additional options in physics education research related to a
redesign of calculus-based introductory physics courses. Metrics for a massive
implementation of a new studio-style physics teaching initiative are analyzed to
inform and direct best practices. In addition, hands-on demonstration tools
related to NTE are developed for students and by
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.