* 1905730
* Electrostatic Roles on Macromolecular Assemblies in Vision Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Murugappan Muthukumar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 451,265.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to see is the interface
between a human and the rest of his/her universe. This ability is often hampered
by malfunctioning of macromolecules and their assemblies which make up several
compartments of human eye. Examples include crystallin proteins in human lens
and hyaluronic acid-collagen composite gel in the vitreous of human eye. Despite
the enormous significance of knowing how these charged macromolecules behave in
the human eye, a fundamental understanding is lacking. The challenge arises from
variations in the sequences of the crystallin proteins and how they interact
among themselves via a combination of hydrophobic and electrostatic
interactions. In the case of vitreous, how the collagen molecules organize into
fibers inside a restrictive gel-like environment created by hyaluronic acid
matrix, is a new area for quantitative and fundamental investigation. The
Principal Investigator proposes to use a combination of synthesis, including
site-directed mutagenesis and chemical synthesis, computer modeling,
characterization techniques using light scattering, microscopy, and rheology,
and advanced polymer physics theories. One of the major components of the
proposed research is to mentor and build scientific foundation for the next
generation of scientists to pursue fundamental research in an area of tremendous
importance in getting rid of human
blindness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments and modeling are proposed to understand
the aggregation/disaggregation of crystallin proteins pertinent to human lens,
and the assembly of collagen bundles in hyaluronic acid matrixes pertinent to
human vitreous, using site-directed mutageneis, chemical synthesis, static and
dynamic light scattering, differential dynamic microscopy, rheology, and
computer modeling. Specifically, the proposal addresses (i) role of crystallin
protein sequences (synthesized by site-directed mutagenesis) on aggregation,
(ii) role of charge modification of crystallin proteins on
aggregation/disaggregation, (iii) nucleation and growth of collagen bundles, and
(iv) extent of heterogeneous distribution of collagen bundles inside hyaluronic
acid matrix. The proposed work aims at identifying fundamental principles behind
aggregation of large numbers of protein molecules in aqueous crowded
environments, based on conformational fluctuations and controllable modulations
of electrostatic forces. The proposed in vitro experiments will result in
insights on the macromolecular origins for required transparency to light in
human eye. Training students in this interdisciplinary area with a strong focus
on fundamental understanding is the strong educational component of the proposed
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.