* 1905822
* Understanding the Fundamental Deformation Processes of BCC Refractory High Entropy Alloys using Experimentally-Validated Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jaime Marian, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2022
* USD 432,084.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing new materials is at the
heart of technology advancements such as cellphones, earthquake-resistant
structures, or advanced satellites and space probes. One area where new
materials are sorely needed is that of energy generation based on standard steam
cycles. There, one way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is to increase the
thermodynamic efficiency of the plants. This can be done by developing materials
that can sustain higher operating temperatures than the current standard set by
nickel-based superalloys. High-entropy alloys are one such class of materials
that hold the promise of increasing the operating temperature by up to 300~500
degrees. High-entropy alloys are made up of four or more chemical elements
(specifically transition metal elements) in equal proportions, and thus have a
very complex chemistry. This project focuses on understanding the deformation
behavior and strength of these alloys at high temperatures using the most
advanced computational and experimental tools at the atomic scale. The goal is
to discover the mechanisms that make these systems strong at high temperature so
that we can design yet better alloys and use them to replace current materials
in power generation plants to increase their efficiency. For this, a diverse
group of students and scientists will be engaged, including women, latino
students from the Los Angeles area, and military veterans, which bring
discipline, focus, and familiarity with high-precision machinery and computers.
This project will be able to advance our goals towards reducing the carbon
footprint of existing power plants, and contribute to other applications such as
improved jet and rocket engines and safer nuclear power plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Refractory high entropy alloys (RHEA) are a class
of materials consisting of four or more refractory metal elements in equiatomic
proportions. These alloys show great promise for high temperature applications
due to their high strength and ductility in a wide temperature range,
potentially superior to even Ni-based superalloys. These systems usually
crystallize in a body-centered cubic (bcc) alloy, which suggests that their
plastic response is controlled by thermally activated motion of screw
dislocations. However, the high strength of these systems at high temperature
does not fit standard theories of lattice resistance and solid solution
hardening. In this project, a kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) model of screw
dislocation glide will be developed. The alloy will be represented as an
effective medium characterized by an atomic averaging of all the alloy elements,
and where each atom then is treated as a solute in this effective environment.
The project focuses on the NbMoTaW system as a representative RHEA. The
computational approaches will be validated using in-situ transmission electron
microscopy nanomechanical tests of single-crystal specimens, which will be used
to study the temperature, orientation and strain rate dependence of the alloy.
Ultimately, the tools developed under this proposal will be useful to assess how
refractory high entropy alloys deform as a function of temperature and strain
rate, with the goal of improving the high temperature behavior of these systems
and evaluating their potential to increase the efficiency of power plants. The
proposal contains a plan to involve both undergraduate students and students of
underrepresented minorities in the research activities. As well, the proposal
investigators will reach out to minority students and Armed Forces veterans
pursuing undergraduate degrees in science and engineering. The results of this
proposal will be used to enhance the content of several courses at UCLA where
dislocations, strengthening mechanisms, and metals plasticity are a central part
of the syllabus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.