* 1905550
* Pushing the limits of transmission electron microscopy of polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2025
* Enrique Gomez, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2025
* USD 854,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microscopic visualization at
the atomic and molecular scale is transforming the understanding of how organic
and inorganic materials organize and function. The tremendous advances in
electron microscopy instrumentation continue to push the limits of what is
possible, even with biological and organic compounds that are inherently
susceptible to degradation from exposure to electron beams. Nevertheless, many
of the recent advances are not tailored for microscopy of polymers. This project
will develop electron microscopy tools to characterize the structure of
conducting polymers in new ways and push the limits of imaging at the molecular
or atomic scale. These techniques will not only advance the fundamental science
of how the chemical structure of polymers impacts the microstructure but also
how chemistry affects macroscopic properties. The emphasis on conjugated
polymers will accelerate the development of flexible electronics and
bioelectronics and thereby benefit society by impacting energy harvesting and
health. Furthermore, integrated educational and research activities will deliver
a carefully tailored message to first year undergraduate students of how
engineering can help society, as an effort to enhance recruitment and retention
of students from underrepresented groups. The investigator and graduate students
involved in this project will further support diversity in engineering by
offering mentorship and research experiences to undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research is centered on pushing the
limits of polymer electron microscopy. Recent work has demonstrated the
importance of secondary events on radiation sensitivity, and these new concepts
suggest new approaches to mitigate damage and thereby push the resolution limit.
An emphasis of the proposed work is on demonstrating the consequences of
advances of detectors on polymer microscopy, including pixelated scanning
transmission electron microscopy (STEM) detectors and direct electron detectors.
Resolving diffraction spots with a focused probe allows for 4D STEM, and
therefore mapping of pi-pi stacking in a manner not otherwise possible. In
combination with auto-samplers, 4D STEM will allow of mapping of conductive
pathways over large distances. The enhanced signal-to-noise ratio of direct
electron detectors enhances the sensitivity of energy-filtered TEM to
differences in elemental composition, or when used in the low-loss regime, to
differences in valence electronic structure. Combining energy-filtered TEM with
electron tomography will rely on such detector advances, to minimize the dose
required for acquisition. Furthermore, the automatic acquisition of thousands of
images that can then be averaged to enhance the signal-to-noise of lattice
planes, or even reconstruct the unit lattice, would push the resolution limit of
polymer electron microscopy beyond the Glaeser equation for radiation damage.
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.