* 1905081
* Understanding the Role of O-GlcNAc in Programmed Cell Death
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Matthew Pratt, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding
Professor Matthew Pratt at the University of Southern California to investigate
how a specific chemical modification of proteins changes the chemical and
biochemical properties of the proteins. In addition, Dr. Pratt and his team wish
to learn how the chemical modification, which occurs by addition of a sugar
molecule to amino acid sites in the proteins, is associated with the death of
biological cells. This sugar modification of certain proteins inside cells has
been shown to lower the likelihood of a particular type of cellular death,
called apoptosis. This programmed cell death pathway is fundamental to a wide
variety of biological events and outcomes. Even though sugar modification of
proteins controls programmed cell death, the exact details regarding the
chemistry and biochemistry are unknown. The experiments proposed here test two
relatively unexplored potential paths where the sugar modification may change
the behavior of specific proteins, which lowers the likelihood of programmed
cell death. Through parallel activities, experiments from the research project
are integrated into an outreach program to create a protein science laboratory
for high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to
understand the direct consequences of O-GlcNAc modification on apoptosis-linked
proteins. To accomplish this goal, synthetic protein chemistry will be used to
prepare homogeneous and site-specifically modified proteins for biochemical
study. This method enables the precise construction of O-GlcNAc modified
proteins through the combination of recombinant protein expression and peptide
synthesis. This method will be exploited in two ways. First, the effects of
O-GlcNAc on an executioner of apoptosis, caspase-6, will be tested. Second,
O-GlcNAcylation of the chaperone protein HSP27, which can inhibit apoptosis by
preventing protein-protein interactions, will be explored. Information from this
study will provide new insights into how O-GlcNAc can inhibit
apoptosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.