* 1905910
* Fast X-ray Microscopy to Quantify the Nucleation of Hot Cracking
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Anthony Rollett, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,057.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will use state-of-the-
art facilities for ultra-high speed imaging with high energy synchrotron x-rays
for the purpose of understanding the problem of hot cracking during the
solidification of metals and alloys. Hot cracking means that, instead of
obtaining fully solid metal during casting or 3D printing, cracks are left
behind that weaken the material. It may also mean that the cracked component
must be discarded and/or trimmed, which is wasteful. The main focus will be on
studying cracking during 3D printing with laser light where mega-Hertz imaging
provides micro-second resolution of the sort best known for stop-action movies
of bullets penetrating through armor. Such ultra-high speed imaging has made
rapid progress in recent years thanks to the advent of new cameras and
improvements in x-ray detection and has already made substantial contributions
to our understanding of the melting process. It is thus extremely well suited to
imaging the sudden onset and growth of cracks. The sensitivity of cracking to
variations in solidification speed and chemical composition will be
investigated. Computer simulation will be used to test hypotheses about how the
cracking happens with respect to the materials microstructure. The new
understanding gained in this work has broad impacts in the casting industry in
general. It is also likely to stimulate new theoretical analysis of the problem,
which often happens when a new experimental technique is applied. In addition to
supporting a doctoral student, undergraduates will be recruited to assist with
the work, which involves a good deal of detailed analysis of sequences of
images. The work will also be disseminated to the twenty-plus companies that are
members of CMU's NextManufacturing Center and have a strong direct interest in
additive manufacturing. As the analysis proceeds, the main results will be
incorporated into the PI's teaching, which will help ensure that CMU's MS and
engineering minor programs in additive manufacturing stay up to
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will use ultra-fast x-ray
microscopy, with the high energy, high intensity synchrotron x-rays, to test the
hypothesis that the nucleation of solidification cracking is variable and
depends on the morphology of the solid near the end of the freezing process.
Given the lack of direct measurement of the nucleation point and the arbitrary
aspect of nucleation in cracking theories, even a measurement of the solid
fraction at which cracking starts will be novel. Measuring the degree to which
the nucleation of cracking depends on the extent of columnar versus equiaxed
growth will further extend our fundamental knowledge of the problem. We will
also probe for heterogeneous nucleation of the cracks from, e.g., the small
vapor bubbles that are often observed in laser melting of Al-based alloys. The
expected results include direct visualization of solidification cracking in a
variety of materials as a function of temperature gradient and cooling rate,
which are controlled by laser power and scan speed. We will mainly focus on
aluminum alloys, partly because many of the structural Al alloys are prone to
cracking and partly for ease of imaging, with stainless steel or nickel alloys
for comparison purposes. We will also use lattice-Boltzmann simulations (from a
previous DMREF project) to model the solidification and quantify the mushy zone,
specifically the shape of the liquid zones at high solid fractions. The most
direct impact will be on laser powder bed printing but the potential for broader
impact on casting technologies also exists. Through collaboration, we will seek
access to different types of modified powders that are intended to avoid
cracking through, e.g., promoting equiaxed microstructures. We will use computed
tomography and sectioning for 3D characterization. The ultra-fast x-ray
microscopy will be mostly carried out at the Advanced Photon Source because this
facility has the best combination of high energy and
intensity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.