* 1905397
* Weyl Semimetals in Extreme Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* James Analytis, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2022
* USD 390,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in the physics of material
systems, often called “condensed matter” have revealed new kinds of
characteristics called topological properties. Materials with certain types of
topological properties can be used in manufacturing devices for quantum
information technology. In this proposal, the team will investigate certain
materials called Dirac and Weyl semimetals which exhibit very interesting
topological properties. These materials are very challenging to synthesize, but
the team has unique expertise to produce them and these will be supplied to
other research groups around the world who are working to advance quantum
technology. In this proposal, the materials synthesized will be studied by
subjecting them to magnetic fields, to strain, and to various chemicals. Their
properties will be determined through advanced techniques such as electrical
transport, spectroscopy, and thermal transport measurements. The goal is to
uncover new knowledge of how to tailor the topological properties of these
materials so that they can be used in making devices for quantum technology. The
project also includes a plan to launch an image-based book on Quantum Materials
to inform the public. Graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups will be recruited in this research to widen participation in this
research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Three main
projects are proposed that extend the idea of studying symmetry breaking fields
beyond applied magnetic fields. Inspired by recent predictions that
inhomogeneous strain can act as an effective magnetic field, the first project
studies the effect of uni-axial strain fields on magneto-transport phenomena, in
both magnetic and non-magnetic Weyl materials. The second project explores the
question of the robustness of topological surface states when their protection
by symmetry is compromised. In this case, the PI will study the question whether
the mere proximity to a topologically non-trivial phase is sufficient to allow
topological states. In the third project, the PI extends this idea further by
studying competing interactions which can drive or suppress topological states,
focusing in particular on how topological and emergent degrees of freedom
transport charge and entropy in Kondo-lattice materials. These projects broaden
the original conception of this research proposal, attacking one of the most
interesting questions in the field - how is broken symmetry, and its associated
correlations, intertwined with electronic topology? The project includes a plan
to launch an image-based book on Quantum Materials, showcasing the recent
technological advances that have allowed the visualization of the quantum nature
of solids. Students from different backgrounds will be recruited to participate
in the planned research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.