* 1905401
* Overcoming Energy Loss in Organic Bulk Heterojunctions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Stephen Forrest, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 480,000.00

Mature solar technologies, in particular silicon, are now providing energy in a
growing number of locales across the US at costs well below even that of fossil
fuels. In short, solar energy is delivering on its promise of over 60 years as a
source of low cost, clean and literally infinitely renewable energy. However,
basing all solar solutions on this single materials system is still far from an
optimal solution. To be impactful, new solutions must have the objective of
making solar power generation a ubiquitous presence, ultimately filling all of
our ever-expanding energy needs. Recently there have been dramatic increases in
organic photovoltaics (OPVs) that have led to the demonstration of &gt;15% solar
power conversion efficiencies (PCE) in cells containing new non-fullerene
acceptors (NFAs) and unusual combinations of liquid and solution-processed
organic and metallic materials that leverage our increased understanding of
charge and exciton transport in films with heterogeneous phases at the nanometer
scale. The primary impact of the research will be to understand and improve OPVs
to ultimately provide ultralow cost solar power in situations where established,
mature solar technologies are less effective, such as in solar power generating
windows and building-integrated photovoltaics, and generation at very low light
levels to scavenge waste illumination power. The project will support the
education of a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students in
experimental and material design and synthesis, spectroscopic measurement, data-
taking and analysis, and scientific communication. The PIs will seek to host a
Conference for Undergraduate Women in Physics (CUWiP) at the University of
Michigan in 2021. They will also develop strong ties to local minority serving
institutions to give seminars and short lectures discussing state of the art OPV
design and spectroscopic measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
combine extensive expertise in OPV design and characterization with state-of-
the-art and emerging multidimensional coherent spectroscopies (MDCS) to
understand the energy loss mechanisms that currently limit single junction OPV
device efficiencies. The research aims to improve our fundamental understanding
of the mechanisms governing charge and excited state transport and sources of
energy loss in NFA-based OPVs. This will be facilitated by the development and
use of new spectroscopic and visualization tools that can precisely quantify, on
femtosecond - second time scales across the UV and into the infrared, the
dynamics of photogenerated charge transfer across heterogeneous interfaces and
transport away from their points of origin. The principles derived from these
fundamental studies will provide molecular design rules to guide the improvement
of NFA-based OPVs towards their thermodynamically limited efficiencies of
~25%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.