* 1905648
* Electron Microscopy and Modeling of Resistive Switching Devices Based on TaOx
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Marek Skowronski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2023
* USD 485,272.00

Non-technical description: Artificial Intelligence (AI) places specific demands
on the information processing and as the applications multiply, they require a
dedicated hardware specifically designed for the task. Current transistor-based
digital circuits are not well suited for AI and finding new materials with novel
functionalities, enabling new device principles is critical to the progress in
this field. This project aims to bring advanced knowledge of material properties
evolution upon working (cycling) conditions for a specific type of devices,
namely for switches based on tantalum oxide that can repeatedly change the
electrical resistance between high and low values as the result of the applied
bias. The applications of such structures include non-volatile solid state (no
moving parts) memories and artificial synapses mimicking the functions of the
human brain. The research emphasizes understanding of material properties and
the processes controlling the resistance of such device. The parallel goal is to
educate the next generation of engineers for the electronics industry workforce.
The components of the plan are (i) reaching out to high school students through
'Engineering@CMU' program, (ii) involvement of undergraduates in research
through Semiconductor Research Corporation - Undergraduate Research Opportunity
program, and (iii) holding regular conference calls with companies such as Intel
and IBM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Resistive switching devices
have been demonstrated more than a decade ago but many of the desired
performance criteria have not been met. This is, in part, due to our poor
understanding of the processes involved in resistance switching and, in
particular, the formation and evolution of a conducting filament within highly
resistive oxide layer. Resistive switches encode information by redistribution
of ions both vertically between the functional oxide and the electrodes and
laterally within the oxide film. The research aims to map out the ion motion in
the oxide film as a function of device bias history semiconductor by recording
two- and three-dimensional elemental maps by X-ray energy dispersive
spectroscopy and electron and atom probe tomographies. Of particular interest is
the filament evolution toward the end of device lifetime. The analysis of end-
of-endurance material properties leads to identification and prediction of the
device failure mechanisms. The experimental distribution maps are being
simulated by the finite element model based on diffusion equations including
motion of ions and transport of heat and electric charge with additional
restrictions imposed by the electrical biasing circuit. The model is intended to
be universal for the entire class of resistive switching
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.