* 1905164
* Scalable Quantum Emitters Enabled through Rational Bottom-Up Synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Troy Van Voorhis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 480,000.00

Light sources that emit a stream of identical particles of light are critical
for the advancement of light-based quantum technologies. These technologies
include secure quantum communication and light-based quantum computing. Light
from such sources is referred to as quantum light. Bright sources of quantum
light will enable optical technologies that are unachievable with today's
classical light sources, much as the development of lasers paved the way for key
innovations in science and led to a large body of essential commercial
applications. The research team focuses on the development of nanoparticles that
can emit quantum light. These nanoparticles can be made in solution and in
quantity, paving the way for the production of large numbers of identical
quantum light sources. Engaging and retaining women and underrepresented
minorities (URMs) in the sciences is a systemic challenge the team addresses
through a variety of complementary efforts. The project encompasses pre-college
outreach programs targeting K-12 students and the broader community, fostering
exposure and excitement about the science conducted. Undergraduates are
encouraged to obtain research experience preparing them for graduate school
through a set of initiatives, especially focusing on URM students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop lead halide perovskite
nanocrystals capable of serving as single photon sources to enable a broad range
of quantum information technology applications. The project follows a
multifaceted approach combining chemical exploration of composition, shape, size
and ligand environment together with computational modeling. The interplay
between computational exploration and chemical synthesis allows for the design
and synthesis of colloidal quantum emitters that can serve as building blocks in
nano-electronic devices in a rational and scalable fashion. Current lead halide
perovskite nanocrystals suffer from two main shortcomings with respect to
coherent single photon emission, namely instability of the lattice and
competitive dephasing. The team synthesizes and investigates new ligands and
inorganic shells to suppress the dynamic twinning within the crystal and to
rigidify the lattice to diminish phononic coupling, aiming to increase photon
coherence times. Optimizations in composition and geometry are explored to yield
faster lifetimes and improved photon purity. Construction of colloidal nano-
assemblies are used to decrease lifetimes, paving the way for the development of
a family of emitters with transform limited emission. Establishing this
colloidal system as a viable source of quantum light critically expands the
toolbox of quantum photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.