* 1905734
* Disentangling Relationships among Dopant Structure, Dopant and Polymer Energetics, Thin-Film Morphology, and the Electrical Properties of Doped Conducting Polymer Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kenneth Graham, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 452,189.00

Organic semiconductors promise to enable new generations of low-cost,
mechanically flexible, and wearable electronic devices. Their potential uses are
only beginning to be realized on the commercial scale with the recent widespread
adoption of organic light emitting diodes (OLED) in cell phone and tablet
displays and televisions. Further, these materials are being explored for use in
solar cells, electronic circuitry, sensors, and thermoelectric devices that are
printed directly from solution. In many cases, organic semiconductors are
chemically doped with molecules that introduce charge carriers to make the
materials more electrically conductive, as is desirable for many applications.
For example, chemical doping is used in OLED to increase brightness and power
efficiency. Improving the performance and stability of doped organic
semiconductors is critical to the further development of electronic devices in
which they may be used, yet it is extremely difficult to predict how a chemical
dopant will affect the electronic properties of an organic semiconductor. This
research uses a tightly integrated experimental and theoretical approach to
disentangle variables that influence the electronic properties of doped organic
semiconductors, with the goal of enhancing the material performance and
stability across multiple potential applications. In addition to accelerating
the development of applications based on organic semiconductors, the proposal
aims to promote interest, engagement, and participation in STEM disciplines
through exposing high school students throughout the state of Kentucky to the
exciting technologies enabled by organic semiconductors. In part, this goal
involves a workshop where high school students make electrochromic devices,
where a material changes color through electrochemical doping, and
thermoelectric devices, where a material harvests heat and turns it into
electricity, and learn about the power of computational
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electronic and thermoelectric properties of
doped organic semiconductors remain extremely difficult to predict due to the
interplay of multiple variables and a lack of understanding of how each variable
impacts the material properties. This research seeks to advance the state-of-
the-art of doped organic semiconductors by refining models of their electronic
structure and transport characteristics based on a highly integrated
experimental and theoretical approach. The three primary research objectives are
to determine the influence of the dopant size on the material electronic
structure, establish critical connections between doped conjugated polymer
energetics and morphology with dopant size and diffusion, and ascertain the
influence of doped conjugated polymer electronic structure and morphology on the
electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient of materials of interest for
thermoelectric applications. The research approach involves application of
ultraviolet and inverse photoelectron spectroscopy on model systems coupled with
quantum-chemical calculations and molecular dynamics simulations to determine
the influence of dopant size and polymer morphology on electronic structure.
Furthermore, electrical conductivity and Seebeck measurements on electrochemical
transistors combined with kinetic Monte Carlo simulations will uncover how
energetics and morphology influence charge-carrier transport and thermoelectric
performance. The overall objective of the research is to establish clear
relationships between dopant molecular structure, organic semiconductor
electronic structure, and doped organic semiconductor morphology, electrical
conductivity, and the Seebeck coefficient. These findings are key to enable
better predictive design of doped organic semiconductors with controlled
electronic properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.