* 1905487
* Tunable Enthalpic and Entropic Interactions in Blends of Block Copolymers and Polymeric Additives
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,01/31/2024
* S Michael Kilbey, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymer thermoplastic
elastomers (TPEs) are critical components in numerous products across many
industries, including medical devices, telecommunications and construction.
These materials also show promise as membranes for water purification and fuel
cells. However, TPEs are challenged by issues with long-term stability, which
limits their service life in established applications and prevents their
adoption in clean water and clean air technologies. This research program will
lay critical groundwork to address this challenge by tailoring the structure of
block copolymer TPEs with a class of interaction-tuned polymer additives,
thereby enabling careful studies of the molecular and mesoscale attributes that
control the observed mechanical properties. This knowledge will guide the
development of high-performance block copolymer TPEs that maintain their
mechanical integrity over long timescales. Furthermore, the principles can be
extended beyond the model chemistries that are the focus of this research
program, thereby facilitating the development of new TPEs based on renewable
feedstocks. The collaboration between Stein and Kilbey will provide graduate and
undergraduate students with training in polymer synthesis and advanced materials
characterization techniques. Laboratory research is complemented by 1) an annual
workshop for graduate students at UTK focused on Fundamentals of Polymer
Physics; and 2) a new graduate elective that provides training in Computational
Tools for Data Analysis, which introduces methods to process, analyze and
organize large amounts of experimental data. Undergraduate student involvement
is facilitated by the NSF-supported ASPIRE and TLSAMP programs at UTK, which
provide funded research opportunities for students from under-represented
groups, especially first-generation college students from the Appalachia
region.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will examine structure and
properties in blends of linear triblock copolymers and interaction-tuned random
copolymer (PrC) additives. The enthalpic and entropic driving forces that
control miscibility of these constituents will be tailored by changing the
composition, molecular weight and architecture of the PrC additives, enabling a
systematic interrogation of a large parameter space. Three related research
thrusts will test the key hypothesis that PrC additives can enhance macroscopic
mechanical properties by modulating the local structure within nanoscopic PS
domains. The local structure, as defined in the proposal, includes attributes
such as chain conformations, interfacial area per chain, and the spatial
distribution of PrC additives. Outcomes of this research will provide a
framework that guides the design of miscible polymer additives to enhance
specific TPE properties, including tensile strength, ductility, or creep
resistance. This will allow for the design of block copolymer membranes that
preserve their mechanical properties over long time scales, which is critical
for next-generation energy conversion devices and water purification
technologies. Although this research program will be implemented with model
styrenic materials, the fundamental principles elucidated through the design of
PrC additives are envisioned to be directly relatable to other classes of
materials that face similar challenges with long-term stability, including those
derived from renewable resources. Students will be trained in polymer chemistry,
polymer physics, high-throughput analysis of large data sets, and advanced
materials characterization. These technical skills are critical for
competitiveness in and lifelong contributions to a society dependent on
materials science and engineering. Additionally, opportunities provided to and
direct mentoring of students from under-represented groups will help to inspire
and stimulate young learners, catalyze their success, and ignite curiosity,
ultimately fostering the development of a diverse and competitive workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.