* 1905091
* Identifying the molecular mechanisms that mediate cell membrane repair
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Colin Johnson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The protein dysferlin initiates and controls the process of repairing damage to
the cell membranes of muscles during physical movement. With this award, the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding a team
led by Professor Joe Baio from Oregon State University to investigate the key
chemical interactions that dictate dysferlin repairs and manipulate biological
membranes. Certain types of muscular dystrophy, including Limb-girdle muscular
dystrophy type 2B and Miyoshi distal myopathy muscular dystrophy are connected
to mutations within the dysferlin protein. This project specifically studies how
the interactions of dysferlin with components of the cell membrane start the
repair process. Results from this research help unlock answers to how chemical
miscues lead to downstream musculoskeletal diseases. Professor Baio plans to
integrate this project into an outreach program designed to increase the
representation of Native Americans in STEM disciplines by providing training
opportunities for both Native students and instructors from a local American
Indian school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
establish the chemical principles that dictate how key proteins repair and
manipulate biological membranes. When muscle sarcolemma is damaged, calcium
leaks into the cell and exposure to calcium ions trigger a binding event between
dysferlin's outer domain and an intracellular lipid vesicle. It has been
postulated that following lipid binding, dysferlin then directs this liposome
towards the damaged portion of the membrane, where it fuses and patches the
damaged membrane. In this project, sum frequency vibrational spectroscopic
approaches is applied to resolve the chemical interactions between dysferlin and
phospholipids that trigger the initial lipid binding step and guide vesicle
shuttling. This approach provides the geometry and positions of important atoms
and protein structures at the dysferlin-plasma membrane interface. These
approaches are then repeated for dysferlin variants associated with
dysferlinopathies demonstrating how mutations within the protein contribute to a
failure of this mechanism. Finally, this experimental work also provides crucial
evidence that sum frequency vibrational spectroscopy-based approaches can
potentially be applied to the dissection of any complex membrane protein-lipid
interaction. In addition, Professor Baio works with teachers and students from a
local Native American boarding school and provides them with opportunities to
engage in research during the summers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.