* 1905442
* Collaborative Research: Wave transport via eigenchannels of complex media
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Alexey Yamilov, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 04/30/2024
* USD 203,881.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Unlike line-of-sight propagation in a
translucent medium, light transport in an opaque medium is a seemingly random
walk that is described by a diffusion process. Common to electronic, acoustic,
as well as the electromagnetic waves, most of the incident wave is reflected,
and only a small fraction is transmitted via a multitude of partial waves with a
broad range of delay times. Counterintuitively, this behavior can be altered by
exploiting wave interference. This award supports an experimental and
theoretical efforts to investigate the degree, to which one can manipulate input
waves in a chip-scale platform, to achieve near-100% transmission or avoid
temporal spread of a short pulse. The collaborative program of an experimental
group at Yale University and a theoretical group at Missouri University of
Science &amp; Technology will train graduate and undergraduate students to
conduct interdisciplinary research across the evolving boundaries of multiple
fields, including condensed matter physics, optics of complex media,
nanotechnology, and computational physics. The cutting-edge research will be
incorporated in the curriculum at both participating institutions. This project
includes an extensive exchange program with visits by faculty and students,
summer internships, design and assembly of optical demonstrations for
undergraduate research projects and recruitment
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The concept of
transmission eigenchannels has been a cornerstone of mesoscopic physics but it
is also applicable to electromagnetic waves and acoustic waves. Despite of the
essential role of the eigenchannels in mesoscopic transport and vast
opportunities for optical/acoustic imaging applications, little is known about
the intrinsic properties of individual transmission eigenchannels or the time-
delay eigenchannels. This collaborative program supports a joint experimental
and theoretical studies on the statistical properties of individual
eigenchannels, such as their fluctuations and correlations, in a unique on-chip
photonic platform that allows both selective coupling of light into a single
eigenchannel and direct probe of its spatial structure inside the random medium.
Compared to electronic systems, robustness of coherence effects for photons at
room temperature makes optical systems ideal for the in-depth fundamental
studies of coherent wave transport. The proposed work addresses long-standing
questions in mesoscopic physics regarding the nature and statistical properties
of individual transmission and time-delay eigenchannels and the roles they play
in static and dynamic wave transport. A systematic comparison between the
experimental and numerical results will provide key insights into how the
eigenchannels are formed, what determines their properties, and whether it is
possible to achieve simultaneously spatial and temporal control of wave
transmission. The research program will produce a wide range of experimental and
numerical data, which will pave the way for the mesoscopic physics community to
develop and verify new theoretical models for coherent wave transport. In
optics, the fundamental understanding of coherent propagation via eigenchannels
will inform a broad range of practical applications, from laser surgery,
photovoltaics, imaging in turbid media, to random laser and energy-efficient
ambient lighting. The collaborative experimental-theoretical program will train
graduate and undergraduate students to conduct interdisciplinary research across
the evolving boundaries of multiple fields, including condensed matter physics,
optics of complex media, nanotechnology, and computational physics. The cutting-
edge research will be incorporated in the curriculum at both participating
institutions. The two teams will join force in education outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.