* 1905559
* Cryptic Hydrogels
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Shelly Peyton, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 612,169.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogels are a class of material
that can become swollen with water, and they represent an increasingly important
category of materials in research and commerce. They are employed as
biomaterials, contact lenses, absorbent materials, wound healing materials,
water retention aids, coatings, adhesives, and many other applications. However,
unlike many other type of plastic materials typically used in industry, these
hydrogels are typically very weak, and there is currently no robust mechanism to
strengthen the materials on-demand. Building this attribute into these hydrogel
systems would significantly enhance their real-world applications. In sum, this
process costs one to ten billion dollars, and seven to twenty years per drug.
This project will create a way to strengthen gels by applying force to them,
with specific applications toward better, more robust adhesives. They will also
use this funding to create new educational opportunities for students.
Specifically, high school women will be brought into the lab during the summer
months, where they can work with these and other sophisticated materials and
diverse researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogel and organogel networks are swollen,
insoluble polymer networks made from soluble monomer precursors, and they are an
increasingly important class of materials in research and commercial
applications. Their uses are far-reaching in both academia and industry, as
biomaterials and wound healing materials; controlled delivery materials and
networks; contact lenses; coatings; and adhesives. One critical limitation for
gels has been that, in comparison to industrial thermoplastic polymers, they
cannot be strengthened in response to mechanical deformation. Building on-demand
stiffening into gel systems could greatly broaden their full potential and
utility in applications as stable and mechanically robust adhesives, coatings,
fabricated articles, and potentially biomaterials. In this project, a team of
three laboratories will 1) Create and characterize poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)
gels with strain-induced stiffening properties, both irreversible and
electrostatic (reversible) crosslinks, 2) Incorporate shielding groups into the
networks to tune their force sensitivity, and 3) apply this technology to
mechanically-activated adhesives. These studies will establish fundamental
relationships between molecular and environmental parameters and strain-
triggered elastic modulus changes with a new class of materials. This work will
provide the scientific foundation for hydrogel property control via strain-
triggered stiffening or softening mechanisms. This contribution is significant
because the eventual applications of this fundamental knowledge could apply to
materials design for new hydrophilic materials as well as regenerative medicine
and disease. Outreach objectives in this proposal will continue current efforts
developed by the PIs in previous NSF-funded broader impacts in expanding
engineering research opportunities tailored for high school
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.