* 1905870
* Improving Mechanical Performance of Glassy and Semicrystalline Polymers: Molecular Perspectives
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Shi-Qing Wang, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2022
* USD 457,500.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio-renewable polymers such as
poly(lactic acid) (PLA) hold the promise to replace fossil-based thermoplastics
such as poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET). PLA has not replaced PET despite
similar physical properties such as relatively high glass transition temperature
Tg (60 to 70 degree Celsius) and slow crystallization kinetics. Unlike PET,
crystalline PLA are brittle at room temperature, making the material hardly
usable. Amorphous PLA is also brittle because of rapid physical aging that can
take place in PLA. To make the replacement competitive, which is of considerable
economic benefit to the national prosperity and welfare, several scientific
advances must be made. First, a better understanding of mechanics of
semicrystalline polymers must be achieved from a molecular viewpoint. Second, a
clearer relationship must be established between processing conditions and
resulting mechanical properties of semicrystalline polymers. The proposed
research will investigate why crystallization does not enhance ductility for
polymers with Tg above room temperature. In particular, research will be
conducted to evaluate the conjectures that (a) crystalline regions of such
semicrystalline polymers are mechanically weaker than the non-crystalline
regions and (b) fast crystallization is necessary is entrap chain entanglement
and preserve (instead of deplete) chain networking. Moreover, efforts will be
made to establish the processing, structure and property relationships that will
make PLA superbly tough and heat resistant. Specifically, scientific principles
will be identified to achieve crystallization while preserving chain
uncrossability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past studies of mechanics of semicrystalline
polymers and "flow-induced" crystallization mainly focused on polymers whose
glass transition temperature are below room temperature and crystallization
kinetics are relatively fast, e.g., isotactic polypropylene and polyethylene.
The existing knowledge is thus not transferrable for class B semicrystalline
polymers (with Tg above room temperature) such as PLA because mechanics of PLA
at room temperature involves deformation of glassy amorphous regions that
separate the crystalline regions. For example, the well-known respective models
of Peterlin and Flory-Yoon do not directly apply. The much higher stress due to
glassy polymer deformation raises the question of whether crystalline regions
are structurally as strong as the amorphous regions. Since chains do not
topologically cross in the crystalline regions, the cohesion of crystalline
regions cannot take advantage of strong covalent bonds and is thus limited. The
planned research will apply new knowledge in melt rheology and molecular
mechanics of polymeric glasses, in combination with the mature characterization
tools such as WAXS, SAXS and DSC to establish an insightful perspective that
recognizes the need to explicitly describe and control the state of the
amorphous phase in terms of the population of tie chains relative to dangling
and free chains. Moreover, in situ polarized optically microscopy will be
employed to identify the locations (either inside spherulites, or within
amorphous regions or at inter-spherulitic boundaries) where mechanical weakness
resides, providing the needed information for a molecular model of mechanics of
glassy semicrystalline polymers. The proposed work will explore the unique
effect of elastic pre-melt-deformation on polymer crystallization and resulting
mechanical properties of PLA. Here each stretched entanglement strand is
expected to nucleate a nano-crystal that is free of chain folding and acts like
rigid nano-fillers in close packing, linked by non-crystalline stretched chain
networking. Specifically, cold-crystallization of pre-melt-stretched PLA could
result in crystalline yet optically clear samples that are not only superbly
ductile but also have outstanding dimensional stability (e.g., zero shrinkage at
100 degrees Celsius).&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.