* 1905547
* Understanding the Role of Crystalline Junctions in Associative Polymer Gels
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Robert Grubbs, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 410,600.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New strategies are needed to
create polymers with mechanical and structural properties that more closely
mimic natural materials. In this project, the Bhatia and Grubbs groups at Stony
Brook University will explore how including very small rigid domains, or
nanoscale crystallites, into soft polymer gels impacts their structure, flow
properties, and elasticity. These crystalline domains represent a novel method
for controlling the structural and mechanical properties of polymer gels. Thus,
the work will impact design of improved materials for applications that
contribute to national health and prosperity, including soft tissue engineering
and drug delivery. The project will also contribute to the development of new
experimental techniques to characterize polymeric materials that contain both
ordered and disordered domains such as biopolymer gels, conductive polymer
films, and thermoplastic elastomers. The PI and Co-PI will train graduate and
undergraduate students in a wide range of techniques for modern polymer
materials research, including synthesis, chemical characterization, scattering
studies, and mechanical characterization; and they will aim to recruit under-
represented student populations for this project, benefiting STEM workforce
development and inclusion of diverse students in STEM fields. Finally, examples
from the research will be incorporated into video lectures on macromolecules and
nanomaterials that can be used to update the core chemistry curricula at the
college level and into demonstrations for K-6 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is focused on control of hydrogel
nanostructure and microstructure while maintaining desired rheological and
transport properties. In this project, the Bhatia and Grubbs groups at Stony
Brook University will explore the impact of stereochemistry and crystallinity on
the rheology and nano- to micro-scale structure of associative block copolymer
gels. Although crystallinity has long been used as a means of controlling
polymer properties in the solid state, studies of solutions and gels with
crystalline domains have been limited. A major challenge in understanding the
physics of these systems is quantifying ordering in multiphase systems that
contain both amorphous and ordered domains, where the ordered domains are too
small to easily discern through conventional diffraction methods. The
researchers will overcome this by utilizing X-ray pair distribution analysis
(PDF) to quantify chain ordering in these materials. The project will focus on
ABA triblock copolymers in a selective solvent, where the midblock is
poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and the endblocks are poly(lactic acid) (PLA). The
overall goal is to build fundamental, comprehensive structure-property
relationships for block copolymers with crystallizable blocks in selective
solvents. Specific objectives are to: (1) Synthesize a series of PLA-PEO-PLA
triblock polymers with varying PLA and PEO block length and L/D ratio; (2)
Characterize the structure, assembly, and crystallinity of these polymers using
DLS, SAXS/SANS, PDF, USANS, and confocal microscopy; (3) Measure the rheological
properties of the gels and compare these to existing models of polymer networks;
and (4) Integrate examples from the research into undergraduate and graduate
core courses in chemistry and demonstrations for K-6
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.