* 1905891
* Nematic Enhancement of Superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Johnpierre Paglione, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nematicity, which has been a central
theme in the study of iron-based superconductors, is a term borrowed from the
field of liquid crystals, where it refers to a phase with broken rotational but
preserved translational symmetry. High temperature superconductivity in copper-
oxide and iron-pnictide materials continues to fascinate and stimulate the
scientific community due to the unanswered questions about the mechanism behind
Cooper pairing of electrons to produce record-high transition temperatures.
These factors demand not only continued investigation and characterization of
known nematic systems but an additional, targeted research effort to uncover and
understand other nematic systems and its potential applications within material
physics. However, understanding electronic nematicity, and its impact on
superconductivity, is limited by the dearth of materials demonstrated to exhibit
an electronic nematic phase. These materials are mostly limited to certain high-
Tc superconductors and a small handful of other complex materials. In this
project, a series of experiments probing both the nematic response and the
superconducting state properties of nematically active materials are performed
to help understand the influence of nematic fluctuations on superconductivity,
and hence elucidate the role of nematicity in enhancing transition temperatures
in both iron- and copper-based high-Tc superconductors. This project involves
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral scientists in interdisciplinary
research and areas of scientific and technological significance, including
collaborative and exchange programs with external institutions, and includes
participation in the Graduate Resources Advancing Diversity with Maryland
Astronomy and Physics (GRADMAP) program, the Fundamentals of Quantum Materials
Winter School, and the NIST Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships (SURF)
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronically driven nematicity has taken on an
increased significance as a widely observed phase in the larger electronic phase
diagrams of both copper- and iron-based high-temperature superconductor systems.
As a generic feature of many iron and cuprate superconductors, understanding
electronic nematicity, particularly as it relates to these specific compounds,
is essential to truly understanding the conditions from which high Tc emerges.
However, in these systems other complicating factors, commonly long range
magnetic order, make the impacts of the nematic phase challenging to isolate.
This project investigates the BaNi2As2 nickel-pnictide system, a newly
discovered nematically enhanced superconductor series that is free of magnetism.
Transport and thermodynamic measurements as well as scattering experiments are
being employed to characterize both the electronic nematic properties as well as
the nature of the superconducting state as the electronic system is tuned by
chemical pressure, doping and applied strain. With a growing body of theoretical
work suggesting that nematicity may in fact interact cooperatively with Cooper
pairing, understanding this correlated electronic phase and how it relates to
pairing is thus crucial to understanding and advancing high-Tc
superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.