* 1905203
* Protein framework for manipulating nanoparticles and enzymes: from capsules to arrays
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Jeffery Saven, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2022
* USD 540,000.00

Professors Ivan J. Dmochowski and Jeffery G. Saven of the University of
Pennsylvania are supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the Division of Chemistry to elucidate how hollow and
cage-like proteins can form nano-containers to encapsulate nanoparticles and
other proteins such as enzymes. Experimental approaches and theoretical methods
are combined to understand these molecular systems and to engineer molecular
containers for specific cargos and applications. An important aim of the project
is to develop chemistries and methods to link single containers together to form
three-dimensional microarray structures. The goal is to engineer microarrays for
specific applications in catalysis, and to integrate judicially designed
microarrays in functional devices, such as biosensors and enzyme cargo delivery
systems. Cage-like ferritin proteins provide a unique model system for studying
bio-nano supramolecular assembly, and the modular "molecular capsule-to-array"
concept provides a versatile platform for addressing many materials chemistry
challenges in nanotechnology and biotechnology. Ordered hierarchical assembly of
small nanostructures into larger, well-structured arrays can deliver desirable
materials properties, self-assembly, and processability. Graduate and
undergraduate students, including students from the University of Puerto Rico,
are receiving multidisciplinary training through this collaborative research. In
addition, laboratory and classroom activities targeting middle, and high school
students are being developed. These activities are subjected to evaluation and
best practices are prepared for publication in chemical education
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferritin proteins encapsulate appropriately sized
and liganded inorganic nanoparticles or super-positively-charged proteins in
native-like assemblies. The research team aims to elucidate how cage-like
proteins, such as thermophilic ferritin from A. fulgidus (AfFtn), encapsulate
various nonbiological and biological cargo to form stable, molecularly precise
nano-containers. Computational protein design identifies amino acid mutations
that enhance the stability of ferritin capsules. Design and modeling are also
applied to guest species, such as super-positively-charged enzymes, to explore
determinants of efficient ferritin encapsulation. Molecular simulations provide
insight on the structure and dynamics of ferritin-nanoparticle and ferritin-
protein interactions. Guided by computational design, an expanded set of
inorganic nanoparticles and enzyme cargos are being identified and assessed.
Experimental approaches range from the creation and processing of recombinant
proteins to the biophysical characterization of ferritin assembly and
encapsulation in solution and in the solid-state. An important goal is to link
AfFtn capsules at engineered and structurally well-determined attachment sites
to form well-defined arrays. Among several strategies to be pursued is the
incorporation of divalent cation binding sites at the three-fold symmetric
ferritin pores and subsequent formation of arrays with bis-hydroxamate
linkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.