* 1905274
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Studies on the Environmental Fate of Short-Chain and Emerging Fluorinated Alkyl Substances Using Mass-Spectrometry and Molecular Modelling
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Diana Aga, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 432,631.00

The Environmental Chemical Science Program of the Chemistry Division funds
Professor Diana Aga of the Chemistry Department at the University at Buffalo and
Professor Scott Simpson of the Chemistry Department at St. Bonaventure
University to identify per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) that
contaminate the environment. These chemicals are widely used in a variety of
industrial applications, including fire-fighting foams and paints, as well as in
consumer products, such as food packaging and cleaning products. Residues of
PFASs have emerged as significant environmental contaminants. The residues do
not break down easily and accumulate in fish and wildlife over time. They are
also found in drinking water sources. Exposure to these chemicals may lead to a
wide range of adverse human health effects. Many important questions remain
unanswered such as how PFASs are distributed in the environment, how they can be
removed from drinking water sources, or how toxicities of individual components
and mixtures can be measured. The research team is identifying PFASs in the
environment and developing tools to predict their mobility (e.g. how they are
dispersed) and persistence (how long they stay in the environment). This project
will enable the development of more accurate PFASs risk assessment models and
treatment technologies. This research provides opportunities for undergraduate
students from a primarily undergraduate institution to directly collaborate with
graduate students at the University at Buffalo. Additionally, graduate students
are hosted by scientists at the Environmental Protection Agency to gain insight
on how scientific and technical information are used for developing public
policies. Summer camps for high school students from local "All-Girls" high
schools are organized to promote careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
5,000 different PFASs are potentially released from the multiple formulations
produced throughout the U.S. The development of treatment strategies and
complete understanding of their toxicity is hampered by the lack of standardized
analytical methods and important parameters. These include the octanol-water
partition coefficient for complex contaminant mixtures. Because of the varying
degrees of environmental transformations, there are many unknown degradation
products that have not yet been identified. Through concerted experimental and
computational efforts, tools for the reliable quantification, identification,
and characterization of emerging PFASs in the environment are being developed.
The theoretical tools include pairing physiochemical data generated from Density
Functional Theory (DFT) and Conductor like Screening Model for Real Solvents
(COSMO-RS) calculations. In order to aid in the identification of unknown PFASs,
the results are compared with experimentally determined liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) retention times. In addition, different LC-MS
instruments and LC columns are being evaluated to determine efficient separation
of emerging PFASs, minimize the variability of results, improve the accuracy of
the LC-MS analysis, and estimate soil mobility of PFASs. The data generated from
these fundamental studies are essential for developing and testing practical
methods for assessing risks associated with exposure to PFASs in the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.