* 1905981
* Light Control of Superconductivity by Subcycle Dynamic Symmetry Breaking
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Jigang Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 11/30/2022
* USD 399,814.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Scientists and engineers have recently come
to realize that certain materials, such as superconductors, have properties that
can be exploited for applications in quantum information and energy science,
e.g., processing, recording, storage and communication. Light can be used to
create and control superconductivity. This makes it possible to design exotic
properties in superconductors which can then be used in making devices for
computing, sensing and communication. The proposed project aims to study one
group of these materials called iron pnictide superconductors. These materials
will be rapidly perturbed by laser light and their responses recorded using high
speed measurements. The goal is to extract details of superconductivity in these
materials so that they can be utilized in making devices for quantum information
and energy applications. Education is an integral and essential component in
this proposal. Specific plans have been made to mentor college
professors/undergraduates, to engage high school teachers and their students
through "A Physics Day" program; and to provide research and training
opportunities for underrepresented minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;A grand challenge
underlying the implementation of superconducting electronics and its quantum
information applications is how to establish universal quantum control
principles for switching coherent orders and modulating supercurrents at faster-
than-terahertz clock rates with nearly "zero-heat" energy dissipation. The
project aims to demonstrate the feasibility of harnessing light-driven coherence
and nonlinearity to probe and control quantum phases and collective modes in
specifically-chosen iron pnictide superconductors. Specifically we will
implement a subcycle dynamic symmetry breaking principle using a tailored light
pulse to nonthermally modulate correlation gaps and/or periodically bias
supercurrents. The research goals are: (1) explore the laser-driven
superconducting systems with different magnetic orders and fluctuations, clean
vs. dirty limit, different paring symmetries; (2) Reveal collective modes via
light-induced supercurrents; (3) Achieve proof-of-concept validation of coherent
control of superconducting orders using "tailored" laser pulse trains.
Understanding how to measure, manipulate and harvest coherence and entanglement
in superconductors with unprecedented ultrafast visualization can potentially
break new grounds for materials discovery - to achieve room temperature
superconductivity transiently, increase the coherence times, and stabilize the
transient phases beyond technologically-relevant, many nanosecond timescales.
Reaching such a fundamental understanding and implementing dynamical quantum
switching will advance Quantum Leap, one of the 10 Big Ideas of the National
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.