* 1905277
* Electron Spin Effects in Semiconductor Nanostructure: Magnetism and Topology
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Jacek Furdyna, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 589,997.00

Non Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project involves investigating the
connection between the science of magnetism and topology, which has recently
become a major research frontier of semiconductor physics as well as quantum
mechanics. The design and synthesis of quantum materials exhibiting this
connection is, however, a major challenge. The specific goal of this project is
therefore to design and synthesize new resilient materials in which this
connection can be studied, and to achieve transformative discoveries using those
materials. Those discoveries could result in new science and technology of
interest in the emerging field of quantum computing. The project will use
molecular beam epitaxy, which is a tool by which materials can be constructed
atom-by-atom. This allows the design of materials with new functionalities that
can be utilized in contemporary and emerging technologies. This research team
will synthesize high-quality semiconductor materials with controllable magnetic
properties. Another part of the project will include investigating the
properties of semiconductor materials which have been stacked in periodic
structures. The coupling between the different layers could lead to completely
different functionalities not possible from either material separately. The
project could potentially provide important solutions to next-generation devices
for quantum computing and data storage devices that consume very low energy.
This project will also train students by providing them with a skill set
necessary to supply the nation's workforce to support and advance new
technologies of quantum computing and data
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The project
involves the interplay between magnetism and topology in semiconductors, a
combination of disciplines that has already delivered exciting discoveries which
directly impact quantum and spintronic device physics. The specific goals of
this project are to utilize tuning knobs, such as strain, heterostructuring and
metastable phase synthesis, made possible by precision molecular beam epitaxy,
aimed at developing robust spintronic topological phases. The proposed goals are
reached by tackling two objectives. The first objective aims to harness
perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in two-dimensional III-Mn-V interfaces to
achieve a temperature-resilient quantum anomalous Hall effect. The second
objective aims to engineer new emergent quantum phases of matter in magnetic
topological superlattices consisting of stacks of topological and normal
insulators, one of which is magnetic. By combining complementary expertise in
material development, optical probes, and electronic characterization tools, the
team has the ability to achieve major breakthroughs toward advancing current
understanding of magnetic topological phases and toward strengthening their
resilience to environmental perturbations. The project synergizes those research
objectives with a strong educational component that includes direct training by
research on a variety of tools relevant to semiconductor and quantum
technologies, and launching a course focused on topological phases in condensed
matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.