* 1905355
* Collaborative Research: Controlling Flow Separation via Traveling Wave Actuators
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Iman Borazjani, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 245,352.00

Flow separation over a wing or fan blade leads typically to a significant loss
of lift, thrust, or power, an increase in drag, an increase in fuel consumption,
etc. Consequently, flow separation over these surfaces should be prevented with
design or controlled. To control flow separation in this project, the flow near
the surface is energized through triggering instabilities by a new lightweight,
energy-efficient actuator that generates traveling waves. The main goal of this
project is to test the hypothesis that this actuation is more efficient than
other means and to optimize the performance of this actuator by gaining an
understanding of the key parameters that govern the interaction of the actuator
with the flow. This project will create a series of educational videos and the
engagement of a diverse group of undergraduate students through well-established
programs at our institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main hypothesis of this
proposal is that traveling wave actuators perform better than other actuators
that create standing waves because: 1) traveling waves also inject momentum
(generate thrust), and 2) apart from frequency, an additional parameter
(wavelength) can also be tuned to affect flow separation as demonstrated by the
preliminary results. Numerical and experimental approaches will be used for flow
on a typical airfoil (NACA0018). Large-eddy simulations (LES) with moving
boundaries will provide possible traveling waves for the initial design of
traveling wave actuators and elucidate the mechanisms of flow reattachment. The
experiments in the wind tunnel will provide the data to validate the simulations
and confirm the hypothesis by comparing the traveling against standing wave
actuators. The team?s synergistic capabilities in generating traveling wave via
piezoelectric actuators and the wind tunnel experiments as well as LES with
moving boundaries and fluid-structure interaction uniquely position us to tackle
this challenge and accomplish the tasks put forward in this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.