* 1905263
* Near-field coupling between molecular vibrations and plasmonic metal oxide nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Delia Milliron, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 05/31/2023
* USD 428,764.00

Chemists can grow extremely small crystals. The smallest crystals can be only a
few nanometers in size, or about 100,000 times smaller than a sheet of paper.
These small crystals contain just a few thousand atoms. Some nanocrystals can
concentrate light and the focused energy can be used in applications ranging
from solar energy conversion to sensing. However, a single type of nanocrystal
can only concentrate a few colors of light. By changing its chemical
composition, one can adjust this color for specific applications. With support
from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Delia Milliron at the University of Texas at
Austin is growing nanocrystals that concentrate infrared light. While we cannot
see infrared light, we feel it as heat from sunlight or a hot fire. Working with
her students, Professor Milliron is studying how the size, shape, and
composition of a nanocrystal influences its ability to concentrate infrared
light. Their discoveries could lead to better ways of detecting specific
chemicals and improved catalytic methods, which would have important benefits to
society. An interactive educational module regarding nanoscience and light-
matter interactions is being adapted to reach diverse audiences, including high
school students at Texas School for the Deaf and younger students who visit UT's
campus for Girl Day and Explore UT, both are community-oriented outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets the synthetic development of
colloidal metal oxide nanocrystals (NCs) containing aliovalent dopants that
induce a high concentration of free electrons, leading to localized surface
plasmon resonance (LSPR) in the mid-infrared spectral region. Coupling between
LSPR modes and the vibrational modes of proximal organic molecules is studied
quantitatively. Most research on LSPR has focused on noble metals, which must be
patterned into larger, micron-scale metal structures to reach mid-infrared
frequencies. The limitations of that approach motivate the investigation of
plasmonic metal oxide NCs. This is quantitatively establishing how NC
physiochemical properties control the nature and strength of coupling between
LSPR and vibrational modes, ultimately leading to the foundational understanding
needed to develop sensitive and chemically specific detectors, and to direct the
flow of energy to tune and enhance catalytic processes. The team is creating
interactive educational activities that illustrate how the interaction of light
and matter is used in modern applications, such as electronic displays and solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.