* 1905885
* III: Small: RUI:  Finding Best Representative Phylogenetic Tree Reconciliations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Ran Libeskind-Hadas, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 498,458.00

This project will develop new techniques and software tools to aid biologists in
studying the relationships between groups such as parasites and their host
organisms. These methods and tools will allow life scientists to better
understand the origins of viral and bacterial diseases, parasites that attack
crops, and other pairs of co-evolving groups. The project will involve the
design and analysis of new algorithms, systematic validation of these algorithms
on large biological datasets, and the development of a software tool that will
be broadly disseminated. This work will be conducted at an undergraduate college
and will prepare approximately 25 students to engage in research. The work will
also result in teaching materials and outreach activities for high school and
college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work under this award will explore
the problem of reconciling pairs of phylogenetic trees representing taxa such as
hosts and parasites or genes and species. Given a pair of phylogenetic trees and
the associations between their leaves, maximum parsimony reconciliation seeks to
map one tree (e.g., the parasite tree) onto the other (e.g., the host species
tree) to minimize the number of biological events required to explain their
discordance. In general, the number of such maximum parsimony reconciliations
can grow exponentially with the size of the trees. Consequently, it can be
difficult or impossible to identify one, or a small number, of best
representative reconciliations. This work will develop efficient algorithms to
find best representative reconciliations in order to make more robust
conclusions about the evolutionary histories of the pairs of taxa. These
algorithms will be implemented in a new software tool for life science
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.