* 1905364
* Kinetic and Mechanistic Studies of Criegee Intermediate Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Craig Murray, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2023
* USD 394,638.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences program of the Chemistry Division funds
Professor Craig Murray of the University of California, Irvine to explore the
chemical reactivity of Criegee intermediates. Criegee intermediates are reactive
chemical species that play an important role in the atmosphere. They contribute
to particle formation, which can affect air quality, health and climate.
Laboratory experiments measure the intermediate concentrations over time to
determine the speed of their reaction with atmospheric trace gases. The research
project provides training for graduate and undergraduate students on technical
laboratory and other transferable skills that will prepare them for careers in
academia or industry. Professor Murray's outreach program establishes air
quality and weather monitoring stations at several local high schools. Outdoor
and indoor particle sensors provide long-term data at each location. Student and
teacher participants develop projects that use mobile particle sensors
interfaced with smartphones. This outreach component broadens participation and
encourages students to continue to participate in STEM activities, both inside
and outside the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A laser flash photolysis
transient absorption spectroscopy apparatus is used to quantify the temperature-
dependent kinetics of Criegee intermediate reactions with trace atmospheric
gases. The experiments examine the kinetics of reactions of Criegee
intermediates with multifunctional volatile organic compounds to analyze
photolytically co-generated radical species and explore the role of water vapor
as a potential catalyst. Complementary quantum chemical and kinetics
calculations provide further insight into the detailed reaction mechanisms. The
research generates data to test and refine chemical models of the atmosphere and
explores how reactions of gas-phase species lead to the formation of secondary
organic aerosol particles that may affect air quality, health, and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.