* 1905185
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Cross-plane and  In-plane Transport in 2D Layered Heterostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* David Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 233,104.00

The goal of this collaborative effort is to develop an understanding of thermal
and thermoelectric transport in an important new class of two-dimensional (2D)
crystalline materials. This class of materials has the lowest thermal
conductivities ever observed in a fully dense material. Highly efficient
thermoelectrics can provide efficient solid-state cooling that rivals
conventional refrigeration systems. This effort leverages measurement techniques
recently developed in the Cronin lab, which enable the cross-plane (i.e. in the
direction perpendicular to the layers) thermal and thermoelectric transport of
extremely thin films to be measured accurately for the first time, and the
unique materials synthesis capabilities developed in the Johnson lab, which
enable specific sequences of 2D layers to be prepared and structurally
characterized. Together, the labs will address several open questions regarding
the thermal and thermoelectric transport properties of this interesting
materials system, such as how the arrangement of layers and density of
interfaces impact the difference between in plane and cross plane transport
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will explore thermal and
thermoelectric phenomena in a unique class of materials poised between the
amorphous and crystalline states and test potential device structures using
novel measurement techniques. In addition to thermoelectric energy conversion,
the proposed scheme of studying cross-plane transport can be applied to a wide
range of other device systems, including LEDs, FETs, and RTDs, currently being
investigated by other groups. The proposed heterostructure geometries open up
new degrees of freedom in the cross-plane transport with independent control of
electrons and phonons, which is essential for achieving efficient thermoelectric
energy conversion devices. The proposed layered heterostructures will enable
many parameters to be varied such as inter-material barrier height, band gap
(across the semiconductor-semimetal spectrum), and charge density wave
transitions over a wide range of compositions to optimize thermoelectric
phenomena. These structures enable investigation of systematic structural
changes that are not possible with traditional approaches, for example,
atomically-sharp interfaces that are not lattice matched and metal/semiconductor
superlattices with atomically abrupt interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.