* 1905914
* Topochemical synthesis of functional 2D materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Brian Leonard, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2023
* USD 490,529.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Modification of functional materials is
one of the greatest challenges facing materials scientists and this tuning is
critical for future technological applications. Two dimensional (2D) materials,
like graphene, have the potential to unlock new technologies that will lead to
smaller, cheaper, faster, and more efficient devices. The long-term goal of this
project is to develop new synthetic methods that allow for the modification of
more complex, multi-element 2D materials through insertion reactions in which
guest atoms and molecules are incorporated without disrupting the original
layered structure of the host. The initial aim of this project will focus on
layered metal oxyhalide compounds with the short-term goals of understanding
what role the host materials play on the insertion reactions and the types of
guests that can be inserted. By understanding what governs the insertion
reactions, new guests with novel properties can be designed and incorporated
into layered materials resulting in products with specific desirable properties.
The physical and electronic properties of these materials will be monitored to
understand how to fine tune 2D materials for future applications including
batteries, smart windows, and ultra-thin electronic components like transistors
and capacitors. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), will give students from high
school through graduate school hands on training and education in the field of
materials chemistry. These future scientists will be taught skills in both
synthesis and characterization solid state materials as well as the fundamental
background on these technologically important materials. The PI will also
interact with high school and community college classes through demonstrations
and seminars to help educate the general public about the importance of novel
layered materials for future applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop new synthetic
methods to prepare 2D oxyhalide materials with tunable properties and provide a
platform for modifying other types of 2D materials through intercalation
chemistry. There are several types of layered elements and compounds, but
understanding of the chemistry behind their intercalation reactions is limited.
This project will focus on the synthesis and characterization -- including
optical, electrical, and magnetic properties measurements -- of layered
transition metal oxychloride crystals intercalated with multiple guest species
including Li, Fe, Co, and Mn. These novel layered materials will be synthesized
from their single crystal host metal oxychlorides using solvothermal methods and
characterized with electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, electron paramagnetic
resonance, and absorption and photoluminescence spectroscopies. These
characterization techniques will help locate and quantify the second metal in
the gap between the covalent metal oxide layers and understand how it affects
the properties of the host material. The development of these new synthetic
methods will lead to a family of novel bimetallic oxychlorides with interesting
electronic and magnetic properties. It will also provide a general synthetic
method that will enable intercalation of metals beyond alkali and alkaline
metals. Finally, the project will use these layered materials as a starting
point for exfoliation to produce atomically thin 2D sheets with new fundamental
properties due to quantum confinement and enable fine tuning of their
properties. This project is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.