* 1905053
* Active colloids with tunable interactions in liquid crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Oleg Lavrentovich, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 540,030.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Mankind is increasingly dependent on
technologies of transportation. Over centuries, the thrust has been on
development of macroscopic devices such as cars, planes, ships that are larger
than the human beings. The new challenge is to develop miniature systems that
could rectify the energy of environment into directed motion at the scale of
micrometers. In the future, these micromachines are expected to interact with
biological tissues and individual cells, serve as elementary units of soft
microrobots, deliver microscopic quantities of drugs or other useful chemicals,
work as energy harvesters, responsive actuators, microscale mixers and
separators. Electric field is considered as one of the most effective means in
powering the transport of matter at microscale. Most of the studies of
microdynamics are performed for an isotropic environment, such as water, which
does not provide a clear sense of direction for electrically powered
microsystems. The goal of the project is to learn how one can control dynamics
of microparticles by anisotropic fluids, with properties that depend on the
direction in space. These fluids are known as liquid crystals. Anisotropy of
liquid crystals under the action of the electric field is already used in
informational displays of modern computers, smartphones and TV sets. The project
will explore how to use liquid crystals as a medium that enables and commands
dynamics and interactions of microparticles. The project will advance the
knowledge of mechanisms defining dynamics of soft matter at microscopic scales
and potentially contribute to the technologies of future micromachines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Collective out-of-
equilibrium spatiotemporal dynamics of microscopic particles in the so-called
active matter is a fascinating area of intense studies. Depending on the type of
interactions, active matter develops various scenarios of behavior, from
coordinated collective unidirectional motion to turbulent-like flows. The
project will explore how the electric field controls dynamics of colloidal
particles and their interactions at microscale, using methods such as optical
microscopy, confocal microscopy and particle velocimetry. The project will
answer a question whether and how the seemingly chaotic dynamics of active
matter can be controlled by an ordered environment of a liquid crystal. The
potential transformative value is in understanding the mechanisms by which the
orientational order can command interactions and collective motion in ensembles
of electrically powered active particles. The orientational order of the
proposed LC environment imposes long-range anisotropic elastic and hydrodynamic
interactions and propulsion modes that are absent in isotropic fluids. The
project will advance the knowledge of electro-hydrodynamics of LCs and colloids,
physics of out-of-equilibrium active matter. Application of already tested
methods such as three-dimensional confocal microscopy, particle imaging
velocimetry, patterned photo-alignment and electro-optics will ensure that the
new knowledge is based on a solid experimental background. The project will
provide a new platform to design and control ensembles of active particles,
which has the potential for enormous societal benefits in areas ranging from
existing technologies (such as improved electrophoretic displays) to the
technologies of the future, which would exploit the unique ability of active
colloids to transduce energy from the environment into systematic movement, to
control the flow of matter, to serve as important elements of micromachines. The
project will educate a new and diverse generation of scientists with fundamental
and technological expertise in soft and active matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.