* 1905062
* Role of the Antiflorigen TFL1 in axillary meristem fate
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Doris Wagner, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

Plants - unlike animals- cannot escape when they find themselves in an
inhospitable environment. Instead, plants cope by changing themselves, their
final form or by delaying/accelerating the transition through phases in their
lifecycle. Key to these coping strategies are small proteins that can move from
one part of the plant to another, called florigen and antiflorigen. Florigen
promotes more rapid development and flower formation, while antiflorigen has the
opposite effect. The two regulators oppose each other and together act like a
rheostat. What trajectory plants will eventually follow depends on the relative
abundance of florigen to antiflorigen, which in turn is controlled by
temperature, daylength and other cues. How does the balance of florigen and
antiflorigen change plant form or the rate of its developmental transitions?
Addressing this question has been hampered by technical challenges, florigen and
antiflorigen can modulate accumulation of other key regulators; but, do not bind
DNA to change transcription. The principal investigators have overcome these
challenges and can now dissect where in the plant these developmental choice
decisions are made, the precise processes put in place by antiflorigen and how
it opposes florigen. Insights gained from these studies will be of broad general
interest both by advancing understanding of the activity of these important
regulators and by impacting agriculture. Traits modulated by florigen and
antiflorigen in different crop species include such key agronomical traits such
as tuberization, bulb formation, tree bud set and bud burst, seed dormancy,
photoperiod-dependent flowering and flower
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage state-of the-art
genetic, genomic, biochemical and cell biological approaches to provide
mechanistic insight into the transcriptional pathways regulated by antiflorigen
(TFL1), its repressive activity and the site of competitive action with florigen
(FT). Specifically, imaging and genetic studies will probe whether FT, like
TFL1, accumulates in and controls fate of axillary meristems. Standard and cell
type specific RNAseq combined with network analyses will identify the pathways
and the key components in each directly repressed by TFL1/FD. Finally, dual
affinity purification combined with mass spectrometry (conducted in laboratory
course) will uncover proteins that interact with and shape activity of the TFL1
complex. The combined activities will provide novel mechanistic insight into the
question how key regulators of plant form and function execute their roles. The
broader impacts, besides training of undergraduate students, graduate students
and postdocs in independent research, will include mentoring of female
scientists and training of 40 undergraduate students in research in laboratory
courses. Students in two authentic research lab courses will conduct dual
affinity purification combined with mass spectrometry, interpret the results and
conduct follow-up experiments of their design. Finally, a lecture on research
conducted in this proposal will be given to high school students during a summer
research academy at Penn. Graduate students involved in the project will lead
summer research academy lab sections, workshops and boot
camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.