* 1905647
* Understanding Surface Reactivity of Bimetallic Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Judith Yang, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 374,515.00

Corrosion is a crucial concern in applications involving metals, such as nuclear
reactor vessels, pipelines, ship hulls, jet engine turbines blades, bio-metallic
implants, and bridges. A longstanding challenge in corrosion science is the need
to predict accurately the degradation of a given alloy or coating based on its
composition and the exposure conditions. The formation of a protective oxide
scale layer is a common mechanism by which metals achieve corrosion resistance,
but the formation of these scales is not well understood. Factors such as
chemistry, surface conditions, and material sensitivity control oxidation
behavior, but classical oxidation models lack the ability to predict whether a
given alloy composition can form a continuous protective scale for a specific
service environment. A primary reason for this gap in knowledge is the lack of
experimental tools capable of observing the earliest stages of oxidation. This
award supports the fundamental research into the atomic- and nano-scale process
of alloy oxidation needed to develop practical, predictive models. The
scientific understanding will accelerate materials innovations relevant to many
technological areas that require sustained corrosion resistance at elevated
temperatures, including energy generation, materials processing, and chemical
conversion processes. This research program will contribute to national economic
competitiveness through the development of novel materials and technologies, and
to the development of a competitive STEM workforce through training and
mentorship of graduate students and postdocs, interdisciplinary courses, and an
emphasis on the participation of women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolutionary processes leading to the
establishment of protective oxide scales during corrosion are critically
important but depend on many intrinsic and extrinsic variables, including
temperature, total pressure, nature and abundance of the reacting species,
structural and chemical factors, and competitive nucleation and interfacial
phenomena. This research will systematically assess the relationships among
these variables to develop a detailed understanding of the establishment of
protective scale formation in harsh environments including environments of high
temperature and multiple oxidizing gases. The metal oxide nucleation and growth
will be visualized at the atomic level using in situ environmental transmission
electron microscopy. The growth kinetics and structure of the scales that
eventually form will be characterized using thermal gravimetric analysis and a
variety of electron microscopy techniques. These key experimental efforts,
enhanced by complementary theoretical calculations, will explicate the atomic
origins and critical parameters affecting the reaction pathways of protective
oxide-scale formation in service-relevant environments. This combination of in
situ and ex situ characterizations bridges large temporal- and spatial-scale
ranges, from initial-stage oxidation to the development of the thermodynamically
stable oxide. The knowledge resulting from the methodologies developed will lead
to new paradigms in this important field of gas-solid surface
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.