* 1905340
* Accretion in Reactions of Organic Peroxy Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Paul Wennberg, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 637,592.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Chemistry Division supports
Professors Paul Wennberg and Brian Stoltz of the California Institute of
Technology to study how particles form in air. These particles, also known as
aerosols, make the air hazy (reduce visibility) causing potential problems
navigating on the roads, at sea or in the sky. There is also significant
evidence that breathing such particles is harmful to human health. Generally,
about half of the mass of these particles is composed of molecules comprised of
carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen (oxygenated hydrocarbons). There is recent evidence
that some of these oxygenated hydrocarbons form in the air via the combination
of two smaller molecules, a process known as accretion. To learn what promotes
this type of chemical combination reaction, laboratory and computer calculations
are used to examine the efficiency for different chemicals found in the
atmosphere. This research is important for developing an underlying
understanding of air quality but also for biology, human toxicology, soil
chemistry and the preservation of artwork. Students and staff from the Wennberg
and Stoltz groups are heavily engaged in bringing science to the public.
Atmospheric chemistry provides an opening for conversation and interaction as
citizens of Los Angeles have direct experience with poor air quality. These
outreach activities are performed both on campus and in the local schools. On
campus,&lt;br/&gt;for example, the science program is conducted with local
elementary schools and pre-K children in an outdoor lab. The research team works
closely with the Benjamin Franklin Elementary School in Glendale, CA to
collaborate with the teachers in designing experiments that enhance the science-
and math-based learning curriculum in which the students are
engaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactions of organic peroxy radicals with other
peroxy radicals are thought to produce much larger molecules via accretion.
These larger molecules have a much lower vapor pressure and can condense to form
aerosol. Little is known about what controls the rates at which these accretion
products form. This study examines the hypothesis that weak bonding interactions
in the initially produced complex of the two peroxy radicals determine the
efficiency of this chemistry. The rates of this oxidative reaction are studied
for a diverse set of organic substrates. The team synthesizes compounds that are
thought to characterize these accretion products to confirm their identity. The
comprehensive laboratory studies are complemented with computational chemistry
through a collaboration with Professor Kjaergaard at the University of
Copenhagen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.