* 1905411
* Convergent Materials Design: Pressure Tuning Superconductivity via Polymorphism Control
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Tyrel McQueen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2023
* USD 367,462.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rational discovery of new
superconductors, materials that conduct electricity without resistance, remains
an unsolved materials challenge in chemistry and physics. Simply stated, even
how to approach this problem is unknown. Yet achieving this goal has the
potential to benefit society with cheaper and more efficient electrical
distribution, improved cell towers, and enhanced medical imaging. The proposed
work, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research, is centered on identifying appropriate design
principles for superconductors through iterative materials-by-design. A
combination of materials synthesis, pressure-dependent structural and physical
property characterization, and computational modeling will be used to establish
structure-property relationships. Understanding these relationships will in turn
yield design principles allowing scientists to piece together new
superconductors, enabling the next generation of technological benefits to
society. Involvement of the local community, including electrical engineering
students from Morgan State University, will further extend the impact by
providing cross-fertilization of knowledge between the materials and electrical
engineering fields, and the implementation of new classroom and hands-on modules
on solid-state electronic materials will help train the next-generation
workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to establish novel structure-
function relationships and design principles for new materials discovery in
layered electronic materials, specifically aimed toward the superconducting
state. To do so, a combination of materials synthesis, physical property and
structural characterization measurements under pressure, chemical bonding
models, and density functional theory (DFT) will be applied. Specific questions
to be addressed include: 1) what is the connection between symmetry,
polymorphism, and superconductivity?; and 2) how does dimensionality impact
superconductivity? Using electronic structure calculations, the PIs have
identified a class of lesser-known materials that will provide unprecedented
insight into each of these questions: in the former by targeting concomitant
changes in structural parameters, and in the latter by providing the first
example of bilayer iron pnictides with flexible chemical motifs. These design
principles, which are elucidated through pressure-dependent measurements and
computation, will be applied iteratively to inform further design principles for
improved materials at ambient pressure. In addition, the application of
iterative materials-by-design to superconductivity will demonstrate how a
problem for which definitive predictive theories do not exist can still be
significantly enhanced by modern materials-by-design approaches. Involvement of
the local community, including electrical engineering students from Morgan State
University, will further extend the impact by providing cross-fertilization of
knowledge between the materials and electrical engineering domains. The
implementation of new classroom and hands-on modules on solid-state electronic
materials will help train the next generation workforce, with the content freely
and publicly available for use by others. This project is supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.