* 1905982
* Bioengineering Single Crystal Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Derk Joester, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 697,809.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Optimized during hundreds of millions of
years of evolution, biomineralized tissues frequently display an extraordinary
level of performance. Bone, for example, displays high toughness at low weight
and is capable of self-repair; some invertebrate teeth self-sharpen despite
continuous wear. Organisms typically form these materials under mild conditions
through environmentally sustainable processes, making them appealing targets for
bio-inspired or bio-enabled syntheses. Despite the abundance of such materials
in nature, many biological mechanisms that allow the organism to control their
formation remain poorly understood. As a model organism, sea urchins exert
remarkable control over mineralization, creating smoothly curving and branched,
yet single crystalline endoskeletal spicules of calcium carbonate (CaCO3).
Previously, the team designed an in vitro culture system of sea urchin embryo
primary mesenchyme cells (PMCs) to control the growth of these spicules in the
laboratory. They discovered that a signaling protein, VEGF, controls the shape
of spicules deposited by PMCs. The team will next probe the roles of a number of
proteins that have been identified as potential crystal growth regulators in
transcriptomics experiments. Techniques include, proteomics, in vitro assays in
microfluidic droplet reactors, and knock-down experiments in vivo. In
combination, these studies will lead to an improved understanding of
biologically controlled mineralization. Poised at the intersection of molecular
biology, materials science, and bioengineering, this research has the potential
to inform a wealth of new technologies, from bio-inspired and bio-enabled
materials to materials for carbon dioxide sequestration. The team will to
leverage the interdisciplinary potential of this research to train undergraduate
and graduate students from a broad range of backgrounds. An undergraduate
research assistant will learn fundamental biological laboratory skills while
also using advanced materials characterization techniques. Finally, the team
will utilize instrumentation developed as part of a NSF Major Research
Instrumentation grant to help undergraduate students visualize phase
transformations in seawater, thus broadening the project?s reach to fundamental
materials science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities address gaps in the understanding of how
living organisms control crystal growth processes, with the long-term objective
to develop bio-inspired and bio-enabled materials. In prior work, the team
discovered the role of VEGF signaling in branching of endoskeletal single
crystals of calcite that are deposited by primary mesenchyme cells (PMCs) of the
sea urchin embryo. Going forward, the team will use quantitative proteomics to
confirm proteins that have been identified by transcriptomics as candidates
involved in crystal growth control. Selected proteins will be produced
recombinantly, and recombinant antibodies (rAbs) will be raised against them.
rAbs will be used to map proteins across the spicule deposition vesicle and the
spicule itself. In parallel, the team will use existing microfluidic devices to
dissect the impact of native and recombinant proteins, individually and
collectively on nucleation, polymorph selection, and crystal growth. Finally,
the team will complement these experiments with functional analyses in vivo.
Taken together, the team expects to develop a detailed mechanistic understanding
of how expression of the relevant proteins, localization in the spicule matrix,
and impact on nucleation kinetics and crystal growth may be connected. This is
an important first step towards translating key molecular players into a system
that is more easily engineered and scaled up, using the tools of synthetic
biology for materials processing. The team will thereby address all four
challenges in hard materials identified in the Report on the 2012 NSF
Biomaterials Workshop. Complementary to the proposed research objectives, the
team will engage undergraduates in research, incorporate research outcomes into
undergraduate laboratory modules, and host high school interns through
Northwestern University's Science in Society program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.