* 1905389
* Ultrafast spectroscopy beyond the diffraction limit: elucidating charge and lattice interactions with individual grain boundaries
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Bolin Liao, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Fundamental understanding and effective engineering of electrical and thermal
transport processes in materials is important, as the efficiency of our energy
infrastructure and the reliable performance of electronic devices, the
transportation and the power systems are significantly affected by these
processes. Polycrystalline materials consisting of microscale crystal grains
separated by grain boundaries are an important class of materials widely used in
thin-film solar cells, high-performance thermoelectric modules and electronic
and photonic devices. How electrical and thermal energy is transferred across
the grain boundaries strongly impacts the macroscopic transport properties of
polycrystalline materials and device performance. Currently, a detailed
understanding of these microscopic processes is still lacking. The overarching
goal of this project is to develop theoretical and experimental techniques to
elucidate local energy transport processes across individual grain boundaries.
Specifically, the research team will use ultrafast optical and electron
spectroscopies to examine how these processes are affected by the morphology,
structure and disorder of the grain boundaries. This project supports
educational activities to advocate renewable energy technologies to K-12 and
undergraduate students through hands-on class projects and short classes. To
promote diversity in the renewable energy workforce, the research team also
provides research opportunities to high school and undergraduate researchers
from underrepresented minority communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A thorough
understanding of the structure-property relationship of functional materials
with complex microstructures has been a longstanding goal for modern materials
science. Grain boundaries are among the most common microstructures with
significant influence on the macroscopic properties. Despite the paramount
importance of grain boundaries in functional materials, most previous studies
have focused on the average effect of a macroscopic ensemble of grain boundaries
and/or under static and equilibrium conditions. This project aims to address
this challenge by combining state-of-the-art first-principles simulations with
ultrafast optical and electron spectroscopy with high spatial-temporal
resolutions. Specifically, the research team will examine individual grain
boundaries in multicrystalline silicon, polycrystalline perovskites and
nanostructured thermoelectric materials regarding their local interactions with
electrons and phonons and their impact on the macroscopic electrical and
thermoelectric transport properties. This project provides a systematic
understanding of how individual grain boundaries affect local electron and
phonon transport properties, especially under dynamic and non-equilibrium
conditions. This knowledge can enable transformative opportunities to build
functional materials with a bottom-up approach, "one grain at a
time".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.