* 1905869
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:   Deconvolution of cis-regulatory variation underlying kernel development in maize
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Alexandre Marand, marand                  alexandre      P
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2022
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2019. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Alexandre Marand is "Deconvolution of cis-regulatory
variation underlying kernel development in maize" The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of Georgia and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Robert Schmitz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the DNA sequences that
coordinate gene expression is a critical objective for solving fundamental
questions in biology, such as the origins of human disease and the genetic basis
of crop yields. Emerging evidence has suggested that these sequences, termed
cis-regulatory elements, are major players controlling phenotype (trait)
variability in a wide array of species. Advances in genome-wide profiling
techniques have enabled identification of these sequences, as well as the genes
they regulate. It remains unclear if the positions and interactions of cis-
regulatory elements relative to their target genes accounts for major phenotypic
differences within a species. This project aims to address these fundamental
questions by characterizing how cis-regulatory elements control kernel
development in maize. The project was specifically tailored to foster the
fellows training in genomics and scientific communication. The broader impacts
will allow the fellow to expand on past efforts to encourage underrepresented
groups to consider careers in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to identify cis-regulatory elements orchestrating dynamic patterns
of transcriptional regulation contributing to kernel development in maize (Zea
mays L.). For Objective 1 of this study, the fellow will leverage Assay for
Transposase Accessible Chromatin (ATAC) and Chromatin Conformation Capture
coupled Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (HiChIP) sequencing approaches to identify
regulatory elements and their target genes, respectively, in developing and
mature kernels from two distinct maize genotypes. In Objective 2, the fellow
will generate ATAC-seq and HiChIP profiles from reciprocal hybrids apart of
Objective 1 to determine the extent of novel regulatory interactions in hybrids,
how parent-of-origin (including imprinting) impacts gene expression, the
influence of genetic variation towards transcriptional regulation, and the
integrated network of genetic, transcriptional and regulatory variation
paramount for determining kernel phenotypes in maize. All data generated by this
project will be disseminated via public repositories, including NCBI and the
host laboratory website. Analytical software and source code will be open source
and available on github.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.