* 1905399
* RUI: Nitrogenase and friends: Uncovering how diazotrophs regulate and maintain nitrogenase activity under unfavorable environmental conditions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Cedric Owens, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 325,000.00

Nitrogenase is an enzyme found in certain bacteria, called diazotrophs, that
converts nitrogen gas into ammonia, an essential nutrient for plant growth and,
thus, nitrogenase is critical to agriculture. With this award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Cedric Owens of
Chapman University to determine how diazotrophs maintain nitrogenase activity
under environmental conditions that would typically be expected to inactivate
the enzyme. Nitrogenase is inhibited by both carbon monoxide, a metabolic
product, and oxygen, an essential gas for aerobic respiration in many
diazotrophs. This project studies the countermeasures diazotrophs have taken to
protect nitrogenase from inactivation by carbon monoxide, and how nitrogenase
activity is regulated by cellular levels of oxygen and oxidizing compounds.
Results from this project will enhance the understanding of nitrogenase activity
in diazotrophs and potentially inform the design of synthetic nitrogen fixation
systems that are more resistant to environmental inactivation. This project
broadens participation of undergraduate students in research at Chapman
University (a 4-year college) and at Santa Ana College (a 2-year minority
serving college). Furthermore, a faculty member from Santa Ana College
participates in research activities through a summer workshop and, together with
the Dr. Owens, develops biochemistry experiments to teach fundamental chemical
concepts to first-year general chemistry students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two
nitrogen fixing proteins being studied in this project are CowN, which responds
to carbon monoxide (CO), and alpha-proteobacterial NifA, which responds to
cellular oxygen and/or oxidation-reduction (redox) levels. While CO is a potent
inhibitor of molybdenum containing nitrogenase (Mo-nitrogenase, the most common
nitrogenase), it is a substrate that is reduced to short-chain hydrocarbons by
the alternative vanadium-containing nitrogenase (V-nitrogenase). The mechanistic
reason for the differing effects is unknown and is not explained by the enzymes'
dissimilar metal compositions. Interestingly, Mo-nitrogenase tolerates CO in the
presence of a small protein, CowN, which is expressed in a CO-dependent manner.
The first aim of this project is to apply enzymological, biophysical and
structural approaches to uncover the mechanism by which CowN protects Mo-
nitrogenase from CO inhibition and determine if CowN alters Mo-nitrogenase
reactivity. NifA is the main transcriptional regulator of nitrogenase, sensing
either redox levels, oxygen levels, or both. The second aim is to use structural
biology, spectroscopic and biophysical tools, in order to test the hypothesis
that redox and/or oxygen levels are sensed through a previously uncharacterized
iron-sulfur cluster via a non-canonical environmental sensing mechanism. The
results of the project are expected to yield critical information on the
cellular conditions required for nitrogenase
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.