* 1905861
* Exotic Quantum Responses in Complex Oxide Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jon-Paul Maria, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2023
* USD 354,443.00

Nontechnical description. The project explores the intrinsic electronic and
optical properties in strongly correlated electron systems. Unlike in
semiconductors, which are currently utilized in information technology,
electrons in these material systems are strongly coupled and collectively
respond to external stimuli, thus offering responses that are beyond
conventional semiconductor materials. Enabled by the improvement to synthesize
vanadate and titanate thin films with exceptionally low defect concentration by
hybrid molecular beam epitaxy the electronic properties of these ultrapure
materials are explored. Growth experiments are performed to synthesize films of
the newly proposed insulator BiVO3 and ultimately the quaternary compound
Bi1-xSrxVO3. The goal is to demonstrate that electric field control over
electronic properties can be realized in these materials. The doping of the
strained thin films is explored to experimentally confirm that the
superconducting transition temperature can be induced and enhanced by utilizing
epitaxial strain. The research is expected to have significant scientific and
technological impact, by providing fundamentally new insights into electronic
phase transition materials that can be used in sensors, logic devices for high
performance power efficient computing, and quantum computation. The program
provides multidisciplinary training opportunities to graduate and undergraduate
students in the area of thin film synthesis and characterization of electronic
phase transition materials. Outreach activities target K-12 audiences to nurture
their curiosity in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description. The project focuses on fundamental studies of growth kinetics
relevant to the synthesis of complex oxide thin films with perovskite structure.
Growth experiments aim to map conditions to access a self-regulated growth mode
for the ternary oxide compounds BiVO3 using a combinatorial growth approach,
i.e. conventional molecular beam epitaxy and chemical beam epitaxy. A growth
strategy is developed for the self-regulated growth of BiVO3, which enables the
thin film synthesis of the quaternary compound Bi1-xSrxVO3. A collaborative
research approach is taken to analyze the quaternary system using angle resolved
photoemission spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy, scanning tunneling
microscopy, and temperature dependent magnetotransport and nonlinear optical
spectroscopy. The in-depth analysis of electronic and optical properties of the
solid solution Bi1-xSrxVO3 opens up an entirely new design space in the strongly
correlated vanadate material system, in which electric field control over
electronic properties near the quantum critical point of the band-filled metal-
to-insulator transition is inherently built-in. Detailed donor doping studies of
the strained quantum paraelectric SrTiO3 and CaTiO3 are conducted to explore
whether a superconducting phase can be induced in CaTiO3, and if the
superconducting transition temperatures in SrTiO3 can be enhanced if the quantum
critical behavior is stabilized at higher temperature using epitaxial strain.
The overarching goal of the project is to explore new quantum phases in complex
oxides exhibiting strong electron correlation effects and to understand their
exotic responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.