* 1905662
* Collaborative Research: Antiferromagnetic Spin-Flop Transitions in Heusler-Piezoelectric Systems Induced via Voltage
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Don Heiman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 90,000.00

Developing new materials with unique magnetic and electronic properties is at
the forefront of materials science and nanotechnology. In this project,
materials with a unique combination of magnetic, electronic, and strain
properties are studied to advance future applications in ultrahigh-frequency
(Terahertz) transistors and wireless communications, which are necessary to meet
the ever increasing size of data sets and the speed of data transmission. The
midshipmen (undergraduates at the Naval Academy) involved in this project will
participate in educational outreach of underrepresented groups in the sciences -
including young women in the local areas. This project will also serve as a
training ground for midshipmen and undergraduates in magnetic nanostructures and
information technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiferroic materials have been
proposed for an array of applications due to their binary or ternary co-existing
magnetic spin, electric dipole, and ferroelastic properties. These multiferroic
properties have been found in single phase compounds, however, they are rare and
will have operating limitations in future devices, including low operational
temperatures where the multiferroic properties co-exist. Compared to single-
compound multiferroics, the arena is far larger for artificial multiferroics
containing composites of dissimilar materials. This project focuses on coupling
versatile magnetoelastic Heusler compounds strain-coupled to a piezoelectric
substrate (e.g. PMN-PT) to mimic single-phase antiferromagnetic (AFM)
multiferroic properties for THz AFM spintronics. Heterostructures will be grown
using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and sputtering. Various methods including
polarized beam reflectometry, synchrotron X-ray diffraction, and X-ray magnetic
circular dichroism will be employed to fully investigate the voltage control of
the crystallographic and magnetic structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.