* 1905209
* Enhancing helicity-dependent optical interactions in inversion-asymmetric materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Jennifer Dionne, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical description: The human eye has evolved to perceive the intensity
and color of light. However, polarization provides an additional data-rich
channel for information - a property is beautifully embodied by mantis shrimp
and scarab beetles, species which see circularly polarized light. Many inversion
asymmetric materials - including chiral molecules and atomically-thin materials
- also preferentially 'see' (that is, absorb) left- or-right circularly
polarized light, but only weakly; in fact, the differential absorption of left
and right circularly polarized light is nearly five orders of magnitude less
than these materials' absorption of unpolarized light. This project enhances the
optical absorption and emission of circularly-polarized light in molecular and
monolayer materials through the design, synthesis, and characterization of new
materials and nanostructures that control light-matter interactions. By
increasing chiral light-matter interactions, the research increases the efficacy
and reduces the unwanted side effects of pharmaceutical drugs; reduces the
toxicity and environmental impact of herbicides and pesticides; and facilitates
efficient quantum optoelectronic information processing. As part of the project,
the Principal Investigator is engaging in outreach and mentoring with K-12
students and teachers, giving particular attention to underrepresented groups;
developing new undergraduate and graduate curriculum; and implementing a
national theatre production via a playwright
residency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Many inversion-asymmetric
materials, including chiral molecules and certain van der Waals materials,
exhibit a differential absorption of left and right circularly polarized light
that is nearly five orders of magnitude less than their absorption of
unpolarized light. Such weak differential absorption prohibits applications
including single molecule circular dichroism spectroscopy, all-optical chiral
resolution, and efficient valleytronic data encoding for quantum information.
This project focuses on enhancing helicity-dependent optical absorption,
emission, and carrier relaxation in molecules and monolayered materials. The
approach is based on nanostructured materials known as metasurfaces, which, when
placed in the near-field of a molecular or monolayer sample, precisely control
the amplitude, phase, and polarization of light. Full-field electromagnetic
simulations are used to design metasurfaces for strong chiral-optical absorption
and emission. In parallel, high-quality factor dielectric metasurfaces are
fabricated and a suite of optical and atomic force microscopies are developed to
characterize how the metasurfaces enhance molecular and monolayer circular
dichroism, photoluminescence, and enantioselective absorption. Finally, the
metasurfaces are used to manipulate electron spin orientation and carrier
dynamics in molecular and van der Waals materials with broken inversion
symmetry. Conclusions drawn from the project are expected to find applicability
in all-optical enantioselective sensing and separation as well as quantum
optical information generation, transmission and
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.