* 1905421
* GOALI: Understanding Nucleation and Growth of Solute Clusters and GP Zones to Facilitate Industrial Fabrication of High-Strength Al Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Louis Hector, Jr., Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,992.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the
nucleation of precipitates in high-strength aluminum (Al) alloys to facilitate
their application in the automobile industry. Alloying elements called 'solutes'
in metallic materials can exist in different forms, or phases. The solutes are
in solid solution phases if they are randomly distributed in alloys as
individual atoms; they can also be in certain small particles or 'precipitate'
phases if some solutes agglomerate together to form specific structures through
typical nucleation and growth progresses. Mechanical properties of alloys depend
on the phases of solutes. Generally, alloys in solid solution phases are soft
and ductile, convenient for low-cost mechanical forming and fabrication; but
alloys with certain precipitate phases can be much harder and, therefore,
difficult for mechanical forming compared with their counterparts in solid
solution phases, so they are usually achieved in alloy components at final
product stages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;7000 series aluminum alloys with zinc (Zn)
and magnesium (Mg) as the major alloying elements have a high strength-to-weight
ratio after proper precipitation hardening (similar strength but half of the
weight compared with conventional steel). Their widespread implementation in the
automotive industry as structural components can achieve vehicles with
lightweight and high fuel efficiency. However, the solute solution phases in
these alloys can quickly (~30 minutes) transform into precipitate phases to
harden the alloys even at room temperature, making significant challenges of
their low-cost forming and fabrication using current automobile manufacturing
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This University of Michigan-General Motors
collaborative GOALI project aims to apply an integrated computational,
experimental and statistical approach to understand and control the early stages
of solid-solution-to-precipitate transformation kinetics of 7000 series aluminum
alloys. The key objective is to design new alloy chemistries to retard the
nucleation and growth of early-stage precipitate phases at room temperatures.
These early-stage precipitates are mainly solute clusters and Guinier-Preston
(GP) zones, both of which are made of a small number (less than 1000) of solute
atoms agglomerated together. Then these alloys can stay in soft solid-solution
phases for a longer time, convenient for conventional automobile manufacturing
techniques. In addition, the new alloy chemistries should not impede the final
precipitation hardening at a higher temperature. The proposed research will
potentially enable implementation of 7000 series aluminum alloys in the
automobile industry, contributing to vehicle light-weighting and favorably
impacting energy savings, sustainability, and competitiveness. The generated
computational-experimental-statistical framework and new knowledge will be
applicable to alloy design in general and thus accelerate material development
for meeting future needs. The proposed teaching and training elements will
enable an integrated-computational-materials-engineering (ICME) approach to be
widely imparted to senior undergraduate and graduate students in materials major
and champion outreach/education activities of K-12 students as well as
opportunities for students of underrepresented groups to be engaged in start-of-
the-art materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nucleation and growth theories of precipitates in solids
are key fundamental principles to guide the development and application of
advanced age-hardenable structural alloys. However, the conventional theories
fail to provide quantitative guidance for the development and processing of
multicomponent commercial alloys, where nucleation and growth of precipitates
can occur in multiple steps with substantial structural-composition
transformations under the influence of defects. This gap between theory and
practice limits the industrial applications of many commercial alloys that
require special fabrication and manufacturing processes. For example, high-
strength Al-Zn-Mg-based 7000 series alloys have severe formability limitations
if stamped more than ~30 minutes after the solutionizing treatment. These
limitations result from fast precipitate kinetics at room temperature ('natural
aging'), mainly the nucleation and growth of solute clusters and Guinier-Preston
(GP) zones that can act as nuclei for subsequent precipitates. Understanding and
controlling these nucleation and growth processes can slow down natural aging,
and thereby expand the room temperature forming window amenable to the
sustainable manufacturing of 7000 series Al alloys and other lightweight high-
strength materials in the automobile industry, which has a significant impact on
vehicle mass reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this industry-university
collaborative GOALI project, the applicants plan to apply an integrated
theoretical, computational, experimental and machine learning approach to
understand and control the nucleation and growth kinetics of solute clusters and
GP zones in Al-Zn-Mg-based alloys. A multi-scale simulation framework based on
first-principles calculations, atomistic simulations, and phenomenological
hardening model will be constructed to quantitatively describe the solute
clusters and GP zone kinetics and their effects on hardness increments. Alloys
with the proposed solutes will be synthesized and subjected to thermal
processing and indentation hardness tests to verify their natural aging
kinetics. A combination of high-resolution transmission electron microscopy,
electron energy loss spectroscopy and computer image simulations will be used to
characterize the solute clusters and fine precipitates to verify the nucleation
and growth mechanisms. A statistical machine learning surrogate model will be
constructed to speed up the search of alloy chemistries to retard natural aging
with further experimental confirmations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
the research team proposes a transformative alloy design concept to tune the
early-stage precipitation kinetics of complex commercial alloys by searching the
trace solute elements to control the structures and compositions of solid
clusters and GP zones beyond the role of individual atoms of trace solute
elements. The research team also proposes an efficient routine to design
advanced alloys with a large parameter space by applying the integrated
computational, experimental and statistical machine learning methods.
Quantitative understanding of precipitate nucleation and growth kinetics in 7000
series Al alloys using the newly developing computational and experimental tools
will facilitate the development of advanced nucleation and growth theories for
generalized multicomponent alloy systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.