* 1905499
* Probing Effects of Pressure, Mixed Valence, and Spin Frustration on Itinerant Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Mykhailo Shatruk, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2023
* USD 488,287.00

PART I: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
investigation of itinerant magnets, a unique class of materials used in
societally important clean-energy technologies, including electric vehicles,
wind turbines, and magnetic refrigerators. Early studies offered understanding
of magnetism in simple metals -- iron, cobalt, and nickel. Currently, however,
the state of knowledge and theoretical tools available to materials scientists
affords insight into magnetic behavior of more complex intermetallic systems,
consisting of two or more elements. This project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, will
combine advanced theoretical methods with experimental studies of itinerant
magnets. Chemical synthesis, applied pressure, and high magnetic fields will be
used to trigger changes in magnetic behavior. A detailed analysis of the changes
observed will establish how itinerant magnets respond to variations in their
crystal and electronic structures. The outcome of these studies will be improved
understanding of itinerant magnets for the design of advanced magnetic materials
to be used in clean-energy technologies and other applications. The diversity of
theoretical and experimental tools employed in this project will provide unique
research training for graduate and undergraduate students, who will become
proficient in solid state chemistry, materials synthesis and characterization,
and quantum-chemical calculations. For broader outreach, the project PI will
also organize nationwide undergraduate summer schools in magnetism and magnetic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART II: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Itinerant magnetism has been a fascinating area of
research in condensed-matter physics for many decades. Currently, however, such
magnetic systems are receiving renewed attention from solid-state chemists, due
to the broader availability of theoretical tools for investigation of electronic
structure and improved insight into peculiarities of chemical bonding in the
solid state. This project aims to uncover correlations between the nature of
magnetic ordering and chemical bonding in itinerant magnets by exploring the
interplay between the crystal and electronic structure and magnetic properties
as a function of chemical substitution, applied pressure, or magnetic field. One
aspect of the project will focus on complex transition metal pnictides, with an
emphasis on effects of pressure and light-induced excitations that may lead to
drastic changes in metallic behavior. The project will also investigate behavior
of spin-frustrated systems with metallic or strongly covalent bonding. These
studies target the next level of complexity in the spin-frustrated systems,
where the addition of itinerant magnetic behavior can lead to the discovery of
exotic spin textures and unconventional spin dynamics. The proposed research
activities will provide versatile training to graduate and undergraduate
students in materials synthesis, investigation of structural and magnetic
properties, and studies of the electronic band structure. Undergraduate students
and students from underrepresented groups will be involved in the project, both
as researchers and through participation in national undergraduate summer
schools in magnetism and magnetic materials organized by the PI. This project is
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.