* 1905783
* Voltage controlled antiferromagnetism in magnetic tunnel junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Weigang Wang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 429,557.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;An effective way to influence the magnetic
properties of a thin film is by using electric fields, which may lead to many
new functionalities in future generations of electronic devices. In most cases,
this type of electric control of magnetic order is investigated in ferromagnetic
(FM) systems. For example, both the preferred direction of magnetization and the
size of magnetization of a Fe or Co thin film can be modified by voltages
applied on adjacent dielectric layers. Indeed, this effect has been successfully
used to manipulate the resistance of a magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJ), a
sandwich structure where the tunneling probability of electrons across an
insulting barrier depends on the relative orientations of the magnetizations of
the two FM films on both sides of the insulator, to achieve a small switching
energy that is below 10 fJ. In this project, the principal investigator explores
the voltage-controlled magnetic properties in antiferromagnetic (AF) systems.
Antiferromagnets have a number of advantages compared with the their FM
counterparts: they have no net magnetization therefore AF cells can be packed
into extremely high density without affecting each other; for the same reason,
they are immune to external magnetic fields; due to the staggered arrangement of
spins in antiferromagnets, the spin currents can possibly penetrate much deeper;
and most importantly, the intrinsic magnetization switching frequency of
antiferromagnets can be in the THz region, promising ultra-high speed operations
as well as reduced switching energy. This project incorporates the education and
training of graduate/undergraduate students and high school students, especially
those belonging to underrepresented groups, in all stages of the research. In
addition, outreach to general public will be carried out through activities such
as Physics Phun Night and Physics Open House.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore voltage-controlled
antiferromagnetism in MTJs with AF barriers, and in MTJs with the spin-filtering
tunneling effect where the magnetoresistance is driven by the AF/FM coupling. In
the first research topic, perpendicular MTJs with AF barriers such as
Chromium(III) oxide are fabricated, where the insulating layer serves as both
the tunnel barrier and the AF material. The exchange bias of the AF materials
and the voltage-controlled AF order can be very sensitively detected by the
sharp transitions of the perpendicular tunneling magnetoresistance curves
measured under different bias voltages. The ability to grow high quality
thinfilm heterostructure with extremely small roughness, as well as the
fabrication of perpendicular MTJ samples with sub-100nm lateral dimension will
enable, for the first time, the investigation of many intrinsic properties with
less parasitic effects associated with grain boundaries and defects in the AF
layer. In the second research topic, the spin-filtering tunneling effect with
the newly discovered 2 dimensional (2D) materials as barriers will be explored.
Different 2D materials are incorporated with various nonmagnetic electrodes to
facilitate the understanding of the very large TMR. The effort will be focused
on voltage-controlled AF/FM coupling in 2D barriers, which can potentially lead
to very efficient switching of MTJs. These research activities will not only add
significantly to our understanding of voltage-controlled antiferromagnetism, but
also benefit applications such as MRAM, spin logic, spintronic oscillators, and
neuromorphic processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.