* 1905742
* Manipulation of Hole-pinned Vortices: Classical and Quantum
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* John Ketterson, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 510,002.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Superconductors, which transport electric
current without loss, also expel a magnetic field. However, above some critical
field magnetic flux enters a superconductor through the formation of an array of
swirling currents of superconducting electrons, called vortices. The movement of
these vortices can destroy the superconducting property. High field magnets
avoid this problem due to microscopic defects that pin the vortices. Rather than
having the vortices pinned randomly by defects, the approach of this research
team is to pin them in a controlled way by creating patterns of nanoscopic holes
within a thin film to which they attach. By introducing external electric and
magnetic fields it should then be possible to move the vortices between the
pinning sites in a controlled way. Such manipulations can, potentially, be used
to either store data, perform calculations, or both, all within the same
assembly of holes. Since vortices are inherently stable, being destroyed only at
the edges of the film or on encountering an anti-vortex, the “information bits”
they carry are secure. Furthermore, they can have sub micron dimensions and may
respond on sub nanosecond time scales potentially facilitating high-speed, high
density data processing. But vortices are also quantum mechanical in nature and
this suggests the possibility they may be manipulated in a quantum mechanically
coherent way by exploiting both quantum tunneling and superposition. Therefore,
this project could lead to the development of devices for quantum information
technology. The proposed project is in line with national goals to better
understand and better exploit quantum phenomena. In addition, it will equip
students with the expertise needed to join the work force of future industrial
efforts to realize and exploit the principles and techniques established for
quantum information technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore various quasi-static and dynamic
properties of thin film vortices pinned on patterned holes in thin
superconducting films. An external magnetic field perpendicular to the film will
control the average flux density within the film, with special emphasis on
strengths corresponding to an integer occupations. One class of experiments
involves a search for resonant responses of vortices pinned on isolated holes,
since displacement of the vortex center generates a restoring force. This
project will in addition study the use of applied d.c. (or pulsed) currents, and
in combination with oscillatory fields, to move vortices between neighboring
pairs of holes, down a one-dimensional line of holes, or across a two
dimensional array of holes, which should result in r.f./microwave emissions, the
frequency of which is controlled by the hole spacing and the local current
density. Application of an oscillatory current at the hopping frequency should
produce Shapiro-like steps in the d.c transport characteristics. In the presence
of quantum-tunneling between the neighboring potential wells, a single vortex
pinned on the pair could distribute itself between the wells in a symmetric or
antisymmetric manner from which two-state super-positions might be formed, which
could be searched for spectroscopically. The manipulation of such vortices can
be used as flux-flow oscillators, computer bits, or data storage elements. The
phenomena to be examined, if realized, could, potentially, lead to new classes
of super-conducting devices, all based on the manipulation of hole-pinned
vortices. These include: i) various flux flow oscillators, a multi-bit flux line
memory element, and iii) a possible qubit. Graduates of this program will be
equipped to enter various industrial environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.