* 1905043
* Development of Novel-Scheme Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy and Its Application in Realistic Conditions -- Photochemistry of MoS2
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Zhenrong Zhang, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 820,499.00

Scanning probe microscopy methods that provide chemical maps of the surface of
objects hold promise for revealing information that is useful for making
chemical reactions more efficient and developing faster electronic and optical
devices. Scanning probe microscopes may one day yield chemical images of
individual molecules in a variety of environments, but this potential to
visualize such small objects has been stymied due to limitations associated with
effectively and simply integrating the probe element into the microscope system.
With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program and partial co-
funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professors Zhenrong Zhang and Howard Lee at Baylor
University are developing tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy techniques that allow
for imaging of individual nanometer-sized objects in their native environments,
as a result of novel, integrated fiber optic probe tips made by sophisticated
microfabrication methods. This new approach to building chemical imaging systems
significantly simplifies microscope operation and yields a method for
visualizing tiny amounts of sample. The Baylor team readily investigates
chemical reactions on catalyst surfaces in gas and liquid environments. Due to
the practical and accessible nature of the new nanoscale chemical imaging tool,
the research may impact research in materials, biomedical, and optoelectronic
sciences. Professors Zhang and Lee are providing undergraduate and technical
college students new learning and research opportunities in optics and scanning
probe microscopy. Such student skill sets are valuable for the students' future
careers. The Baylor team is also providing broad, public education and outreach
to the Waco community through frequent hands-on optics and spectroscopy events
at the Mayborn Museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a user-
friendly, tip-enhanced, Raman spectroscopy nanoscale chemical imaging system
that is based on an optical alignment-free design, namely, an integrated
plasmonic fiber-tip assembly. The fiber-tip assembly can be easily integrated
into existing scanning probe microscope designs. This unique approach provides a
simple path for independent delivery of excitation light to and collection of
light from a sample, which offers high light coupling efficiency and virtually
nonexistent far-field background interference. As a result, sample signals are
highly sensitive and provide detection limits approaching that of single
molecules. The plasmonic nanostructured optical fibers merge the fields of
plasmonics and fiber optics, thereby enabling tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
imaging applications in numerous gaseous and liquid environments. The specific
objectives of this proposal are to demonstrate nanoscale mapping using fiber-
tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy imaging and study the photochemistry of
molybdenum sulfide (MoS2) at the nanometer scale in a controlled ambient
pressure environment. The team also seeks to demonstrate fiber-tip-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy imaging in a liquid environment via the use of field-tunable
plasmonic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.