* 1905395
* Structure and Dynamics of CO Binding to Nitrogenase via Ultrafast Vibrational Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Nien-Hui Ge, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 524,339.00

Nitrogenases are important enzymes that catalyze the conversion of nitrogen to
ammonia and play key roles in the global nitrogen cycle. Recently, they have
also been shown to convert carbon monoxide (CO) to hydrocarbons and, therefore,
are recognized as important candidates for the production of biofuels. With this
award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry at
NSF is funding Professor Nien-Hui Ge from the University of California, Irvine,
to investigate how CO binds to and interacts with nitrogenases. Although
nitrogenases have been well studied, the detailed mechanisms for CO binding and
reactions are still lacking. This project will apply state-of-the-art ultrafast
vibrational spectroscopy to capture molecular motions using laser pulses at
"shutter speeds" faster than one-trillionth of a second. These snap-shots
provide new and much needed information on the molecular structure and transient
dynamics of CO and nitrogenases as they bind and interact with each other.
Graduate students participating in the research gain valuable training with
advanced laser techniques and core physical sciences to strengthen their career
development. This project is also integrated with outreach efforts that engage
K-12 students through scientific demonstrations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project is undertaken to gain a molecular picture of CO binding to molybdenum-
and vanadium-dependent nitrogenases by novel applications of ultrafast two-
dimensional infrared spectroscopy and a variety of transient measurements. The
high time resolution of these techniques allows the study of rapid structural
fluctuations and transitions of the enzyme. When combined with computational
modeling, these experiments reveal the structure of CO at binding sites,
elucidate local environment around the cofactor, and establish connectivities
between different CO species. Detailed structural and dynamic information
obtained from this project provides new insight and helps to establish a unified
mechanism for CO binding to nitrogenases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.