* 1905290
* Fundamental Insights into Direct Optical Lithography of Functional Inorganic Nanomaterials (DOLFIN)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Dmitri Talapin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Professor Dmitri Talapin of the University of Chicago conducts research to
develop new chemical reactions to prepare materials that enable simple and
precise fabrication of light emitting devices (LEDs) and displays. The goal is
to remove the bottleneck between the development of the individual components
and the integration in real-world applications. Displays and other
optical/electronic devices represent multibillion-dollar markets, and the
ability to provide a new universal manufacturing platform for these industries
may have significant societal impact. This project helps train students at the
interdisciplinary interface of nanoscience, inorganic chemistry, and materials
engineering. Furthermore, Professor Talapin partners with the Leadership
Alliance to recruit minority and underrepresented undergraduate students. This
project also supports interactive summer workshops on nanomanufacturing-related
topics for local underrepresented African-American and Hispanic K-12 populations
on Chicago's South Side. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Talapin is supported by
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF
Division of Chemistry to expand upon a new method for direct optical lithography
of functional inorganic nanomaterials (DOLFIN). This method uses inorganic
nanocrystals with novel photochemically-active surface ligands. The DOLFIN
process combines multiple benefits of photolithography and is tailored toward
efficient patterning of inorganic nanomaterials without diluting or
contaminating them with organic photoresists and other byproducts. DOLFIN is
meant to remedy the lack of efficient methods for high-quality additive
patterning of solution-processed electronic materials. The range of materials
that can be patterned using this technique includes metals, semiconductors,
oxides, and magnetic or rare earth compositions. The project goals include the
development of new DOLFIN ligands for nanocrystals to expand the range of photon
energies and enable multicolor lithography. The team investigates optically
triggered reaction pathways and excited-state dynamics in nanocrystal-ligand
combinations to reveal the processes responsible for DOLFIN's resolution and
sensitivity. The ability to directly pattern functional all-inorganic layers
with nanoscale resolution provides an alternate route for thin-film device
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.