* 1905195
* Innovative Weak Galerkin Finite Element Methods with Application in Fluorescence  Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 10/05/2018,03/31/2019
* Chunmei Wang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 03/31/2019
* USD 583.00

Fluorescence tomography (FT) is an emerging three-dimensional optical imaging
modality that uses in vivo noninvasive depth-resolved localization and
quantification of fluorescent-tagged inclusions. FT techniques have been
extensively employed in early cancer detection, guidance of tumor resection, and
drug monitoring and discovery. This research project aims to develop new
numerical methods for computational problems arising in FT imaging. Besides
fluorescence tomography, the numerical methods can be applied to solve partial
differential equations that arise in various other disciplines. The models,
theory, and computational methods under development in this project will be of
great value in the fields of digital image processing, medical imaging, and
numerical analysis, with direct applications in broad areas such as digital
image and even construction industries. Students will be trained in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to develop
and analyze efficient numerical methods -- weak Galerkin (WG) finite element
methods -- to address challenges posed by fourth-order problems arising in
fluorescence tomography theory. The research will explore algorithmic
advancements, new convergence theory, and imaging technology improvement, by:
(1) developing robust finite element methods for a fourth order partial
differential equation in the primal variable formulation for which no existing
method works; (2) establishing a stability and convergence, including
superconvergence, theory for the newly developed finite element methods; (3)
validating and verifying the methods through collaboration with domain-specific
researchers; (4) analyzing a new weak Galerkin mixed finite element method for a
fourth order partial differential equation; and (5) developing application-
oriented software packages, tested and validated with collaborators in the area
of FT.