* 1905103
* CAREER: Multiscale experimental framework on dynamics of deformable particles in turbulent dispersed multiphase flow
* ENG,CBET
* 10/30/2018,02/28/2023
* Rui Ni, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2023
* USD 447,529.00

From rain droplets in clouds to gas bubbles in bioreactors and nuclear reactors,
multiphase flows occurring in nature and industrial applications are often
turbulent, spanning a wide range of length and time scales and posing
significant challenges to numerical and experimental methods. Significant
progress has been made in characterizing the turbulent multiphase flow dispersed
with spherical particles; much less is known, however, about another large
category with dispersed phase consisting of deformable liquid drops or gas
bubbles. Those particles can freely deform, tumble, break up and coalesce in
turbulent flow, adding new degrees of freedom to an already complex problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key questions arise as to what are the statistics of
unique dynamics of these deformable particles and how to characterize their
complex couplings with the carrier phase. In order to address those questions
and gain insights in the full physical picture of the dynamics of deformable
particles, the project involves a multiscale experimental framework on several
different length scales from interface dynamics to large-scale statistics. In
order to obtain couplings of two phases, both the carrier phase and the
dispersed phases will be tracked in the Lagrangian framework simultaneously.
This enables us to measure, not only the velocity of both phases, but also those
high-order derivatives, including acceleration and velocity gradient tensor,
that are more important to the momentum couplings between two phases.