* 1905080
* Activation of N-O Bonds in Metal-NOx Complexes Related to Denitrifying Enzymes: Elucidation of Bioinorganic Pathways to Generate NO and HNO
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Todd Harrop, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 465,000.00

Denitrifying metalloenzymes are proteins that catalyze the interconversion of
reactive oxidized forms of nitrogen (NOx), which are sources of chemical signals
in cells and nitrate contaminants in groundwater. For example, the overuse of
nitrate-based fertilizers has led to a saturation of aquatic systems as well as
drinking water reservoirs with NOx. The result is ecological imbalance, with the
associated overstimulated growth of phytoplankton and algae leading to low
oxygen levels in water and ultimately death to larger aquatic organisms. With
this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is
funding Dr. Todd Harrop from the University of Georgia to study iron and cobalt
complexes as synthetic analogues of denitrifying metalloenzymes as sources,
converters, and/or scavengers of reactive NOx species. This project elucidates
the interactions of these metalloenzyme analogues with environmentally and
physiologically relevant NOx, and the potential interconversions of these
species. Students, including those from underrepresented minority groups, are
trained in the understanding of metal-NOx chemistry, which establishes design
principles and fundamental structural, electronic, mechanistic benchmarks to
guide the discovery of new ways to convert NOx through biology. The project
brings together collaborators from across several fields, including the
biochemical, biomedical, environmental, spectroscopic/physical, and theoretical
sciences. This project is integrated with the UGA Young Dawgs program to provide
research internships for high school students in the state and the Skype a
Scientist program as an online general science discussion with K-12 classrooms
around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemistry of nitrogen oxides (NOx) is
critical to a variety of biological and environmental processes. Indeed, the NOx
species nitrite (NO2-) and nitroxyl (HNO) have emerged as potential regulators
associated with hypoxic signaling events, i.e., sources of nitic oxide (NO).
Furthermore, both species have been shown to be critical in ischemic
preconditioning. However, the link between NO2- and HNO is not entirely clear,
but it involves metal sites and several studies suggest that hemes may perform
this task. The question is how does heme-Fe perform the nitrite-to-NO (or HNO)
conversion to result in an otherwise stable and highly covalent Fe-NO bond, and
what (if any) other biological signaling agents assist in this task? To improve
our understanding of M-NOx chemistry as it relates to biological signaling, low-
molecular-weight coordination complexes (inspired by nitrite reductase) are
synthesized and spectroscopically characterized to: (i) unravel features
critical for M-N(O)/N-O bond activation, (ii) gain access to M-NOx intermediates
that are challenging to experimentally achieve in the protein, (iii) interrogate
their reactions with other critical small molecule signaling agents (thiols),
and (iv) define potential NOx connections/conversions that serve as models for
analogous transformations in biology. The synthesis and reactivity of the
proposed M-NOx complexes represent significant advances toward the discovery of
new/stable redox catalysts for NOx transformations that have applications in
environmental remediation and mammalian physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.