* 1905324
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Elucidating Binding using Bayesian Inference to Integrate Multiple Data Sources
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Lulu Kang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 240,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors David Minh and John Chodera, and their groups at
(respectively) the Illinois Institute of Technology and the Sloan Kettering
Institute for Cancer Research, are developing statistical methods to study
binding interactions between molecules. These interactions play critical roles
in biology and materials technology. Full understanding of binding interactions
can require integrating large amounts of data collected using multiple
analytical instruments and experimental protocols. Existing statistical methods
and software do not fully integrate data from multiple sources to produce useful
knowledge. The Minh/Chodera team is pioneering the use of a new approach (a
"Bayesian network") as a general framework for analyzing chemical measurement
data from multiple instruments and protocols and for designing new experiments.
The framework is usable for both small laboratory experiments and the massive
datasets generated by automated instrumentation. The software (including a
straightforward user interface) is utilized to teach the underlying principles
in related courses, and will be made freely available online, along with
tutorials and clear documentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Minh/Chodera team
is developing chemometric methods and software for analyzing data related to
binding. They are working to fuse data from diverse methods, including
isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), surface plasmon resonance (SPR),
absorbance, fluorescence, and X-ray solution scattering. Key features of the
software include automated parameter determination for physical binding models,
and uncertainty propagation and quantification for model parameters. The
research team also incorporates automated and principled model selection and
hypothesis testing, and Bayesian experimental design to maximize acquisition of
new information while minimizing cost. The software automatically constructs
Bayesian networks that consider all sources of experimental error (e.g.
dispensing, weighing, transfer, and measurement) for any experiment described by
the Autoprotocol machine-readable standard. The software then performs Bayesian
inference to weigh evidence for competing physical models, obtain credible
intervals for thermodynamic and kinetic parameters, and propose new experiments.
Robotic experiments, statistical inference, and Bayesian experimental design can
be efficiently iterated to reduce model ambiguity and improve parameter
precision. The team is using the software to advance knowledge of cooperativity
between binding sites. A test application focuses on physiochemical properties
that dictate site affinities and selectivities in human serum
albumin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.