* 1905673
* A Biomaterials Strategy to Maintain Functionality in Osteoarthritic Cartilage
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Mark Grinstaff, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 11/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical section&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic biomaterials are of critical
importance in developing innovative solutions for the repair of soft tissues,
such as human cartilage, tendons, valves, and blood vessels. New polymer
compositions and polymers with novel properties will precipitate rapid progress
in medical device and tissue repair areas. Scientific advances, such as those
described in this NSF sponsored research, will potentially lead to tangible
improvement in the lives of millions of Americans suffering from osteoarthritis,
and other diseases caused by soft tissue degradation. Furthermore, the outcomes
will support US pharmaceutical device industries, which play an important role
in medical polymers market. US companies have 45% share of a 300 B industry. NSF
funding will be used to support undergraduate and graduate students, who will
benefit from a cutting-edge interdisciplinary research and educational
experience that encompasses training in biomaterials and polymer chemistry.
Students will be encouraged to think independently and creatively while
recognizing the importance of collaborating with other experts (e.g., materials
scientists, pathologist, biomedical engineers, surgeons, entrepreneurs and
patent lawyers). These activities will contribute to positive societal outcomes
by fostering excitement for fundamental research while educating and training
the next generation of academic research and biotechnology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical section. &lt;br/&gt; Biomaterials are
highly sought-after for the repair of soft tissues. However, there are limited
solutions to the mechanical wear or failure of human cartilage, tendons,
ligaments, sphincters, valves, and blood vessels, which can be caused by aging,
disease, or injury. Consequently, there is significant need for new and
innovative approaches to restore the material and functional properties of
tissues using synthetic biomaterials. With NSF funding, the PI (Grinstaff) and
his team will evaluate the performance of an interpenetrating polymer network
(IPN) formed between a synthetic hydrophilic biocompatible polymer and
osteoarthritic cartilage tissue, as a case study. The synthetic polymer
reinforces the tissue and acts like rebar steel in concrete to strengthen the
material. Key preliminary data support this new idea and the proposed studies,
well-characterized materials and rigorous experimental designs are established,
and essential cross-disciplinary collaborations and expertise (biomaterials,
tissue culture, biomechanics, etc.) are in place to accomplish the studies. This
highly interdisciplinary and cutting-edge research will also prepare educated
and trained undergraduate and graduate students for employment in industry and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.