* 1905211
* RUI: Developing Organic Charge-Transfer Liquid Crystals: Towards Modular Control of Functional Properties in Laser Re-Writable Organic Medium
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Joseph Reczek, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 174,075.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Joseph J. Reczek of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Denison University is preparing a
new class of organic materials for potential use in data storage and information
encryption. These materials have properties between those of liquids and solids
and are constructed from molecules that contain aromatic rings. In organic
chemistry, aromatic molecules are very stable and do not readily react with
other substances. Since chemical bonds consist of electrons, aromatic rings are
capable of conducting electricity and light in optical data storage, similar to
molecular-scale wires. Professor Reczek designs and constructs an interactive
educational exhibit, "The Solar Station". He also organizes and conducts a
hands-on "Chemistry Challenge" competition for both middle and high school
students at The Works Museum in Licking County, Ohio. He has also established a
joint program between Denison University, The Works and The Ohio State
University Newark branch to bring local 10-12 year-olds and their parents onto
campuses for STEM lectures and laboratory
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the discovery and
development of fundamentally new properties and chemistries in an emerging class
of supramolecular organic materials, aromatic charge-transfer liquid crystals
(ACT-LCs). Specifically, studies to advance the emergence of optoelectronic
functional properties, material tunability, and controlled molecular assembly in
new ACT-LCs are conducted through three main objectives. The first objective
concentrates on the systematic design, synthesis, and combination/assembly of a
series of aromatic molecules in a modular fashion to better understand and
predict relationships between component structure and ACT-LC bulk properties
including charge-transfer (CT) persistence, extended CT absorption range (NIR),
and resolution of laser-writable optical dichroism. In the second objective,
aromatic components having a large molecular dipole are incorporated into ACT-
LCs to align orthogonal materials for field-effect applications and enhanced
writable resolution. In the last objective, emerging ACT-LCs are explored as
organic media for new methods of optical data storage and information
encryption. This research provides training for undergraduate students in
supramolecular and Nanochemistry. The project also has the potential to develop
creative functional supramolecular nanomaterials for technological
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.