* 1905801
* Unconventional metals in carrier-tuned spin-orbit Mott materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Stephen Wilson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 501,795.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This project explores the fascinating and
complex electronic behaviors endemic to a class of metals born from insulators
with both strong interactions between electrons and strong coupling between the
electron's orbital motion and its inherent magnetic moment or spin. These 'spin-
orbit assisted Mott insulators' can be turned into metals by adding charge
carriers, where many exciting states such as high temperature superconductivity
and electronic states for quantum information are predicted. Ultrahigh purity
crystals of these metals are grown in the project and experiments exploring the
structural, magnetic, and electronic properties of their unusual metallic states
performed. In particular, research activities target a series of doped iridium
oxide materials whose parent insulating states have recently been shown to
collapse into metals with anomalous charge and spin properties. This builds the
knowledgebase needed for assessing the viability of these materials for
potential future superconducting and quantum information applications. The
project trains graduate students in advanced crystal growth techniques as well
as in advanced scattering techniques at national user facilities, addressing the
national need for trained personnel in both arenas. Additionally, the project
executes a multitier education and outreach effort targeted at promoting diverse
participation in STEM disciplines and within materials science in particular.
This is achieved through undergraduate research opportunities targeted at
attracting and retaining underrepresented demographics within materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This project
experimentally explores two classes of iridium oxides where canonical spin-orbit
Mott states appear--the Ruddlesden-Popper series of Srn+1IrnO3n+1 and the rare-
earth series of pyrochlore Al2Ir2O7. Key variants of these compounds are
explored with the goals of understanding the origins of unconventional spin and
charge density wave formation in the Ruddlesden-Popper iridates, their relation
to strange-metal behavior and potential superconductivity in these systems, and
the coupling between magnetism and the metal-insulator transitions of the
pyrochlore iridates. All of these phenomena are of considerable interest for
identifying exotic electronic states predicted to manifest in these materials,
with examples ranging from high-temperature superconductivity to magnetic Weyl
semimetal states. Experimental approaches include synchrotron x-ray and neutron
scattering measurements, bulk electronic properties (such as charge transport
and magnetization) measurements, and complementary electronic probes performed
via a network of collaborators. A key enabling tool in the research is the use
high-pressure floating zone crystal growth techniques to create ultrahigh purity
specimens for study. By leveraging this tool, the project creates new pathways
for discovering predicted and other unforeseen unconventional electronic states
in carrier-doped spin-orbit assisted Mott materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.