* 1905785
* CAREER: Assembly of Nanopieces for Controlled Penetration and Binding of Difficult-to-Reach Cartilage Matrix for siRNA Therapy against Osteoarthritis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Yupeng Chen, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2023
* USD 480,625.00

PI: Chen, Yupeng&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
1653702&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Osteoarthritis (OA) affects
approximately 13.9% of Americans aged 25 years and older. This equates to an
estimated 30 million people in the United States, making it one of the leading
causes of disability. OA is a degenerative joint disease involving in the
degeneration of joint cartilage. This leads to pain, stiffness, movement
problems, and activity limitations. Currently, there is no clinically successful
therapeutic to against OA. As a Nobel-prize winning discovery, siRNA can
effectively and specifically inhibit disease gene expression, which provides a
great therapeutic potential to treat OA. However, it is extremely challenging to
deliver negatively-charged siRNAs to infiltrate avascular, dense, negatively-
charged tissue matrix, such as cartilage. This research will develop a novel
delivery vehicle, which can self-assemble with therapeutic siRNAs and deliver
them into matrix-rich tissues in an effective and safe manner.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will focus on understanding the delicate self-
assembly process between rosette nanotubes (RNTs) and siRNA into non-covalent
architectures. By mediating the assembly process, the RNT/siRNA architectures
will be constructed into siRNA delivery vehicles of various sizes and shapes.
Then, their ability to penetrate tissue matrix and deliver siRNA will be
analyzed and optimized. This proposal will also identify and manipulate the
binding ability of these non-covalent delivery vehicles with tissue matrix
molecules to achieve effective and long-lasting inhibition of matrix
metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13), a key disease gene during OA progression.
Furthermore, the therapeutic potential of this siRNA approach against OA will be
evaluated in an animal model. In addition, this proposal provides a plan to
merge the gap between science and medical education and train the next
generation of scientists and clinicians with interdisciplinary knowledge and
encourage them to translate science, engineering and technology innovations to
satisfy clinical needs. Lastly, collaborating with the Barrington High School
(BHS) in Rhode Island, this proposal will develop an outreach plan to introduce
nanotechnology to high school students and demonstrate to them how it can help
overcome "real-life problems" in clinics. Beyond achieving the specific goals of
this proposal, this career development plan can significantly improve scientific
understanding of the self-assembly of non-covalent structures as well as lay the
foundation for the development of the first siRNA therapy to inhibit OA
progression.