* 1905064
* Molecular Engineering of High-Performance Electrochromic Nanolayers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Peter Dinolfo, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2023
* USD 484,033.00

Professor Peter H. Dinolfo of the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology
at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry to develop
a new type of electrochromic materials. Electrochromic materials change color
when electricity is applied. The materials in this project are composed of thin
film coatings of transition metal (mainly cobalt) complexes on solid surfaces.
The project reveals fundamental chemical knowledge to better understand the how
and why color changes occur. The knowledge obtained is critical to improving
smart windows (improving building energy efficiency), antiglare coatings for
automobile mirrors, chemical sensors, display materials, and optical memory
devices. While many classes of electrochromic materials are available, the
project promises to develop materials that maintain their color in a given
chemical state after the electrical signal is switched off. As a result, this
new class of materials is expected to have the advantage of operating with less
electrical energy consumption. During the course of conducting this research,
graduate and undergraduate students are trained in synthesis, material
preparation and characterization and device construction. In addition, solar
chemistry camps are organized and made available for high school students under
the Summer at Rensselaer High School Research program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the increasing need for
electrochromic materials with high color contrast between states, coloration
efficiency, long-term cycling durability and fast switching speeds. The focus is
on the development of a new class of electrochromic materials using redox
coupled spin crossover (RCSCO) organometallic complexes. Such materials undergo
chemical transformations upon oxidation or reduction with significant splitting
of the anodic and cathodic waves for a given redox couple. Click chemistry via a
layer by layer method is used to generate nanoscale thin film electrochromic
materials using cobalt (Co) complexes as building blocks. The resulting
electrochromic materials are subjected to a series of experiments to investigate
the effects of ligand binding to the Co centers on their spectroscopic,
electrochemical, and magnetic properties. The team also examines the
electrochemical charge transfer rates through their multilayer assemblies and
investigates their coloration efficiency, switching times, and cycle lifetimes.
The results inform the systematic variation of the molecular structure to
optimize the material for specific electrochromic applications. Success of this
research may transform how studies of transition metal coordination compounds
featuring redox-coupled spin-crossover compounds are used as building blocks in
electrochromic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.