* 1905403
* Mixed Rod-Coil Polymer Brushes Tailored for Controlled Surface Topography
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are long molecules
that make up the many kinds of coatings, fabrics and plastics we use. Some
polymers can be flexible and soft. Other polymers can be long and stiff. By
combining stiff and flexible polymers in a single system formed on a surface, we
have learned that we can make nanoscale spiky brush-like surfaces using careful
temperature control and coating methods. The PI and his group plan to better
understand this surface formation process by making new combinations of soft and
stiff polymers, by using advanced tools to study their organization, and by
employing computers to model the structure and to predict their behavior. This
new way of making surfaces opens up many interesting applications. For example,
the surface mimics the protein spikes present on virus surfaces that are used by
nature to identify target cells, take part in the entry into the cell, and also
to prevent identification by antibodies. These materials can be used to study
the behavior of cells on topics ranging from how they work to the behavior of
the immune system. Because the spikes are vertically aligned, they may also act
as nanowires, so they can be used in energy production and storage systems like
solar cells and batteries. Finally, these spikes may be piezoelectric, i.e. they
could convert electrical energy to motion (or sound) and motion to electrical
energy. This research program will also serve as a mechanism to teach students
about polymers and materials science, create globally aware graduate students,
and expose students to a collaborative environment. Graduate students will be
able to work with the research groups of our collaborators as parts of teams and
to take part in exchange visits. Lessons learned from these research programs
will be used to teach K-12 students and to be applied in high school teachers'
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coil polymer brushes synthesized using living
radical polymerization methods will be combined with rod brushes with high
persistence lengths grown from surfaces made using a variety of living and
pseudo-living chemistries. Phase separation aided by solvent processing and
guided by nanolithography will be used to control in-plane structure. A variety
of chemical and process methods will be used to limit macroscopic phase
separation and thereby direct assembly of topographical and chemical structures.
Brush growth will employ new, chemically tailored brush initiators for single
chain and binary chain growth to form rod-coil mixed brush pairings. To direct
brush structure and rod-coil phase separation, brush initiators will be
patterned at length scales of a few 10s of nanometers using state-of-the-art
lithography methods to control spacing of the brush spikes. Brush organization
will be compared to computational predictions which will be used to guide both
brush design and selection and to anticipate the resulting physical structure
and aid characterization studies. Characterization of the brushes will be made
using a selection of analytical methods including grazing incidence (GI) SAXS
and WAXS, neutron reflectivity and resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS)
measurements. Studies of the conductivity and piezoelectric character of the
rod-coil brush films will aid in our understanding of the mixed brush structure.
Through collaborations, studies of these materials as cell membrane substrates,
for targeted biomolecular binding, as piezoelectric and as conducting materials
with unusual transport pathways, will also provide information about key length
scales and rod-brush organization. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.