* 1905341
* Collaborative Research: Exploiting Spin Networks and Efficient Catalyst/Substrate Separations for NMR "SABRE" Enhancement of Complex Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Boyd Goodson, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 483,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Boyd Goodson at Southern Illinois University (SIU) and
Eduard Chekmenev at Wayne State University (WSU) are working to improve the
sensitivity of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), an important method of chemical
analysis which underlies the well-known clinical imaging modality, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). The Goodson/Chekmenev team is developing new,
inexpensive, and easy-to-make means of enhancing nuclear magnetization - a
sensitivity-limiting factor in many NMR and MRI applications, including
diagnostic tests for a host of diseases. Anticipated cost savings can also make
these methods more available for other lab settings, particularly those that
have more limited research infrastructure and/or that feature undergraduate
research. Several students are involved, gaining exposure to highly
interdisciplinary training. The team is also engaged in efforts to recruit
undergraduate students and match them with a variety of mentored research
opportunities on both campuses, with a goal of increasing the numbers and
diversity of undergraduate students seeking STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The NMR/MRI approaches being used are based on Signal Amplification
by Reversible Exchange, or SABRE. In SABRE, an organometallic catalyst is used
to co-locate parahydrogen and a target molecule (substrate) within a transient
complex; with properly matched external magnetic fields, nuclear spin order can
transfer spontaneously and efficiently from parahydrogen to the substrate,
giving rise to NMR and MRI signals that are increased by several orders of
magnitude. Work by the Goodson/Chekmenev team seeks to: (1) improve the
understanding and utility of long-range SABRE polarization transfer via spin-
relay networks in model systems, for both homonuclear and heteronuclear cases;
(2) develop and characterize new heterogeneous catalysts for SABRE ("HET-
SABRE"), as well as approaches for catalyst recovery; and (3) broaden the range
of substances amenable to SABRE through improved understanding of the
fundamental quantum mechanics of complex spin behavior in model extended
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.