* 1905312
* Measuring Hole Transfer across the Single Nanowire/Liquid Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Mario Alpuche, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2023
* USD 290,000.00

Semiconductor nanowires can be thousands of times thinner than a strand of hair.
These extremely small sizes give rise to unique properties that can be harnessed
for applications ranging from light emitting diodes to solar energy conversion
devices. However, as the wire diameter gets smaller and smaller, defects at the
nanowire surfaces, which trap charge and degrade device performance, play an
ever-increasing role. With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Mario Alpuche is
studying the light-induced transfer of electrons between nanowires and molecules
in solution. Working with his students, Professor Alpuche is using extremely
small electrodes to detect the electrical current resulting from the absorption
of light by a single nanowire. Their discoveries could have important
implications for the use of nanomaterials in solar energy conversion
applications. In addition, the project is broadening participation by recruiting
students of Hispanic descent through engagement with educational programs
throughout northern Nevada, and collaborations in the United States and abroad
motivate students from underrepresented groups to pursue careers in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Alpuche's research group is developing
new methods to study charge transfer across the nanowire semiconductor surface.
CdSe nanowires are attached to ultramicroelectrodes and excited with light,
producing photogenerated electron-hole pairs. The hole in the valance band can
be transferred from the nanowire to a molecule in solution, or trapped at
surface defect sites, while the electron is transferred to the electrode and
detected as a photoinduced current. The dependence of photocurrent on
electrochemical potential and irradiation power enables a separation of the
contribution of hole traps from that of charge transfer, and finite element
simulations enable extraction of the rate constant for hole transfer out of the
nanowire. The electrochemical instrumentation can detect photocurrent from
individual nanowires, allowing the group to study the effects of nanowire
heterogeneity across an ensemble of structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.