* 1905094
* Understanding Molecular-Recognition Properties of Helical Pores under Non-equilibrium Conditions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Xiao Cheng Zeng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 220,000.00

Professor Bing Gong of the State University of New York at Buffalo and Professor
Xiao Cheng Zeng of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln collaborate to develop
novel approaches to sensing differences among sugar molecules. In this project,
the team designs and synthesizes long-chain molecules that coil up like springs.
The interior space of these "molecular springs" interact with different kinds of
sugar molecules with different strengths. By embedding these "molecular springs"
in a cell wall and monitoring the passage of sugar molecules through the
interior spaces, the research team aims to develop a method to recognize and
sense sugars in water. The results of this research may have implications in
separations and medical diagnostics. The broader impacts involve training
graduate and undergraduate students, incorporating research into teaching,
conducting workshops, reaching out to underrepresented groups, and broadly
disseminating this work to the scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division, this project aims to probe and understand molecular
recognition of sugar and sugar alcohols in aqueous media under non-equilibrium
conditions. The research team prepares aromatic oligoamide foldamers that form
helical coils. When embedded in membranes, the oxygen-rich, electrostatically
negative inner pores of these coils provide thruways for ions to pass through
the membrane. In addition, the presence of numerous amide oxygen atoms in the
inner pores of the membrane-bound foldamers serve as hydrogen-bond acceptors
that enable multiple hydrogen-bonding interactions with sugars and sugar
alcohols in different strengths. Such interactions, being dynamic and transient,
especially in water, result in the perturbation of ion currents through the
transmembrane pores. Depending on their structures and properties, different
types of carbohydrates perturb the flow of ions through the pores differently,
which can be detected very sensitively. By measuring the changes in
transmembrane ion conductance in the presence of different saccharides and their
derivatives, the research aims to monitor and understand molecular recognition
of these molecules under non-equilibrium conditions. Specifically, this work
focuses on synthesizing oligoamides of different lengths (8mer, 16mer, 32mer,
and 64mer) and examining the effects of various sugars and sugar alcohols on the
transmembrane ion currents through the pore-forming foldamers. Vesicle-based
assays are performed to provide a rapid but qualitative screening of the effects
of chosen carbohydrates, followed by measurement of single-channel currents to
reveal the signatures of different carbohydrate
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.