* 1905338
* Investigation of Reactive Radical Intermediates for the Development of X-ray Photonanochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Gang-Yu Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 06/30/2022
* USD 354,520.00

One of the most important molecules in our life is DNA, which can be broken into
pieces in water after exposure to powerful, invisible X-ray radiation. Although
X-ray-induced damage to DNA can cause harmful effects to our health, it can also
be used beneficially in a number of applications including radiation therapy for
cancer treatment. The rate of such damage is found to be accelerated by the
presence of tiny metal particles, such as gold particles whose dimensions are on
the order of a small fraction of the diameter of a human hair. However, the
cause for acceleration in the speed of DNA damage is not fully understood. With
the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the NSF Division of Chemistry, Professor Guo at the University of California at
Davis aims to develop a novel approach to achieve a better fundamental
understanding of this important and complex chemical process. The outcome of
this research can potentially help scientists tailor these important reactions
for applications ranging from disease treatment to catalytic cleavage of
synthetic polymers. This interdisciplinary project at the interface of
chemistry, biology, and materials science provides valuable research training
opportunities and improves competitiveness of students including
underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The X-ray induced DNA
strand breaking process in water is generally believed to start with the
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by X-rays. The ROS then react with
DNA to form reactive DNA intermediates, which subsequently leads to the breaking
of the DNA strands. While it was discovered recently that this process can be
accelerated in the presence of gold nanoparticles, the mechanism for such
catalytic process is not understood. In order to decipher these important and
complex reactions, Professor Guo's group develops a novel approach to generate
and monitor the reactive intermediates. The approach features nanoreactors
irradiated by an X-ray beam. The nanoreactors containing catalyst assemblies are
designed and synthesized to control the chemical environment, and the timing of
X-ray irradiation, the size of the X-ray beam, and the position of the catalyst
assemblies in the nanoreactors are controlled so that the conversion of reactive
intermediates to broken DNA strands can be spatially and temporally separated
from the production of ROS. Such separation simplifies the interpretation
process and allows the identification of the intermediates and measurement of
their lifetime, leading to the elucidation of the reaction mechanisms. The
anticipated outcome of this project is the development of a novel technique that
is useful not only for elucidating X-ray induced chemical reactions (such as DNA
strand breakage) but also for controlling chemical reactions that can be used to
harvest or detect X-rays through the conversion of X-ray energy to chemical
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.