* 1905834
* ACOUSTO-OPTICAL PHASED ARRAYS (A-OPA)
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* James Bain, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2024
* USD 413,128.00

The development of low power and efficient optical interfaces for
virtual/augmented/mixed reality (VR/AR/MR), three dimensional holographic
displays and solid-state light detection and ranging (LiDAR) systems is a
recognized challenge. If overcome, new applications that will ultimately have a
transformative impact on our society would be enabled. At the heart of these
optical interfaces there is the optical phased array (OPA), a semiconductor-
based device that can steer a light beam by controlling the phase of light
through tunable components. The OPA demonstrated to date rely either on liquid
crystals or integrated photonic platforms with thermal tuning. While compact,
these OPAs consume Watts of power. Reducing power consumption of the OPA is the
ultimate goal of this project. Through innovations in materials, device design
and component integration, this project will investigate the fundamental
scientific and engineering challenges behind the development of a new class of
OPA, which is dubbed the acousto-optic phased array (A-OPA). &lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this project will lay the foundations for the development of a new
class of OPAs that would facilitate the deployment of efficient optical
interfaces for VR/AR/MR, self-driving cars or remote sensor communication. The
impact of the A-OPA would be disruptive and transform our interactions with
humans and machines. More broadly, the fundamental investigations in materials,
devices and technology will impact the photonic community at large by enabling a
new host of applications in optical networking, free-space communication,
optical switching and interconnects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed A-OPA
integrates thin films of lithium niobate (LN), a material with low optical
losses, the highest electro-optic coefficient and very large electromechanical
coefficient, with arsenic trisulfide (As2S3), a chalcogenide material with
relatively low optical losses and one of the highest acousto-optic coefficients.
Light is steered along two orthogonal angles by means of the electro-optic
effect in LN and the acousto-optic effect in As2S3. The development of advanced
micromachining processes permits the integration of these materials in very
confined geometries so that light is guided with low loss in sub-micron
waveguides and high efficiency electro-acoustic transducers are built on the
same chip. Very low voltages and power will be used to steer the phase of light
in one direction through the electro-optic effect in LN. The LN on insulator
stack will be engineered to efficiently drive acoustic waves into unreleased
films of As2S3. By exciting high frequency acoustic waves in As2S3, gratings of
variable pitch will be sculpted on the surface of the chip and steer light out
of plane. The ultimate technical goal is to devise a high performance OPA with
significantly reduced power consumption with respect to the state-of-the-
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.