* 1905259
* CZ RCN: Research Coordination in Carbonate Critical Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jonathan Martin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,121.00

The Critical Zone, defined as the thin layer of Earth's surface between the top
of vegetation and the bottom of groundwater, is the site of complex interactions
among rock, soil, water, air, and living organisms. These interactions provide
societal benefits, including life-sustaining resources, primary among them food
and water. Processes in the Critical Zone operate over wide range of time scales
that depend, in part, on the composition of the underlying bedrock. Silicate
minerals that break down slowly comprise much of the bedrock, but carbonate
minerals in limestone tend to react quickly, commonly leaving large voids that
facilitate the transfer of water through the Critical Zone. The current Critical
Zone Observatory (CZO) network lacks a site that contains significant amounts of
carbonate bedrock. This Research Coordination Network will foster discussion
among researchers about Critical Zones with elevated carbonate mineral contents,
evaluate how properties and processes of carbonate-rich Critical Zones can be
generalized to other lithologies, and integrate these findings with results from
the CZO network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A principal goal of this project is to
create a Research Coordination Network (RCN) in which researchers can evaluate
Critical-Zone properties and processes that are endemic to Critical Zones in
carbonate terrains. A related and equally important goal is to integrate new
findings with on-going research within the CZO network. These goals will be
achieved through four primary technical objectives: (1) compile available data
and models stemming from current research ;(2) convene workshops, in the field
and at major disciplinary conferences to explore new research directions; (3)
build capacity in state- of-the-art techniques used to study carbonate Critical
Zones; (4) use data compilation, workshop participation, and training to advance
knowledge of properties and processes in all Critical-Zone environments.
Outcomes of these objectives will include expanding knowledge of how relative
amounts of carbonate and silicate minerals may cause different properties and
processes in the Critical Zone between regions. This Research Coordination
Network will also develop human capital of Critical-Zone science by including
underrepresented groups in all project activities and by research collaborations
created during workshops. Outcomes will be disseminated among the research
community through workshop reports, a series of three peer-reviewed papers, and
the project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.