* 1905720
* Research in Geometry and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mladen Bestvina, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2023
* USD 369,000.00

The interplay between algebra and geometry is one of the classical themes in
mathematics. Traditionally, one studies geometric objects via their symmetries.
In geometric group theory the situation is reversed: one starts with a group of
symmetries of an algebraic object (for example, another group) and constructs a
geometric object with the same symmetries. This research project focuses on the
study of symmetries of a free group. Surprisingly, its geometry is to a large
degree governed by hyperbolic geometry that goes back to Gauss, Lobachevski,
Poincare and others, most recently to Gromov and Thurston. The goal of the
project is to better understand this phenomenon. The award includes funds for
graduate student support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of the large-scale
geometry of the outer automorphism group Out(Fn) of the free group Fn has made
great strides in recent years, but several fundamental questions are still open.
The PI has proposed a strategy for proving the Farrell-Jones conjecture for this
group. The strategy is modelled on the proofs of corresponding conjectures for
mapping class groups, taking into account the extra complications present in
Out(Fn). The steps in the strategy provide concrete questions the PI plans to
attack. More specifically, a goal is to prove that Out(Fn) has finite asymptotic
dimension, to better understand the boundary of the complex of free factors and
its local connectivity, and to isolate the part of large scale geometry of
Out(Fn) not governed by hyperbolicity by proving a distance formula for a
natural electrification of Out(Fn). In a different direction, the project
attempts to construct infinitely many quasi-isometry types of hyperbolic free by
cyclic groups with fully irreducible monodromies, providing a phenomenon
opposite from the situation for hyperbolic 3-manifolds that fiber over the
circle with pseudo-Anosov monodromies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.