* 1905748
* Compositional Dependence of Deformation Mechanisms in Concentrated FCC Solid Solutions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Michael Mills, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2023
* USD 530,160.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past millennia, humans
have learned how to make strong materials by mixing more than one metal, i.e
alloying. The traditional method has involved adding small amounts of alloying
elements to a base metal. This process led to creation of the most famous metal
alloy, steel, which is responsible for the industrial revolution and
consequently a giant leap forward in technological advances of the human
civilization. Despite great progress in making advanced steels as well as other
types of more modern alloys, such as Ni base alloys for high temperature
applications and Al and Mg alloys for light weighting, there still remain
numerous fundamental questions regarding the underlying mechanisms through which
these materials respond to loading. The answer to this question is the most
important consideration when designing load bearing structures, from buildings
and bridges to cars and airplanes. Moreover, with the modern technological
advances, there is an urgent need to design new materials, capable of enduring
complicated and often contradictory conditions, such as strength, formability
and exposure to extreme situations such as high temperature or corrosive
environments. On the other hand, recent progress in metallurgy has opened up the
possibility of creating multicomponent metal alloys with much more complex
compositions than conventional alloys. This program seeks to establish a
rigorous relationship between alloy composition, the way it is processed, and
how it responds to loading, thereby providing a physics-based predictive path to
design new alloys for tailored structural properties. The program combines
advanced modeling and experimental approaches. Interesting compositions for
study will be identified using cutting-edge computational techniques.
Experiments are designed to create predicted alloy compositions using efficient
methods to rapidly explore a wide range of compositions, and characterization of
internal material defects induced during deformation. In addition, this program
will provide an opportunity to engage and train a diverse population of students
from high school, to undergraduate and graduate levels, through hands on
projects utilizing state of the art experimental and computational techniques to
contribute towards educating the next generation of STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel, high-throughput computations and experiments
are proposed over a wide range of compositions to test the hypothesis that
deformation mechanisms and consequent properties in multicomponent fcc-based
alloys can be favorably tuned by composition. This proposal seeks to develop a
comprehensive understanding of deformation mechanisms in a wide range of fcc
solid solutions, including deviation from equiatomic compositions, and
specifically to explore compositions for which twinning and hcp martensite
effects may contribute to extraordinary strain hardening and ultimate strength
potential. Thus, the research objectives are to: (1) employ novel and efficient
computational and combinatorial experimental approaches for creating desirable
alloys; (2) understand the effect of stacking fault energy and relative fcc/hcp
stability on the competing deformation mechanisms; (3) determine the evolution
of deformation substructure with strain and the connection to remarkable strain
hardening; and (4) characterize and model the deformation mechanisms operative
at elevated temperature in association with anomalous hardening and dynamic
strain aging. An integrated computational/experimental framework will be applied
to a broad range of CrCoNi ternary alloys, and to alloys beyond this ternary
system, in order to make a direct, quantitative connection between the chemistry
of fcc-based solid solutions, and active deformation mechanisms and mechanical
behavior. A new Monte Carlo method based on density functional theory (DFT)
recently developed by PI Ghazisaeidi will be employed to predict phase stability
and segregation behavior. Guided by these computations, PI Mills will conduct
high-throughput experiments in order to reveal the complex relationships between
composition, stacking fault energy, phase stability, and deformation mechanisms.
This proposal will challenge present measurements in low stacking fault energy
alloys through in situ mechanical experiments which will enable improved
correlation between experiment and DFT calculation. Directly linking composition
to phase stability and deformation mechanisms is necessary, as evidenced by the
fact that TWIP steels with similar or lower stacking fault energies (when
compared with CrCoNi) do not exhibit deformation-induced martensite (as does
CrCoNi). Study of these complex composition effects will be extended to higher
temperatures where evidence for strong solute interaction is observed in
mechanical response, such as anomalous hardening and serrated flow, but the
chemical species and deformation mechanisms associated with these interactions
have yet to be identified. The proposed research will be extensible to other
multicomponent alloys, including many important commercial alloys such as IN825,
MP35, and Alloy 28 that share compositional commonality with the recently
emerging fcc-based high entropy alloys, but presently lack detailed deformation
mechanism understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.