* 1905844
* Collaborative Research: Fine Scale Alpha Precipitation and Resulting Deformation Mechanisms in Titanium Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Rajarshi Banerjee, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2024
* USD 292,992.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of this experimental
program is to develop a fundamental understanding of the structure of
lightweight titanium (Ti) alloys, at different length scales, and its influence
on the mechanical properties of these lightweight alloys. Such understanding
will directly impact the ability to engineer the formation of nanometer scale
precipitates (particles) within these Ti alloys, leading to substantially higher
strengths. The proposed research effort brings together state-of-the-art
characterization tools for addressing these precipitation mechanisms. While the
focus of the proposed program is on titanium alloys, it should be noted that the
mechanisms being investigated are applicable in general to other metallic
materials, and, in principle, also to other types of materials, such as
ceramics. Additionally, the program will also illustrate the advantage of using
state-of-the-art tools in a correlative manner for nanoscale characterization
which will be applicable to a wide range of metallic materials beyond Ti alloys.
The successful implementation of the proposed research will result in new
science and have a significant impact on industrial exploitation of materials
and hence will make a positive contribution to the Nation's economy. The
accurate mechanistic understandings developed will be used to inform
computational tools, improving their accuracy, and this will have a marked
impact on industry. The educational outreach will consist of multiple
components, including the development of simple yet attractive modules, based on
scanning electron microscopy, for high school and undergraduate students as well
as the general public to the fascinating world of metals and materials in
general. Such activities will have a significant influence on encouraging high
school students with diverse ethnic backgrounds to enter science and engineering
disciplines. These educational activities will closely couple with the
educational and outreach activities of the Center for the Accelerated Maturation
of Materials at Ohio State University. Due to its geographic location, the
College of Engineering and the Department of Materials Science and Engineering
at University of North Texas are in a unique position to offer such education
and training to the workforce of the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex. In addition,
the university has a substantial segment of students of Hispanic origin. These
students will gain substantially from the research and education activities
associated with this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program involves a focused effort
aimed at formulating a detailed understanding of the factors influencing refined
alpha precipitation in titanium (Ti) alloys, and its consequent impact on
deformation mechanisms and mechanical properties. More specifically, this
program focuses on the influence of metastable precursors, involving structural
and compositional variations within the parent matrix, on solid-state
precipitation of fine scale alpha in Ti alloys and its consequent influence on
deformation mechanisms. The significance of this program stems from the
interrelationship between the complex, often hierarchical (multiple length
scales) microstructure, and properties in these (as in other) alloys. In the
main, these interrelationships have been determined experimentally, and to
reduce the time and costs of materials development and optimization, in the
future these quantities will be the subject of prediction by computational
models. The successful development of such computational models of
microstructural evolution and deformation depends critically on accurate
descriptions of the nucleation process, so that the models may be as physically
relevant as possible. Furthermore, it is now well recognized that classical
nucleation theories, based purely on statistical considerations, are in many
cases inadequate descriptions for developing robust computational models. Hence,
it is the role of this program to provide such accurate mechanistic descriptions
of both intrinsic and extrinsic (e.g., metastable instabilities in the beta
phase) factors that influence the nucleation process. Under this program these
mechanisms will be derived solely from critical experiments. Additionally, the
critical deformation mechanisms and resulting mechanical properties
corresponding to such refined scale alpha distributions within the beta matrix
of Ti alloys will be investigated under this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.