* 1905597
* Interfacial Dynamics in Ultrathin Polymer Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Joshua Sangoro, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2022
* USD 410,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many practical applications,
polymers are in direct contact with solid surfaces so that polymer-substrate
interactions and the presence of free interfaces induce drastic deviations from
their bulk properties. Fundamental understanding of the origins of these
deviations is still lacking. This research will employ specialized dielectric,
microscopy, and thermal characterization experiments to gain in-depth
understanding of the impact of nanoscale confinement and polymer/surface
interactions on the bulk properties of polymers of different molecular
architectures. A unique focus of this work is the development of new, more
accurate experimental methods for probing dynamics at the immediate interface
between polymers and solid surfaces. The fundamental understanding obtained from
the planned research could provide a basis for deliberate and optimal design of
polymers for many technological applications, such as batteries, fuel cells, and
supercapacitors, where interfaces play a significant role in determining the
overall functionality. In addition, the knowledge gained from this project
concerning the impact of the chemistry of solid surfaces in contact with
polymers, the type of polymer, extent of confinement and sample preparative
conditions will provide fundamental understanding to the polymer science and
engineering communities. An important component of this project also involves
several integrated educational activities. The project will contribute to
training and education of specialists in polymer nanotechnology and materials
science through active involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in
this research. The integrated research/educational program particularly
emphasizes work with underrepresented groups and research experiences for high-
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers exhibit deviations from their bulk
physical properties in the vicinity of solid interfaces due to changes in
interfacial structure and dynamics. These changes lead to shifts in the
distribution of microscopic relaxation times determining many physical
quantities of polymeric materials relevant to numerous technological fields as
adhesion, coatings, and nanocomposites. Predictive understanding of how these
alterations in the polymer properties depend on the molecular structure,
flexibility of the polymer chains, thickness of the polymer layers, chemistry of
the substrates, as well as temperature, is still lacking, and reliable
experimental techniques to directly probe the microscopic dynamics in confined
polymers are limited. To address this gap, the planned project will employ
atomic force microscopy, AC chip calorimetry, and especially broadband
dielectric spectroscopy in combination with recently developed nanostructured
electrode assembly featuring silica nanostructures and an air gap, to probe
interfacial dynamics in model ultrathin polymer films. The main goal of the
project is to unravel the impact of interfacial interactions on structural and
chain dynamics in linear and architecturally complex polymers, beyond the mean
relaxation times. The major objectives include: (i) to develop a fundamental
understanding of the influence of solid substrates on dynamics of polymers at
interfaces; (ii) elucidate the role of molecular weight, chain flexibility, and
architecture on interfacial dynamics; and (iii) investigate the impact of
polymer film thickness and temperature on the distribution of relaxation times
at the interphases. The detailed fundamental understanding of the impact of one-
dimensional confinement gained from this project will provide a scientific
framework for the design of novel functional polymers with unique properties for
numerous technologies, including coatings, polymer composites, and polymer
electrolytes suitable for use in electrochemical power sources and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.