* 1905478
* Indirect Excitons
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Leonid Butov, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2022
* USD 550,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award supports a
project directed towards experimental studies of fundamental optical and
electronic properties of structures made of thin layers of semiconductors. A
special design of the structures on a length scale of a billionth part of a
meter allows the creation of new quasi-particles called indirect excitons. The
indirect excitons are unique because they can be cooled down to ultralow
temperatures. Furthermore, the indirect excitons are unique because they can be
electronically controlled like electrons in electronic devices and can emit
optical signals. The project is directed towards increasing our understanding of
the physics of ultracold indirect excitons. The understanding gained through
this research may lead to the exciting possibility of developing advanced
devices that make use of electronic as well as optical properties, i.e.
optoelectronic devices. Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in
this project and will have the opportunity to perform research on the cutting
edge of contemporary physics. The training they receive will prepare them for
employment in high-tech industries across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This individual
investigator award supports a project directed towards experimental studies of
cold indirect excitons and cold electron-hole plasma in coupled quantum well
semiconductor structures. Indirect excitons are formed by electrons and holes
confined in spatially separated quantum well layers. Due to their long lifetime,
indirect excitons can cool below the temperature of quantum degeneracy. This
gives an opportunity to study cold excitons. Due to their long lifetime,
indirect excitons can travel over large distances before recombination. This
gives an opportunity to study exciton transport. Furthermore, indirect excitons
are dipoles and their energy can be controlled by voltage. This gives an
opportunity to create a variety of potential landscapes for indirect excitons
and use them as a tool for studying cold excitons – cold composite bosons in
materials. Studies include transport of cold indirect excitons in basic
mesoscopic devices – quantum point contacts, and cold electron hole plasma in
separated electron and hole layers. The research is performed by students and is
integrated with education. The potential impact of the project is in development
of knowledge in condensed matter physics and increase of fundamental
understanding of optical and electronic properties of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.