* 1905328
* Application of hydrogen bond enhanced halogen bond for biomolecular engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Anthony Rappe, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 12/31/2022
* USD 617,837.00

Halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine) are elements found in 25% of
drugs currently used to treat human disease. The role of halogens in providing
drugs with their specificity against clinical targets is now recognized as
coming from a chemical interaction called the halogen bond. The halogen bond is
similar to the better-recognized hydrogen bond, which is responsible for holding
the structures of DNA and proteins together. With this award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes program of the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Laurie
Stargell and Professor Anthony Rappe to determine how hydrogen bonds enhance the
strength of halogen bonds, allowing this now stronger interaction to be
engineered to design new proteins. The enhanced halogen bonds will be used to
create proteins that interact with other proteins, leading to a new computer
method to design drugs to treat human disease. In addition, the enhanced halogen
bonds stabilize proteins that are otherwise not entirely stable, which has been
associated with neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease. This
project will provide training in structural and computational chemistry for
graduate and undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented
groups. Finally, an outreach project will help middle school and high school
students learn how scientists use 'X-ray vision' to see the atoms in DNA and
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hydrogen bond (HB) is a well-characterized
and prevalent interaction in biology. The halogen bond (XB) is increasingly
being recognized as important in chemistry and biology, particularly in
biomolecular engineering and in the design of inhibitors against biomolecular
targets. Very recently, it was shown that an HB donor can significantly increase
the XB potential of an adjacent halogen substituent through a variation called
an HB-enhanced XB (or HBeXB, for short). This project will test the hypothesis
that HBeXBs are strongly stabilizing interactions that can be exploited in
biomolecular engineering and inhibitor design. In order to realize the potential
of the HBeXB as a design tool, its structure-energy relationships must be
characterized and incorporated into a molecular simulation algorithm. The
objectives of this project are to determine the prevalence of HBeXBs in the
chemical and protein structural databases; incorporate HBeXBs into an empirical
force field for halogen bonds to accurately model this synergistic interaction;
and engineer HBeXBs into coiled coil peptides and partially stable proteins to
validate this new force field and as a proof of concept for bimolecular
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.