* 1905305
* Deposition and nonlinear optical properties of transition metal nitride/oxide thin films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Anthony Johnson, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Nontechnical description: The interaction of light with matter is of high
scientific and technological interest. Light is an electromagnetic wave and the
electric field may interact with the charges present in the material to produce
separation of the positive and negative charge centers resulting in the
appearance of an electric field within the body of the material. When the
intensity of the light is low, then the induced electric field is also very
small and proportional (linear) to the applied field. However, when intense
light such as that from a laser is used then it is possible that a very high
(nonlinear) response may be obtained. This intense response to the externally
applied electric field depends on the structure and composition of the material
and can be used to generate light of a different color, or to modulate the
propagation of light through the material via an intensity dependent refractive
index. For example, it is highly desirable to be able to protect sensors and the
naked human eye from high intensity light such as lasers. While the military
implications of such materials are obvious, the benefits can affect many areas
of everyday life. Most of the materials known to have a nonlinear response are
cut from large crystals or are liquids and are not suitable to cover large areas
reproducibly such as those needed for the application described before. In this
project, the research team study a new class of nonlinear optical materials that
are based on thin films that can be deposited reliably and reproducibly on large
surface areas including complex geometries and even optical fibers with atomic
scale precision. The project is training of two graduate students in an area of
high technological importance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
Nonlinear materials in thin film form are highly desirable for on chip fast all-
optical switching devices, frequency conversion and optical limiting
applications as conventional nonlinear optical materials are not suitable for
integration with the contemporary semiconductor industry process flow. This
project seeks to address this shortage by designing and investigating novel
nonlinear optical materials based on rational principles. The materials
investigated are based on titanium and tantalum nitride seeded dielectric thin
films where the at% of titanium-nitrogen or tantalum-nitrogen bonding in the
film volume can be used to control the value of the nonlinear index of
refraction and film transparency. The maturation of ALD as a thin film
deposition technique allows the formation of such structures with atomic level
thickness control, through a single deposition process by just controlling
parameters such as the process temperature and the precursor delivery
temperature. This project includes design of seeded materials with tunable
composition, as well as the adaptation of optical techniques such as Z-scan and
ultrafast pump-probe to investigate these novel, ultrathin structures. The
proposed activity and the interdisciplinary research team seek to combine and
transfer knowledge between the electronics materials and nonlinear optics
communities. Such cross pollination is expected to advance the state of the art
in both fields, with the goal to enrich the materials toolkit available for on
chip fast all-optical switching, frequency conversion and optical limiting
applications. The main outcome for this proposal is to provide detailed
understanding of the physics governing a new class of semiconductor compatible
nonlinear optical materials that may address the technological need for novel,
well-characterized materials to aid in the realization of new device
paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.