* 1905665
* Claisen and Mitsunobu functional graphenic materials as stem cell instructive 3D printed scaffolds for bone regeneration
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Stefanie Sydlik, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 625,078.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a resorbable
scaffold that supports the bone regrowth after injury. Stem cells hold great
promise to enable bone regrowth, but current scaffolds lack the ability to
retain and provide signals to stem cells to enable their transformation into
bone-forming cells at the site of injury. To overcome these limitations,
functional graphenic materials (FGMs) hold promise. Graphite is abundantly
available and can be chemically modified to form FGMs. FGMs offer excellent and
tunable mechanical properties, degradability, and controllable surface chemistry
that can be translated to tunable bioactivity. However, this is not yet possible
because a suitable processing method does not exist. Here, the PI will develop
new FGMs with the ability to retain and direct the healing response of bone-
forming cells. Further, the PI will develop 3D printing methods for these FGMs
to create personalized scaffolds for patients. Ultimately, FGMs could replace
permanent hardware used in the surgical treatment of traumatic bone injury with
a resorbable material that allows regeneration of natural bone. Beyond societal
impacts, undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the classroom
and laboratory, as well as perform outreach activities to empower and engage
women and underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop novel methods to synthesize and 3D print biomimetic,
functional graphene materials (FGMs) that will serve as scaffolds for instructed
stem cell regeneration of bone. Current methods for stem cell driven
regeneration are limited because a scaffold that recruits stem cells and
supports their retention as they differentiate into functional tissue. FGMs
offer a unique panel of properties not found in any other single material and
therefore has the potential to overcome these limitations. Specifically, FGMs
offer autodegradability, mechanical properties, and long range order, coupled
with controllable surface chemistry. Graphene oxide (GO) offers a plethora of
organic functionality that can be used to tune the surface chemistry to maximize
cellular interactions biocompatibility in FGMs. However, realization of these
properties has been limited due to insufficient control of the chemical
interface, and applications have been limited by an inability to produce a
robust 3D scaffold. Here, new methods will be developed to create biomimetic
FGMs by using the Claisen rearrangement and the Mitsunobu reaction: classic
organic reactions to covalently install biomimetic moieties directly at the
surface of the biomaterial. At the end of this funding period, the project will:
1) Demonstrate the ability of Claisen Graphene, CG, to create an instructive
surface to promote superior stem cell adhesion. 2) Demonstrate superior
stability of proteins, directed stem cell differentiation, and covalent
controlled release using Mitsunobu Graphene, MG. 3) Innovate 3DP methods to
produce FGM scaffolds suitable for implantation in vivo. Overall, this work on
bone will provide valuable insights on stem cell directing therapies and could
unlock the potential of stem cell directed regeneration in a plethora of tissue
engineering therapies. Beyond societal impacts, this project supports ChemCast,
a podcast designed to keep students up to date on research topics as well as
outreach activities including the "Chemistry of
Cycling".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.