* 1905262
* Fundamental Study of Synthetic and Transformational Reactions of Molecular Silver and Gold Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Terry Bigioni, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 270,000.00

Chemists routinely transform molecules using chemical reactions to make and
break chemical bonds, rearranging the atoms in controlled and deliberate ways to
make new and valuable molecules. The synthesis and transformation of molecular
nanoparticles (10-100 times the size of most small molecules) lack that level of
control and sophistication. Professor Terry Bigioni and his research group at
the University of Toledo are changing this limitation by systematically studying
different types of nanoparticle reactions to learn the details of nanoparticle
synthesis and transformation. By shedding light on how nanoparticles react,
chemists may be able to make better nanomaterials and enable new technologies
that drive the economy and help society. The fundamental nature of this work
means that it can impact a broad range of fields, such as better catalysts that
clean the air and conserve energy, new classes of anti-cancer and anti-viral
drugs, light-emitting beacons for biomedical imaging, or energy absorbers for
harvesting energy directly from the sun. Students involved in this research gain
valuable skills and interdisciplinary training that is vital to strengthening
our nation's economy, technical leadership, and workforce. This project includes
extensive outreach activities, including the popular "Saturday Morning Science"
public lecture series at the University of
Toledo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monolayer-protected clusters (MPCs) are a class of
nanoparticles that are small enough to have discrete molecular structures.
Despite being a molecular species, it is still not yet possible to predict the
outcome of MPC reactions. With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry program of the NSF Chemistry Division, Professor Terry Bigioni
and his research group are studying the fundamental chemical principles of noble
metal MPCs (primarily gold, silver, and their alloys), to better understand
reactions involving this new class of compounds. The research focuses on
learning the synthetic principles of nanoparticle formation as well as the
underlying concepts of nanoparticle modification and transformation using a
subset of MPCs with known structures. To accomplish this, the team is developing
methods to study equilibrium distributions and reaction kinetics in order to
gain a more detailed picture of metal nanoparticle thermodynamics and reaction
pathways. These are important steps toward establishing a predictive theory of
noble metal nanoparticle reactivity and improving our ability to rationally
control their structures and properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.