* 1905347
* Two-Dimensional Pre-Assembled Multi-Scale Brownian Soft Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Thomas Mason, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2023
* USD 599,210.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Some pure materials are highly uniform and have
essentially the same structure and properties from very small to very large
length scales. However, other materials, including biological tissues, have
different structures and properties at different length scales from microscopic
to macroscopic; these are 'multi-scale' materials. One of the most important
current challenges in physical science involves developing rules that describe
increasingly complex multi-scale materials which begin to approach the extremely
high level of complexity found in biology. This project focuses on creating and
studying the behavior of highly contollable synthetic multi-scale materials that
contain moving shape-designed particulate components dispersed in a liquid.
Optical lithography, which is the key technology for mass-producing computer
chips, enables the top-down production of human-designed, pre-configured, multi-
scale materials composed of mobile tile-like particles that have interesting
shapes and arrangements at different length scales in two dimensions. Beyond
revealing physical rules that govern the dynamics and structures of mobile
constituents and coupling between different length scales in such multi-scale
materials using optical microscopy, this project benefits K-12 students,
including underrepresented minority students, in the Los Angeles area by
introducing them to the basic concepts of lithography through age-appropriate
educational modules that are deployed in conjunction with educators-in-training
at UCLA's Center X.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
recent advent of lithographically pre-assembled monolayers of mobile shape-
designed colloidal tiles, made using optical stepper lithography, provides a new
and powerful experimental route for making two-dimensional dynamic systems
having controllable multi-scale complexity. This project takes advantage of
lithographically pre-assembled monolayers to explore both equilibrium and non-
equilibrium multi-scale materials, including quasi-crystals and hierarchical
crystals-of-crystals, that have controlled symmetries and topologies spanning a
wide range of length scales. Time-lapse optical video microscopy experiments of
these systems yield spatio-temporal kinetics and dynamics down to the tile
scale, thereby yielding measurements of the fluctuations and evolution of shape-
designed monolayer systems both as a consequence of entropic Brownian
excitations and also as a consequence of active driving. From particle tracking
analysis of these videos, quantitative insight into multi-scale complex systems
of crowded shapes serves as a starting point for understanding more complex
forms of active and biological matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.