* 1905843
* Charge-Spin Conversions in Helical Metals and Chiral Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Peng Xiong, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 466,983.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Conventional semiconductor microelectronics
utilize only the charge of electrons for logic operations. It has been
demonstrated that harnessing the spin of electrons can not only lead to enhanced
performance such as dramatic reduction in power consumption but also produce
fundamentally new functionalities such as nonvolatility and reconfigurable
logics. An essential ingredient of spin-based semiconductor electronics is the
creation of electron populations and currents with well-defined spin
orientations, i.e., spin polarization, in a nonmagnetic semiconductor. This
project aims to generate, control, and detect polarized spins in semiconductors
through pure electrical means, and in some cases without even using any magnetic
material. One way is by driving an electric current through the surface of a
topological insulator, where the electron velocity and spin are always locked in
orthogonal directions; the other is by pushing electrons through a chiral
medium, which can be a monolayer of chiral organic molecules or inorganic
materials with inherent chiral crystal structures. Practically, the research may
lead to new paradigms of spintronics devices free of magnetic materials. At the
fundamental level, they offer ideal platforms for studying microscopic
mechanisms of charge-spin conversions due to structural chirality and electronic
interactions. The project also presents an invaluable combination of basic
science research and technology development, an effective venue for preparing
graduate students for careers in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project is
aimed at the generation, control, and detection of polarized spins in
semiconductors through pure electrical means, and in some cases without using
any magnetic material. The project has two distinct research thrusts, which
share a common objective of addressing the manifestations and microscopic
mechanisms of charge-spin conversions due to structural chirality and electronic
interactions. The two lines of research specifically target demonstrating and
understanding electrical generation of spin currents from charge motion in two
different systems: i) 3D strong topological insulators whose surface states
exhibit helical spin textures in momentum space and, ii) materials with
intrinsic structural chirality in real space. In the first system, the research
introduces photocurrent injection and correlated characterizations of the
topological surface state, which offers high probability of deciphering the
microscopic mechanism behind the current-induced spin polarization and
determining its device application potentials. The study on the spin filtering
effect of chiral materials is designed to produce fundamental insights on spin-
dependent transport in the chiral media. The results from these physical chiral
structures have broad implications in pertinent studies of emergent spin-helical
states in topological materials. Practically, the research may lead to
conceptually new methods of spin injection and detection, forming the basis for
spintronics device platforms free of magnetic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.