* 1905270
* Studying the Processes of Assembly and Stimuli-Responsive Morphological Transformations in Solvated Macromolecular Nano-Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Nathan Gianneschi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Nathan Gianneschi of Northwestern University and
Lucas R. Parent of University of Connecticut examine how amphiphilic copolymers
behave in water on the nanoscale. Amphiphilic copolymers are long chain
molecules possessing both water-loving and oil-loving properties. Examples of
common amphiphilic compounds include soaps and detergents. In this work,
electron microscopy is used to observe molecular-scale movement during the self-
assembly of amphiphilic copolymers in water. Experimental studies examine the
pathways and intermediates for the assembly. Control of self-assembly has
promise for applications such as optimized drug or cosmetic delivery vehicles,
as functional&lt;br/&gt;elements in composites, as optical sensors, and in the
transport of catalysts and reagents in industry and biology. Beyond research and
mentoring in a laboratory, this project connects with ongoing school outreach
efforts. Activities include Exploring Engineering and Spark annual summer camps
for national STEM high school students and local middle school girls. Also, the
da Vinci Program is designed to educate local secondary school teachers and
administrators on increasing classroom STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work employs in situ liquid phase transmission electron microscopy techniques to
study the dynamic processes of macromolecular nanostructures involving
copolymers of N,N-dimethylacrylamide, N-isopropylacrylamide and/or n-butyl
acrylate. Particular emphasis is placed on developing an understanding of the
mechanisms and pathways of self-assembly/disassembly, kinetic trapping, phase
changes and morphological transformations. Polymer syntheses are conducted using
reversible addition-fragmentation transfer polymerization which enables control
over molecular weight and polydispersity. Understanding control at the nanoscale
has promise for the application of investigated amphiphilic copolymers as
components capable of performing as optimized drug delivery vehicles and as
functional elements in composites capable of mechanical or rheological
responses. Additionally, such systems also have the potential to transport
catalysts and reagents. Research associated with this award advances
understanding of the fundamental process of self-assembly of discrete
architectures from disperse polymers which is of significant interest not only
to nanoscience community, but to polymer scientists in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.