* 1905172
* Establishing Water's Role in the Mechanism of Atmospheric New Particle Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Christopher Johnson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2023
* USD 445,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
funds Professor Christopher Johnson at Stony Brook University to study the
formation of new particles, called aerosols, directly from gases in the Earth's
atmosphere. This is an important process, but no complete framework exists to
predict particle formation and growth rates. In particular, the role of water in
these processes is unknown, because it is difficult to detect its presence and
structure in new particles. This project focuses on isolating "seed" particles
with precisely known composition and growing them in inside a mass spectrometer
under precisely controlled conditions. This allows the exact changes in
composition to be followed one molecule at a time. Water vapor pressure is
controlled to determine whether it speeds up growth. Molecular clusters
containing water are analyzed to determine the cause of the rate increase. This
work establishes how water impacts particle formation and provides critical
comparisons for theoretical efforts to predict particle formation rates. This
will ultimately help to reduce uncertainties in global climate models. The
project provides training and research opportunities for graduate students. In
addition, Professor Johnson and his students engage in outreach to the broader
public through demonstrations and visualizations of particles forming clouds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project directly addresses the mechanistic impacts of
water on new particle formation. Using variable-temperature ion trap mass
spectrometry techniques, the kinetics and energetics of growth are determined
for precisely specified seed clusters consisting of sulfuric acid and a set of
organic acids and amine bases, in the presence or absence of water. Three
hypotheses are being tested: (1) Water serves as a "sacrificial ligand" that
enhances the sticking of incoming vapors. (2) Water stabilizes surface-bound
molecules through cooperative hydrogen bonding. (3) Water catalyzes growth by
lowering the barrier to structural rearrangement of the existing cluster to
accommodate incoming vapors. The critical structural features of seed and
product clusters are characterized by in situ vibrational spectroscopy to
determine the most active sites for growth. This work is carried out in
collaboration with theoreticians modeling particle growth. The experiments can
validate the theoretical approaches and the calculations provide additional
insights into experimental results. This project is expected to yield enhanced
predictions of growth rates, explicitly including water, that can be adapted to
regional climate models. In addition to providing training and research
opportunities to students, Professor Johnson also plans to interact with the
Alan Alda Center at Stonybrook on promoting science
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.