* 1905786
* A high throughput platform for rapid single cell surface mapping
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Jiang Zhe, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2023
* USD 373,373.00

Cell surface charge, net electricity on cell surface, is a promising new
biomarker for rare cell detection, cell sorting, and pathology stage monitoring
of malignant cell. Cell surface charge pattern also reflects the in situ dynamic
status of cell membrane, which is critical for membrane-regulated cell functions
such as endocytosis, muscle cell contraction, nutrient transport, T cell
activation and insulin release. Recent evidences show that a variety of cell
functions including cell aggregation, cell division and cell migration can be
modulated by manipulating cell surface charge patterns. Therefore rapid mapping
of single cell surface charge patterns will provide a unique and important
approach in advancing analysis of cells and regulation of their functions.
However, to date rapid mapping of living cell surface charge remains a large
challenge owing to lack of robust techniques capable of measurements at the
micro and nano scale. Scanning ion conductance microscopy has been used for
quantitative cell surface charge mapping. This method employs a single nano
pipette to approach the cell surface point by point, resulting in a low
efficiency, labor intensive and destructive measurement. The proposed research
aims to address this long standing challenge by exploring a universal method for
rapid, non-destructive characterization and mapping of cell surface charge. In
addition, with educational and outreach activities, the proposed research is
poised to enhance the interdisciplinary learning experience for undergraduate,
graduate and K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to explore a lab-on-a- chip platform for rapid, non-destructive living cell
surface charge mapping. Such a device will 1) foster the breakthrough of
discovering new biomarkers for cell identification, sorting and real time
monitoring, and 2) greatly advance the knowledge in understanding the roles cell
electrical properties play on cell functions. To achieve the objective, the
following tasks will be pursued: 1) demonstration of acoustic cell manipulator
that will rapidly focus/release individual living cell onto/off the probe
surface in a continuous flow, 2) study of an array of nanopores that can
accurately map the cell surface charge with high temporal resolution and
accuracy, 3) implementation of signal multiplexing that will enable simultaneous
measurement of surface charge distributions via a nanopore array, and 4)
validation of the platform for rapid cell surface charge mapping using human
dermal fibroblasts cells. The use of non-intrusive cell manipulation enables
quick focus/release cells onto/off the nanopore array's surface, allowing rapid,
high-throughput surface charge mapping in continuous flow. The use of nanopore
array in combination with signal multiplexing enables rapid mapping of the cell
surface charge characteristics at one time without complex measurement
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.