* 1905943
* Metallic Properties of the Isotopes of Hydrogen
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Isaac Silvera, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 510,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The hydrogen atom is composed of a single
proton and a single electron bonded together. The deuterium nucleus is composed
of a proton and neutron, so twice the mass of hydrogen. The objective of this
research is to study the properties of the hydrogen isotopes: hydrogen,
deuterium, and hydrogen deuteride in the metallic phases (tritium is omitted as
it is radioactive), collectively referred to as the hydrogens. In general
isotopic effects of elements are small, of order a percent or two. In the
hydrogens, the mass ratio of D2 to H2 is 200% and the impact on the behavior can
be very large. For example, one of the important quantum aspects of hydrogen is
the zero-point energy or motion in the condensed matter phase. The consequence
is that in the zero temperature limit, the atoms or moleules are not in fixed
positions in lattice sites, but have motion around these sites. Such materials
have very low temperatures of solidification (molecular hydrogen, about 14 K;
deuterium about 18 K). Helium is even more quantum than the molecular hydrogens
and does not have a solid state, remaining liquid to T= 0K. Atomic hydrogen
itself is predicted to have a liquid ground state. The research team plans to
study the effects of high pressure on the hydrogens. The team has already shown
experimentally that hydrogen deuteride, which is a stable molecule, becomes
unstable at a pressure of ~200 GPa, dissociating and recombining to form a
stable mixture of HD, D2 an H2. Thus, in this research the properties of the
isotopes at ultra high pressures and low temperatures shall be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The program of
research is to study the properties of the hydrogens at pressure where they are
metallic. In the research program it has already been shown that hydrogen
becomes a metal at ~500 GPa. It is expected that the pressure will be higher for
deuterium as, due to its larger mass, molecular deuterium will have smaller
zero-point energy and a larger binding energy. HD should have many surprises as
above ~200 GPa it becomes a mixture of 0.5 HD and 0.25 (H2+D2). It may require a
pressure of 500 GPa to dissociate the H2 molecules, but the HD may become
unstable at still a lower pressure. Surprises are expected in this study. Once
the isotopes are metallized, the ground state will be studied by xray analysis.
One of the intriguing predictions for hydrogen is that it may be a room
temperature superconductor, which will be studied. It has also been predicted to
be metastable, i.e. it may remain in the metallic state when the pressure is
relieved. The metastability of the isotopes shall be studied by reducing the
pressure at low temperature, then raising the temperature until the sample
converts back to the molecular phase. It may be that hydrogen is not metastable,
but deuterium is, due to its smaller zero point energy. Finally, a pressure
scale for ultrahigh pressures will be developed. There is no good scale at
500+GPa. A study of the shift of the fluorescence line in nitrogen vacancy nano-
diamond can lead to a new pressure calibration scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.