* 1905733
* Collaborative Research: Development of a turnkey SQUID microscope platform for paleomagnetism and installation in a National Multi-User Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Benjamin Weiss, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 11/30/2023
* USD 493,378.00

Rocks preserve important records of ancient geomagnetic fields. However, some
records have remained inaccessible due to complex magnetic histories and
mineralogy. The main goals of this collaborative project are to develop and
build a magnetic microscope at MIT to measure paleomagnetic records in Earth
rocks and other geological samples and to upgrade a second instrument at Caltech
to enable these measurements. These will share a common platform that will
expand paleomagnetic research opportunities nationally and enable independently
verifying results. In addition, details of the platform will be disseminated to
the scientific community to enable a broad range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many rocks that might preserve important
records of ancient geomagnetic fields have remained inaccessible due to a
combination of intricate magnetic histories and complex mineralogies. The main
goals of this collaborative project are to develop and build a new Scanning
Superconducting QUantum Interference Device (SQUID) Microscope (SSM) platform at
MIT to measure paleomagnetic records in Earth rocks and other geological samples
and to upgrade a second instrument at Caltech to enable these measurements.
These will share a common platform that will allow for conducting multiple
research projects from different research groups concurrently and for
independently verifying results. In addition, details of the platform will be
disseminated to the scientific community to enable a broad range of
applications. This new SSM will have a unique combination of capabilities, which
include cryogen-free operation for lower costs and long uninterrupted use,
magnetic moment sensitivity of better than 1x10^-15 Am2, and spatial resolution
of 100 micrometers. It will map the component of the magnetic field normal to
the sample plane in a grid of positions with area up to 50 mm x 50 mm and with
scanning speed of up to 5 mm/s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.