* 1905775
* EAGER: Thermal Materials Discovery via Deep Learning based High-Throughput Computational Screening
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Chen Li, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,999.00

EAGER: Thermal Materials Discovery via Deep Learning based High-Throughput
Computational Screening&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-throughput computational screening
of materials with target thermal conductivity has the capability to transform
many industries such as thermoelectricity generation and high performance
micro-/nano electronic devices, which produce a significant amount of excess
heat during operation and searching for materials with high thermal conductivity
is extremely important for the disruptive development of such micro-/nano-
electronics in order to prolong their working life and increase reliability
However, this potential has not been implemented due to the huge computational
resources needed by current first-principles based thermal conductivity
calculations and challenges of theoretical models because of the highly complex
and nonlinear relationships from atomic structures of materials to the thermal
transport properties. Deep learning has transformed an increasing number of
fields where big data are available such as image and speech recognition, and
medical image analysis. However, the materials science has remained largely
untapped by deep learning despite its high economical potential. This two-year
EAGER project aims to develop novel deep neural network techniques to achieve
fast and accurate computational prediction of thermal conductivity for high-
throughput thermal material discovery. The development of a reliable, fast, and
accurate deep learning models is a necessity towards experimental validation and
realistic application of high-throughput thermal materials screening.
Simultaneously the program will aim to enhance diversity by engaging minority
and underrepresented students to participate in STEM research. The participants
will also develop understanding of both atomistic simulations of thermal
transport and big data analytics; hence contributing to workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep
learning algorithm has been well developed in computer science, while direct
thermal conductivity prediction from atomic structures has been made available
in materials science. However, intuitive combination of this progress is not an
easy task, since the scientific data (thermal conductivity of materials) cannot
be quickly expanded to the level required by deep learning. To this end, this
project will use heterogeneous multi-resolution thermal conductivity data and
scarce data for training efficient and accurate deep learning models, which has
never been realized for AlphaGO-like deep learning models before. In this
exploratory stage, the focus will be on (1) developing graph and spatial 3D
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for thermal conductivity modeling by
exploiting their automated hierarchical feature learning and non-linear mapping
learning, and (2) developing multi-resolution data based deep neural network
models for thermal conductivity prediction. (3) Experimental and DFT-based
computational validation of predicted materials with extremely high or low
thermal conductivity. A robust, reliable, and high accuracy deep learning model
for thermal conductivity prediction will facilitate development of advanced
functional materials in industry, such as energy conversion, storage, and
thermal management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.