* 1905287
* Nanoscale electromechanical coupling in atomically thin materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Edward Yu, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 428,749.00

Nontechnical Description: Structural deformation of materials, such as bending
or wrinkling, can lead to dramatic changes in their electronic properties. The
project explores these effects in so-called two-dimensional materials, such as
molybdenum disulfide and tungsten diselenide, that are only a few atoms thick,
and that therefore inevitably suffer from structural deformation due to their
extreme mechanical flexibility. The research focuses on using advanced
microscopy techniques to measure and analyze electric charge and voltage
distributions that arise in the presence of deformations in two-dimensional
materials through effects such as piezoelectricity. These effects play a central
role in devices and technologies for computing and communications that are based
on such materials, including proposed approaches for quantum information
processing. Research on this topic is closely integrated with activities in
education and outreach. In particular, an activity focusing on design and
construction of simple optical microscopes based on Legos or three-dimensional
printed components combined with extremely inexpensive, readily purchased
plastic optical components provides diverse populations of elementary school
students with a new window into both the power of imaging in exploring their
worlds, and modern manufacturing technologies such as three-dimensional
printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project focuses on
fundamental studies of electromechanical coupling phenomena - piezoelectricity
and flexoelectricity - in atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenide
materials. Three primary directions are emphasized. First, the project explores
characterization and analysis of electromechanical coupling, in both in-plane
and out-of-plane directions, in mono- to several-layer thick transition metal
dichalcogenides using piezoresponse force microscopy. Second, the project uses
exfoliation and layer transfer techniques to create bilayer transition metal
dichalcogenide homojunctions and heterojunctions with reduced symmetry compared
to the corresponding bulk materials to assess possibilities for engineering
electromechanical response via control over the composition and symmetry of
bilayer van der Waals homostructures and heterostructures. Proximal probe
characterization of these structures provides insight into nanoscale
electromechanical response associated with local symmetry in bilayers with
different layer compositions and rotational alignments. And third, the project
combines computational modeling with experimental measurements to analyze the
implications of electromechanical coupling at the nanoscale for functional
electronic and photonic structures based on atomically thin transition metal
dichalcogenide materials in which highly inhomogeneous strain distributions are
present. By exploring fundamental issues pertaining to piezoelectricity and
flexoelectricity at nanoscale dimensions, the research provides new information
about and insights into the nature, magnitude, and technological implications of
these effects through direct experimental characterization combined with
computational modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.