* 1905920
* 3D Organized Nanoscale Reactors
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2022
* Oleg Gang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 10/31/2022
* USD 385,192.00

Non-Technical Abstract: Biochemical reactions in organisms and in numerous
sensing and manufacturing applications are controlled by a special type of
biomolecule, the enzyme. While there is a great demand for the design of new
types of enzymes with enhanced properties, it is a very challenging task that
requires enormous computational and synthetic efforts. There is another way to
enhance the chemical activity of enzymes and to allow for a much more convenient
use of them - by packaging these biomolecules in arrays. Such packaging also
opens up the possibility of handling and processing enzymes similar to
conventional materials. Until now, enzymatic arrays have been formed by
attaching enzymes to surfaces. These enzyme-coated surfaces are used in
biosensing to boost sensitivity, thanks to a much higher density of enzymes on a
surface relative to in solution. They are also extremely useful for industrial
chemical synthesis due to their ability to enhance reactions and how easily they
can be integrated into the manufacturing processes. However, current methods to
fabricate such enzymatic arrays are limited to surface-based forms. The proposed
research aims to establish a conceptually different approach to create three-
dimensional (3D) enzymatic arrays in the form of a bulk material rather than a
surface. The proposed approach offers nanoscale control over the spatial
arrangement and composition of 3D enzymatic arrays. Such arrays represent a new
class of chemical materials with tailorable structure, and with modulated and
enhanced reactivity. The proposed program seeks to address two key questions in
creating these new enzymatic materials: how to synthesize the chemically active
materials with control of their structure in 3D, and how to improve the chemical
performance of enzymes through the use of novel 3D arrays. The proposed research
aims to establish transformative capabilities in the area of designed chemical
nanomaterials with potential applications in biosensing, reaction management,
and chemical synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The ability to
organize enzymes and enzymatic cascades in three-dimensions (3D) with a
nanoscale control over the placement of individual enzymes can open new routes
for creating chemically active materials and modulating reaction pathways.
However, establishing such capabilities presents a significant challenge. The
proposal seeks developing a versatile methodology to program assembly of
enzymes, guided by DNA frames, into tailored 3D ordered arrays of nanoreactors
with control over lattice type, unit cell spacing, ratio of individual enzymes,
and relative layout of the chemically active materials. The proposed studies
will apply new levels of structure organization of enzymes and enzymatic
cascades into desired 3D organizations. Using model enzymatic cascades, the
research will explore catalysis within a 3D network and effects of its
modification by controlling local chemical environments of enzymes and a global
structuring of nanoreactor arrays. The research program will integrate efforts
in synthesis of DNA-enzyme modules and their assembly into 3D materials with
structural and chemical analysis of formed arrays for exploration of the novel
3D catalytic networks. Synergistic network effects stemming from large scale, 3D
organization of enzymes and ease of molecular transport though 3D arrays will be
explored. The major objectives of the program include: (i) tailored control over
3D nanoreactor arrays; (ii) determination of local effects arising from enzyme-
DNA integration and enzyme colocalizations in 3D; (iii) development of full
spatial control over fabrication enzymatic materials, such as crystal system of
nanoscale arrays, inter-enzyme spacing, ratio of enzymes, and nanoscale
organization of cascades within arrays. The research aims to establish new
methods for synthesis of novel classes of 3D nanoreactor arrays, to elucidate
the structure-function relationship of networked chemical reactions and to
develop ways for manipulating chemical pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.