* 1905535
* Star-Shaped and Linear Polymers in Temperature-Responsive Layer-by-Layer Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Svetlana Sukhishvili, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 560,000.00

PART I: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional polymer coatings
that are responsive to environmental stimuli are useful for biomedical,
agricultural, marine and food applications. In response to a stimulus, these
coatings can change uptake of water or drug molecules, thus providing control of
surface self-cleaning, drug-releasing or antifouling properties. This project
employs temperature as one of the most ubiquitous stimuli for controlling
behavior of surface coatings. When deposited at the surface of sutures or
prosthetic implants, such coatings could deliver drugs (such as anesthetics or
antibiotics) in response to increased body temperature, or they could render
surfaces non-adhesive on-demand when deposited on large surfaces of windows or
ships. Responsive coatings could also prolong the shelf life of food, preventing
its rotting on hot days. The challenge is, however, to create such responsive
coatings with maximized response to an increase in temperature. This project
will take advantage of the capability of the layer-by-layer (LbL) technique, in
which the PI is an expert, to create conformal coatings of controlled thickness
on a variety of surfaces, and will explore the effect of various intricate
molecular architectures of assembled molecules (on coating functionality.
Advanced instrumental techniques will be used to take snapshots of how
multilayered structures, water content, and polymer-film mechanical properties
respond to temperature variations. Importantly, this project will create a
fertile training ground for the participating graduate, undergraduate, and high-
school students. The PI is currently the academic advisor of the "Women in
Materials Science" (WIMS) organization, which is strongly involved in many
outreach activities, including on-campus tours for school teachers and
demonstrations for Girl Scouts and high-school students, as well as visits to
local schools with the goal of encouraging and engaging 5-7th graders to pursue
careers in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART II:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to form highly functional
surfaces by means of assembly of diverse polymeric components lies at the heart
of advanced biomedical, marine and food applications. This research studies
layer-by-layer (LbL) assemblies and aims to uncover the main underlying
principles of assembly of responsive materials at surfaces, specifically
focusing on the role of molecular architecture on film structure and response.
The focus will be on the unexplored area of upper critical solution temperature
(UCST) star-shaped polymers in solution and within LbL films. UCST-type LbL
films enable a highly practical route to modulate surface compliance, control
interactions with cells or contaminants, and regulate release of trapped small
functional molecules in response to an increase in environmental temperature.
The challenge is, however, to balance responsiveness of nanocontainers to
temperature (which tends to decrease with an increase in star functionality,
i.e. number of arms f), with strength of binding with linear polymers chains
within LbL films, in order to maximize film responsiveness and performance as a
platform for controlled delivery. This project aims to address this challenge by
exploring the mechanism of UCST response of star-shaped polymers through the
relationships between molecular parameters of the star (f, as well as number of
units in the arm N) and responsiveness of polymer stars and their assemblies.
The project involves synthesis of novel UCST star polymers, solution studies of
assembly of star polymers with hydrogen-bonding polymer partners using
isothermal titration calorimetry, dynamic light scattering, fluorescence
correlation and vibrational spectroscopies, as well as application of several
orthogonal techniques, such as neutron reflectometry, fluorescence recovery
after photobleaching, in situ ellipsometry, and nanoindentation to explore
assembly and temperature response of LbL star-containing films. The main outcome
of the project will be the development of the knowledge relating molecular
parameters of the star polymer to their UCST response in solution, diffusivity
within LbL films, and the resultant film structure and response. This knowledge
will then be used to rationally construct films with programmable temperature
-esponse characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.