* 1905169
* Chiral sum frequency generation spectroscopy for characterization of DNA secondary structures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* E. Chui-Ying Yan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 435,112.00

DNA has a signature structure of a double helix and the well-known function of
storing genetic information. However, recent studies have revealed that DNA can
adopt conformations other than that of a double helix, and DNA in these
conformations can participate in the signaling process to regulate gene
expression, and thereby direct cellular processes for survival of biological
systems. The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry is
funding Dr. Elsa Yan from Yale University to develop a new method for
distinguishing various conformations of DNA, which is named chiral sum frequency
generation spectroscopy. This method has advantages over existing methods, such
as NMR spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography, and linear optical spectroscopy,
because it has high selectivity and low background, and it allows the real-time
detection of small amounts of DNA. Given these advantages, the method may
improve our ability to formulate rules involving various DNA conformations for
forecasting biological behavior in response to changes in environment (e.g.,
injury and infections) or needs of cellular development (e.g., aging and cell
splitting). The project also includes education activities meant to promote
inclusive learning at Yale University, where the student body has become
increasingly diverse. Pedagogical strategies seeking to help under-represented
minority students to succeed are implemented in a chemistry course for non-
science majors; their effectiveness is assessed by education experts. The
project also includes participation in a science outreach program for local
grade-school students that aims to spark student interest in chemistry and the
sciences in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to use chiral
vibrational sum frequency generation spectroscopy to identify vibrational
signatures that can be used to unambiguously resolve various DNA secondary
structures. The project focuses on DNA secondary structures that are implicated
in the regulation of gene expression, such as G-quadruplexes and i-motifs. The
vibrational signatures are then used to examine the relationship between DNA
secondary structures and chemical modifications. The project examines how the
oxidation of nucleobases in various DNA sequences and configurations perturb the
secondary structure of the DNA. The results are used to evaluate the impact of
DNA oxidative damage on gene expression and function. The project is expected to
establish a new method for characterizing DNA secondary structures and improve
our understanding of how DNA regulates gene expression through the mechanism of
changes in DNA secondary structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.