* 1905732
* Water-driven Glass Transition Dynamics in Polyelectrolyte Complexes and Multilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jodie Lutkenhaus, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 572,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charged polymers
(polyelectrolytes) impact society in areas ranging from personal care and energy
to health care. These polymers bear a charged group that can associate with
oppositely charged macromolecules to form a larger superstructure called a
polyelectrolyte complex. The nature of how these polyelectrolytes associate is
represented by the number of associations or electrostatic crosslinks, which in
turn influences the physical properties of the complex. One important challenge
is that these complexes should bear desired properties at real-world conditions,
such as certain relative humidity values and temperatures. However, there
remains a lack of understanding regarding how and why water and temperature
dictate the thermal and mechanical properties of a given complex. One
significant challenge is that it is not clear how these physical properties
connect to the original structure of the electrostatically crosslinked
polyelectrolyte complex. This project addresses this challenge by examining the
dynamics and mobility of the polyelectrolyte and of water within the structure
at varying environmental conditions. These findings will be compared to the
structure of the complex and physical properties such as stiffness. The
knowledge developed in this project could lead to a predictive relationship that
may broadly describe the physical properties of any complex in response to
environmental conditions. The proposed work offers several opportunities for
educational enrichment of a broad spectrum of members of the general public. The
educational objectives and broader impact for this work include: hands-on
research opportunities for undergraduates, K-12 outreach through TAMU's
Chemistry Open House through demonstrations to the public, Science Night
demonstrations at local elementary schools, and online outreach through the
EngineerGirl website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cultivating a deeper understanding of the physical
properties of polyelectrolyte complexes as they connect to the complex's
structure is an important challenge for advancing their wider application.
However, this understanding is complicated by complex factors such as the
electrostatic crosslinking density, water content, and temperature. For example,
it is known that the glass transition temperature (Tg) is intimately tied to the
water content and ion pairing within the complex, which is in turn influenced by
salt and/or pH. However, the current understanding is somewhat empirical or
qualitative, and a quantitative connection to a physical dynamic process is
needed. The central goal of this project is to elucidate the physical origin of
the glass transition-ion pairing-water relationship via characterization of the
glass transition dynamics and the molecular structure of the complex. This will
be accomplished by spectroscopic characterization, dynamic mechanical analysis,
and thermal analysis. These complexes will be further explored for their
stiffness at different time scales, temperatures, and humidity values. The
central hypothesis is that the dynamics of the polymer chain are influenced by
water mobility at the electrostatic crosslink and by the
association/dissociation of the crosslink itself. Water may lubricate the
electrostatic crosslink and promote temporary dissociation of the electrostatic
crosslink. One significant outcome of this work is possibly a new physics-based
understanding that quantitatively connects the structure of a complex and the
surrounding environmental conditions to the resultant physical properties of
that complex.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.