* 1905619
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Exploring Barnacle Exoskeleton Development and Materials Properties as a Function of Growth Environment
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Rebecca Metzler, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 275,326.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Barnacles have attracted the
attention of explorers, scientists, and sailors for millennia. They are
crustaceans, similar to shrimp, lobsters, and crabs, but unlike their freely
moving relatives are encased in a hard outer shell and securely stuck to a
surface. The barnacle outer shell is a biomineral, a composite material
consisting of a mixture of proteins, chitin (fibrous strings of sugar
molecules), and minerals, which in barnacles are largely calcium carbonate.
Despite the fact that barnacles play a large ecological and economical role -as
they stick to ships, hulls, amongst other surfaces, causing the ships to slow
down and use more fuel- little is known about how the barnacle exoskeleton forms
or if climate changes predicted in coming years will alter this formation
process. The proposed work, done entirely by undergraduate students under the
supervision of the two project PIs, focuses on determining how the exoskeleton
forms by examining the very early stages of exoskeleton development. In
addition, the project will explore how the formation process changes when
barnacles are grown in warmer and more acidic waters. This work will not only
provide information on the formation of an interesting and potentially useful
material, but also how an economically and ecologically important organism will
respond to predicted future ocean conditions. Beyond this basic knowledge, the
project will provide invaluable training opportunities in STEM to undergraduates
at both Colgate and TCNJ, as well as to high school students from
underrepresented communities in New York. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The barnacle exoskeleton is a robust biomineralized
tissue, yet it is structurally disordered on the atomic to micrometer level.
This is in contrast to most well-studied biomineralized tissues (e.g. vertebrate
bone, mollusk shells) which have ordered, hierarchical structures. The goal of
this project is to characterize the developmental process by which this
disordered exoskeleton forms and the extent to which environmental conditions
impact the exoskeletal material. The first objective is to identify the
composition, structure, and materials properties of the barnacle exoskeleton
during the time period immediately following metamorphosis through to full
mineralization under ambient marine conditions. Juvenile barnacles will be
tracked following metamorphosis from larval cyprids through a combination of
techniques (confocal microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, Raman
spectroscopy, x-ray photoemission electron microscopy (X-PEEM), micro-
indentation, and nano-indentation), allowing determination on whether certain
materials properties, such as fracture toughness, are linked to a disordered
structure. The second objective is to examine how the composition, structure,
and materials properties of the developing exoskeleton behave under decreased pH
and increased temperature (mimicking predicted ocean conditions in the year 2100
with current climate change predictions). The results from these experiments
will provide insight into the functionality of disordered biological materials,
while also providing information into whether an ecologically and economically
important organism will be impacted by impending environmental changes. In
addition to the important fundamental knowledge derived from these experiments
is the broader impact the proposed work will have on undergraduate and high
school students. Undergraduate researchers, under the supervision of the two
PIs, will conduct the entirety of the proposed work, participating in not only
the research, but also conferences and manuscript preparation. A workshop for
high school students from underrepresented communities in New York, in
conjunction with Camp Fiver, will be based on the results of the proposed work,
exposing and involving the high school students in scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.