* 1905950
* Inhomogeneity and Charge Modulation in Unconventional  Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Charles Agosta, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 670,234.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Quantum materials are the future of new
electronic devices in our increasingly technological world. Superconductors for
MRI medical imaging, a mature technology, and qubits for quantum computing, a
nascent technology, are two examples of quantum materials that are or will be
ubiquitous in our society. This research is part of a large effort to better
understand the functional quantum materials used presently so that the next
generation of quantum materials can be discovered. This project will focus on
superconducting materials, used both in MRI imaging and quantum computing.
Advancing experimental techniques that use the highest magnetic fields available
in the world, pulsed power systems, and radio frequency systems are some of the
technologies that also can advance sectors such as energy, communications, and
manufacturing. Finally, the undergraduate, and graduate students who participate
in these projects are trained as the next generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Understanding quantum
mechanical ground states is essential to create the next generation of
electronic devices and develop quantum communications. The PI's research is
advancing the understanding of quantum systems by making systematic measurements
of quasi-two dimensional organic superconductors that show signatures of
inhomogeneous superconductivity. This exotic superconducting state, a tunable
mixture of a spatially modulated superconducting order parameter and a magnetic
lattice of unpaired electrons, was predicted over 50 years ago, and is called
the FFLO state. The FFLO state is highly tunable via temperature, the direction
and strength of the magnetic field, and pressure. This research continues the
core measurements of rf penetration depth using a tunnel diode oscillator and
specific heat of organic and pnictide superconductors. The PI also measures the
symmetry and wavelength of the charge modulation in the FFLO state and charge
density waves using x-rays. To facilitate these experiments the PI is working
with the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory (APS) and the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in Tallahassee and Los Alamos to upgrade
access to high magnetic fields at the APS. In organic and pnictide conductors
anion or element substitution and moderate pressure make it easy to traverse the
temperature-carrier concentration phase diagram that is ubiquitous among
superconducting materials. Tuning the system from the density wave insulating
state, through superconductivity, and into a metallic state will provide
evidence of the quantum critical point thought to be responsible for
superconductivity. Understanding the competition between ground states is a
central question in quantum materials and the quantum critical point is central
to this problem. The combination of measurements, model calculations, and an
extensive library of crystal samples will further the goal of understanding the
physics of quantum materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.