* 1905077
* Nucleation of Manganese Oxides in the Presence of Reactive Halogen Species
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Young-Shin Jun, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,194.00

Funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry, Professor Young-Shin Jun at Washington University examines the
formation of manganese oxide particles in salt water. Manganese oxides are
environmentally abundant and are important in removing contaminants. Their
formation can be affected by products from human activities that have high salt
concentrations, such as from desalination and oil and gas recovery. The chemical
reactions involved are poorly understood, including the roles of halide ions
(e.g., chloride and bromide) and highly reactive halogen species. This work
quantitatively and qualitatively examines how salt water chemistry affects the
formation of manganese oxides in the environment. The project also develops
environmental chemistry outreach programs for underrepresented or economically
disadvantaged K-12 students. This outreach both encourages the early involvement
of high school and undergraduate students in research and improves university
courses by incorporating research outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increased
production of highly saline effluents from water and energy generating processes
raises questions about their impacts on the environment. In particular, halides
in brine can greatly affect mineral formation and dissolution processes in
natural aquatic systems. With sunlight, halides may further undergo
photochemical reaction to generate reactive radical species. However, the
effects of halides under sunlight exposure on redox-active transition metal ions
and their solid phase formation are still obscure. This project investigates the
effects of reactive halogen species on the oxidation of aqueous manganese (Mn)
ions and the kinetics of the nucleation and growth of Mn particles, with and
without natural organic matter. It is hypothesized that reactive species
generated from reactions between natural organic matter and halides during their
photolysis can promote the photochemical oxidation of Mn2+ (aq) and facilitate
the formation of higher oxidation states of manganese oxides. To elucidate the
properties of newly formed manganese oxides and to examine these dynamic redox
reaction behaviors, solid phases of manganese oxides and fluid chemistries are
characterized. In situ synchrotron-based small angle x-ray scattering provides
real-time information about the nucleation and growth of manganese oxides. The
project advances fundamental knowledge regarding the nucleation mechanisms and
kinetics of manganese oxides in highly saline systems, which is important for
predicting contaminant removal and transport and for developing new manganese-
based materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.