* 1905304
* Collaborative Proposal: Elucidating Chemical Mechanisms of DNA Repair Using Transition State Analogs
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Martin Horvath, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 11/30/2022
* USD 486,537.00

The information held within the DNA blueprint for life can be eroded by damage
to DNA bases due to cellular metabolism and environmental exposures. Modified
DNA bases lead to changes in the DNA sequence called mutations. These mutations
can negatively impact cellular processes but they can be corrected by the action
of DNA repair enzymes. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program
in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Sheila David at the University of
California Davis and Dr. Martin Horvath at the University of Utah to uncover
molecular details of how damaged DNA bases are detected and repaired. The
research makes uses of synthetic DNA chemistry and X-ray crystallography to trap
and visualize steps in the DNA repair process that are otherwise too fleeting to
study and to generate a detailed molecular picture of the DNA repair process.
Graduate and undergraduate students learn how to combine different chemistry and
biology approaches to reveal and understand key features of fundamental life
processes. This project is also integrated into a unique "Course-Based Research
Experience" (CURE) laboratory course taught at both the University of California
Davis and the University of Utah. Undergraduates emerge from the course with
improved critical thinking skills and a better conceptual knowledge of how
information crucial for living organisms is encoded in their DNA and maintained
by DNA repair enzymes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project delineates
chemical mechanisms of base excision repair (BER) glycosylases to illuminate how
these enzymes efficiently find rare modified DNA bases. Modified nucleotides
that mimic transition states are prepared through synthetic chemistry.
Structural studies of several BER glycosylases bound to DNA containing these
transition state mimics provide insight into the catalysis of base excision.
Indeed, surprising features uncovered with three BER glycosylases, namely MutY,
AlkD and MBD4, raise new questions on these and related glycosylases and prompt
new innovative structural and functional studies that will be pursued by the
David and Horvath research groups. Students working on this project receive
interdisciplinary training spanning synthetic nucleic acid chemistry, nucleic
acid enzymology, and DNA-protein crystallography. Fostering environments in
which women and minority students thrive is a core goal of the work supported by
this award. This project has a positive broader educational impact because it is
tied to two undergraduate laboratory courses that introduce incoming and
advanced undergraduate students to modern research techniques and approaches
used in chemical biology with a focus on DNA damage and
repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.