* 1905384
* Topological shape transitions of colloidal membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Zvonimir Dogic, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 567,318.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elucidating the rules by which thin
flat sheets fold into complex three dimensional structures is of fundamental
interest to a broad range of fields ranging from physics, and materials science
to biology. For example, the process by which a flat 2D bilayer with exposed
edges folds into an edgeless 3D vesicle is essential for transport across
cellular membranes and also for developing new methods of drug delivery.
However, visualizing and quantifying such folding processes using nanometer-
sized lipid bilayers is currently not feasible. This project will use an analogy
between lipid bilayer and colloidal monolayer membranes to quantitatively test
foundational models of vesicle formation and other folding processes. Colloidal
membranes will allow one to measure all the parameters and directly visualize
the folding process with optical microscopy, to a degree that is not possible
with conventional materials. Besides visualizing closed vesicle formation the
team will also study processes by which flat sheets fold into topologically more
complex mathematical structures, such as catenoids and Gyroid-like structures.
In parallel, the team will pursue outreach activities focused on (1) providing
rigorous training in interdisciplinary sciences to graduate and undergraduate
students, (2) encouraging underrepresented groups to pursue work in STEM related
fields, (3) and raising general awareness of the importance of scientific
research to broader communities. This project will actively support
undergraduate research and will build on a strong record of recruiting students
from diverse backgrounds. They will also continue their involvement with the
Cal-Bridge program, a NSF-funded program whose mission is to increase the number
of underrepresented minority and female students entering doctoral program in
physics. Finally, each year they will also participate in about half a dozen
outreach activities at local elementary and middle schools in order to promote
science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal membranes, which are comprised of one-rod-length
thick liquid-like monolayer of aligned monodisperse rods, offer a unique
opportunity to explore fundamental aspect of thin sheets with vanishing in-plane
shear modulus. So far, studies have mainly examined the behavior of colloidal
membranes in the regime were they remain flat 2D structures. The goal of the
current project is to elucidate the fundamental laws by which 2D colloidal
membranes fold into diverse and topologically distinct 3D architectures. Three
specific aims are proposed. In the first aim they will develop active and
passive fluctuations-based techniques to measure the mean and Gaussian elastic
moduli of colloidal membranes, the phenomenological constants that determine the
energetic cost required to bend a membrane from its minimum energy state. In the
second aim they will tune microscopic constituents of colloidal membranes to
investigate regimes were flat colloidal membranes are inherently unstable and
spontaneously fold into complex structures. In one direction they will reduce
the bending rigidity of colloidal membranes to induce folding of flat 2D
membranes into edgeless 3D vesicles and visualize and quantify the pathways of
this transition. In a complementary direction they will explore the regime were
doping colloidal membranes with miscible short rods induces formation of
remarkably diverse and topological complex surfaces with negative Gaussian
curvatures. Using state of the art imaging technique they will elucidate the
molecular mechanisms that drive these instabilities. In the final aim they will
develop robust experimental tools that will enable spatiotemporal external
control of the membrane curvature, thus allowing one to actively intervene in
the ongoing folding processes and guiding formation of topological assemblages
of predetermined final shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.