* 1905121
* Imaging, Manipulation, and Control of Molecular Quantum Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Wilson Ho, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

The ability to visualize, break, and make individual chemical bonds with control
and selectivity in space and time would significantly advance modern chemical
science. A thorough description of the weak interactions associated with the
forces between molecules remains challenging. With support from the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Wilson
Ho and Professor Ruqian Wu at the University of California-Irvine carry out
laboratory and computational research that seeks a deeper understanding of
chemical interactions within and between molecules on metal surfaces at very low
pressures. By taking information gained from experiments using a microscope that
can give images of molecules with sub-atom precision ("itProbe") and using it in
parallel with computer-aided visualization and simulation methods, Dr. Ho's team
is probing the basic interactions between molecules and how those weak
interactions are impacted by conditions that typically lead to changes in
chemical properties, such as heat and light. Not only is the research area
diverse from an expertise point of view, but the project team is dedicated to
training of a wide array of researchers from many backgrounds, including
undergraduates, with a focus on the recruitment of female and underrepresented
students. Outreach activities are organized through the University of
California-Irvine, with opportunities to work with Hispanic communities,
particularly middle school students in underserved communities in southern
California. Results from the research have potential for being shared via
educational resources that impact a wide spectrum of users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide direct visualization of
chemical interactions between atoms and molecules. The integration of
experimental measurements and density functional theory calculations for static
and dynamic properties enables the visualization, manipulation, and control of
the quantum properties in space and time of molecular systems. Such basic
understandings open up opportunities for the realization of practical molecular
functionalities. Results from the proposed research are of technological
importance, including catalysis, energy conversion, environmental management,
molecular recognition, and quantum information processing. The proposed research
addresses the spatial and temporal evolutions of chemical systems by measuring
and imaging time-dependent phenomena. In this way, it becomes possible to
visualize, manipulate, and coherently control the molecular properties to
implement quantum functionalities. Furthermore, the proposed research
manipulates the positions of adsorbed molecules with the microscope to enable
the construction of novel nanostructures that are not possible by other means
and to provide real-space visualization of the temporal evolution of
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.