* 1905768
* Total Tomography of Nonplanar Heterostructures for Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Lincoln Lauhon, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 12/31/2022
* USD 437,033.00

Nontechnical description: Semiconducting materials, particularly alloys composed
of group III and group V elements, are extensively used in devices that process
information electronically and convert electrical currents to light, enabling
fast and efficient communication considered essential in modern society.
Different III-V semiconductors can be combined in heterostructures at the
nanometer scale to make devices with the potential to process information in
entirely new ways by exploiting quantum mechanics. This project is using
advanced deposition and characterization methods with the goal to develop
fundamental understanding of how semiconducting alloys can be formed into
nanoscale wires with superconducting contacts to produce new modes of
information storage, computation, and communication. Furthermore, this project
aims to maintain the competitiveness of the United States in new information
technologies and the future workforce. Towards that end, graduate students are
trained in cutting-edge three-dimensional characterization methods at
Northwestern University and in national laboratories on materials systems
relevant to quantum technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
Substrate-templated nanowire heterostructures grown in network topologies are
candidates for quantum computing schemes involving Majorana quasiparticles.
Band-offsets in narrow band-gap III-As/Sb semiconductors can produce the
required confinement potentials for electrons, but heterostructures must be
grown with the appropriate size, geometry, and precision to enable the desired
coupling to metal and superconducting contacts. The goal of this project is to
correlate the composition, strain, and electronic structure of III-As/Sb
heterostructures in three dimensions to understand how composition and strain
influence nanostructure growth and electronic properties, particularly the
spatial distribution of free carriers in quasi-one-dimensional bands with strong
spin-orbit coupling. Optical properties of quantized emitters in these
heterostructures are also investigated. Atom probe tomography is used to measure
three-dimensional nanoscale composition fields of III-As/Sb nanowire
heterostructures. Based on these composition data, finite element models of
relaxed physical structure are used to simulate and interpret synchrotron-based
single nanowire x-ray diffraction and imaging. The combined strain and
composition data, including dopant distributions measured by atom probe
tomography, are used to develop models of nanostructure growth and electronic
properties. Correlated single nanowire cathodoluminesence provides spatially
resolved measurements of band-gap and active carrier concentrations, and
correlated transmission electron microscopy measurements constrains atom probe
and x-ray reconstructions of composition and strain,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.