* 1905698
* Mobility, interactions, and order in active granular systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Narayanan Menon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2023
* USD 459,871.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Condensed matter physics has drawn inspiration
from the motions of creatures ranging from bacteria to insects, fish, birds and
migrating mammals to create the new field of active materials. Unlike atoms or
molecules, which derive their energy from a heat source to move around in a
random, undirected manner, many living creatures expend their energy to move
along a preferred body axis, leading to unusual collective behaviors such as
schooling, flocking and swarming. In this research, experiments will be launched
to mimic some of these phenomena in laboratory systems made up of millimeter-
sized grains energized by vibrations. Going beyond the biological motivation,
the research team will create grains that move in designed ways to manipulate
and assemble materials. Through this research, both graduate and undergraduate
students will gain exposure to a variety of techniques and frontier areas in
soft-condensed matter physics and be introduced to problems which have
industrial relevance. The PI contributes to graduate education beyond his
university by continuing to organize an annual summer school at UMass Amherst
entitled Soft Solids and Complex Fluids. The PI also contributes to running an
annual program for middle- and high-school teachers entitled Patterns Around
Us.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Active matter is a new
arena for non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, inspired by observed collective
behavior in motile systems from bacteria to insects, fish, birds and migrating
mammals. In this project, the research team will go beyond biomimetic
motivations, and explicitly set aside the constraints and intents of biological
design to create "active" granular particles that can give new material function
and response to granular assemblies. The particular goal is to recognize and
exploit the fact the symmetry of motion of individual units can be entirely
different from the symmetry of interaction with other units. The team proposes
to launch experiments to study the collective mechanics of vibrated grains which
rectify noise to generate directed motion. They have parallel goals of (i)
exploring new issues in the statistical physics of active matter, and (ii)
developing methods of manipulating and assembling macroscopic matter. The major
goal of this proposal is a comprehensive experimental study of the phase diagram
of a number of classes of active particles, so that light may be shed on how
activity can promote or disrupt specific kinds of ordering. Through this
research, both graduate and undergraduate students will gain exposure to a
variety of techniques and frontier areas in soft-condensed matter physics and be
introduced to problems which have industrial relevance. The PI contributes to
graduate education beyond his university by continuing to organize an annual
summer school at UMass Amherst entitled Soft Solids and Complex Fluids. The PI
also contributes to running an annual program for middle- and high-school
teachers entitled Patterns Around Us.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.