* 1905909
* Quantum and Thermal Creep of Skyrmions and Superconducting Vortices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Serena Eley, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 440,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Vortices are topological excitations that
appear in many different systems. In superconductors, vortices consist of
supercurrents circulating around a non-superconducting core and are typically
unwanted because their motion induces dissipation that often limits the
performance of superconducting wires and devices in power, magnet, sensing, and
computing applications. On the contrary, in certain magnetic materials, vortex-
like excitations called skyrmions (winding configurations of magnetic moments)
form which are predicted to be beneficial for use as information carriers in
next-generation low-energy spintronic devices. Mitigating the deleterious
effects of superconducting vortices and exploiting skyrmions in spintronic
devices for magnetic memory and logic require a microscopic understanding of the
complex interplay between vortices, material disorder, and thermal energy. In
this work, the research team is investigating this interplay by comparing the
rates of vortex and skyrmion motion in materials containing varying amounts of
disorder. This research provides training for graduate and undergraduate
students in low temperature measurement techniques, materials growth and
microanalysis, and quantum materials physics, necessary skillsets in multiple
industries including power, sensing, and computing. Additionally, the principal
investigator is reaching out to the local community by organizing an annual Open
House Community Day for which families in central Colorado will be invited to
the Colorado School of Mines for lab tours, science demonstrations, and hands-on
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The interaction
of vortices with material disorder is a primary determinant of the electronic
and magnetic properties of many systems. In type-II superconductors, vortices
are magnetic flux lines that penetrate into the material upon exposure to
magnetic fields. In chiral magnets and magnetic multilayers, vortex-like
excitations called skyrmions (winding configurations of magnetic moments) can
form due to antisymmetric, anisotropic exchange coupling between magnetic
moments on lattice bonds. Though the origins of vortices in superconductors and
skyrmions in magnetic systems are fundamentally different, striking similarities
exist between their dynamics. For example, both can be modeled as particle-like
excitations interacting with quench disorder, undergo disorder mediated
collective interactions and exhibit glassines. Material disorder immobilizes
vortices and skyrmions, whose motion can be induced by sufficiently high
currents or thermal energy (thermal creep), or occur via quantum tunneling
through disorder-defined energy barriers (quantum creep). Despite considerable
previous research on superconductor vortex dynamics, serious gaps still exist in
vortex physics. Creep rates are not predictable and no analytic expression
exists that broadly captures the temperature and field dependence of creep. The
objective of this work is to understand quantum creep of superconducting
vortices and both quantum and thermal creep of skyrmions. To this end, the
research team captures creep rates in many superconducting and magnetic
materials in a range of temperatures and magnetic fields using magnetization and
transport measurements. Subsequent comparisons of creep rates in disparate
materials with varied disorder landscapes enables them to draw universal
correlations between creep and fundamental material parameters. This research
could fill a major gap in the understanding of how vortices overcome different
energy barriers and enable efficacious design of defect landscapes in
superconductors for many applications and magnetic devices for skyrmion-based
spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.