* 1905571
* Collaborative Research: Thermoelectric transport and carrier dynamics in three-dimensional chalcogenide nanowire networks
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Je-Hyeong Bahk, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 291,648.00

Nontechnical description: Heat is abundant in the environment, and thus solid-
state thermal energy harvesting holds great promises as an alternative power
source for wearable electronics and sensors. However, conventional bulk
semiconductors are mostly heavy and nonflexible, therefore not readily suitable
for these applications. This project explores new material concepts and novel
material synthesis techniques based on nanotechnology to create lightweight,
flexible, and scalable material systems for efficient thermal energy harvesting.
The objective of this project is to understand the fundamental thermal and
electrical transport processes in nanowire network-based composites and advance
the knowledge of how these underlying physical processes affect the thermal-to-
electric energy conversion properties. The project actively promotes education
and training of next-generation scientists and engineers, particularly from
underrepresented groups, in the interdisciplinary fields that are
technologically important and critical for sustained economic vitality of the
nation. As direct outcomes of the research activities, online simulation tools
are developed for use in courses, as well as for broader
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This project investigates
the fundamental thermoelectric transport physics in three-dimensional
chalcogenide nanowire networks. Various thermoelectric chalcogenide nanowires
are solution-synthesized and uniformly dispersed in thick flexible matrices such
as polydimethylsiloxane to create stable three-dimensional nanowire networks.
These nanowire networks provide efficient thermoelectric transport paths for
charge carriers in the resulting composite. The impact of carrier tunneling at
the junctions between nanowires on the macroscopic thermoelectric properties is
extensively studied in this project. The matrices offer stable and uniform
dispersion of nanowires, along with their own advantages such as lightweight,
low cost, mechanical flexibility, and solution-processability, all in all,
making the composites suitable for the development of large-scale flexible
thermoelectric materials. In this project, nanowire interfaces are additionally
modified with surface-bound organic molecules or particulate conjugated polymers
to study their impacts on the transport properties. Heterostructure barrier
particles grown at the two ends of the nanowires during the nanowire synthesis
are systematically investigated for further enhancement of thermoelectric
properties via carrier energy filtering and minority carrier blocking effects. A
generalized transport theory including the junction tunneling effects is
developed through the project to understand the underlying physics over a broad
range of transport regimes, and provide insights for further material
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.