* 1905242
* Engineering cyanine aggregation and self-assembly to access exceptionally red-shifted organic chromophores
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Ellen Sletten, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 544,728.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Ellen M. Sletten and Justin R.
Caram of the Department of Chemistry at the University of California-Los Angeles
are developing new fluorescent chemical compounds that re-emit light in the
infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Infrared waves are generally
invisible to the human eye, but can be felt or detected as heat. Similar to
x-rays, this light can penetrate through many objects, including skin and
tissue. The compounds used in this research are very complex, yet easily made
with unique properties that enable them to be highly colored. Additionally, they
are several orders of magnitude brighter when assembled through molecular
interactions in solution. The light intensity is particularly important for
biomedical imaging applications such as early detection of cancer cells in human
body. Additionally, the research is of relevance to the development of new and
exciting devices in telecom-relevant optical fields in which information is
communicated through long distances using infrared light. This work provides
training and education to undergraduate and graduate students in synthetic
organic chemistry and analytical characterization techniques. Several outreach
activities are also developed that include educating the broader community about
fluorescence and electromagnetic radiation. The research is an excellent avenue
for engaging underrepresented minority and community college students in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on J-aggregates of
cyanine fluorophores which emit in the shortwave infrared region of the
electromagnetic spectrum (SWIR, 1000 to 2000 nm). To create SWIR J-aggregates, a
systematic study of the factors that promote the self-assembly of chromophores
into J-aggregates is conducted. Cyanine dyes are ideal complexes because they
are easily synthetically accessible and are known to form J-aggregates with
significant redshifts. In the first part of the project, four phenomena that are
hypothesized to control J-aggregation (amphiphilicity, counterions, polymethine
chain modification, and heterocycle polarizability) are explored through
systematic chemical modifications and environmental control. In the second aim,
these strategies are extended to a known SWIR cyanine dye. This research has the
potential to generate transformative novel nanomaterials for applications in
bioimaging and telecommunications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.