* 1905361
* The Structure of the Gromov-Witten Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Eleny-Nicoleta Ionel, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2024
* USD 380,000.00

Objects known as symplectic manifolds are of fundamental importance in the study
of modern geometry and physics. This award supports research that lies at the
intersection of symplectic geometry, which provides the framework for classical
mechanics, and string theory, which developed as a potential candidate for
unifying general relativity and particle physics, enabling the study of models
of space-time and phase-spaces inaccessible by other means. The problems
considered are deep and of foundational nature, and answers to these will lead
to new techniques and interactions among different fields of mathematics and
will have potential applications in string theory. There are many interesting
applications of this work, and many of the promising directions for continuing
this line of research, involve students. The research and outreach activities of
the principal investigator will have an impact on the education of next
generation of mathematicians, engaging them in cutting-edge research early in
their graduate career.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The theme of this research involves
symplectic manifolds and the structure of the invariants associated to them.
Specifically, one of the projects aims to understand the geometric reasons
behind a general type structure theorem for many flavors of Gromov-Witten
invariants. These types of structures were conjectured using string theory and
have spurred a lot of interest in mathematics and many attempts to understand
the geometry behind them. A second project aims to understand the properties of
the Gromov-Witten virtual fundamental cycle in symplectic geometry and explore
its functorial aspects. It includes a proposed set of axioms that would uniquely
determine it, inspired by the Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms for homology theories.
There are many different constructions of the Gromov-Witten virtual fundamental
class of closed symplectic manifolds, each one with its own strengths and
advantages, so knowing that most of these constructions carry the same
information is useful, allowing one to choose whatever construction may be best
suited for the particular problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.