* 1905207
* CDS&amp;E: Development of Computational Library for Accurate Binding Energies of Emerging Organic Contaminants on Environmental Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* William Alexander, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 355,579.00

When a chemical spill incident happens, emergency responders act to protect
human health and the environment. However, information is not always available
about how the spilled chemical will interact and move through the environment,
where it will end up, or how it might be filtered out. After a spill, methods
that can quickly predict these behaviors would be useful. With support from the
Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor William Alexander of The University of Memphis is using computer
models to quickly estimate how contaminants may act after a spill. Working with
his students, Professor Alexander develops automated computational chemistry
tools to predict the physical properties of contaminants, and to predict "where
they might stick?" on environmental or infrastructure surfaces. The group is
building a data library of environmentally-relevant surface models and using
these models to computationally screen what surfaces the contaminants may stick
to. The group's resulting models and tools could allow responders to obtain
rapid estimates of the behavior of novel contaminant compounds. This will help
aid and direct remediation strategies that could have a significant impact on
public safety and post crisis economic recovery. The project is also providing
multidisciplinary collaborative scientific training for graduate and
undergraduate students from underrepresented student populations. Outreach
efforts are designed to expand access to laboratory science for home-schooled
students, with a focus on environmental science and chemistry laboratory
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 172,00 chemical spills impacting US
bodies of water were reported to the US National Response Center from 2004-2014.
Some of these are due to chemicals with known properties and toxicity, whereas
for others, relatively little information is available. Qualitative models are
often used to predict contaminant fate and transport. These models generally do
not treat important dynamical aspects of contaminant behavior such as solvation
effects and conformational averaging. Also, most relevant surfaces that
contaminants interact with in the environment (silts, clays, etc.) and within
the water system (filter media, polymer plumbing, etc.) are dynamical and
amorphous in nature. Incorporating these dynamical aspects into prediction
models will increase the accuracy of the resulting physical properties and
binding estimates. In the project, input files and job management are automated
for rapid quantum mechanical (QM) prediction of contaminant physical properties,
including conformation and solvation effects. A library of relevant amorphous
surface models (i.e. amorphous silica, carbon, polymers) derived from molecular
mechanics (MM) simulations is generated. These approaches are combined into
QM/MM schemes to enable rapid computation of contaminant binding energies to
direct filter media selection and to predict where contaminants may concentrate.
The methods are validated using a large test set of known organic contaminant
molecules in a range of compound classes, including dozens of compounds selected
from public health agency priority lists. Selected molecules are used to
experimentally validate computed molecular properties by new partitioning and
adsorption studies. Throughout the investigations, new workflows are developed
to manage the large datasets. In addition to accurately predicting contaminant
behavior, the resulting methods may help to reduce human exposure to contaminant
compounds in the field by requiring less field samples and
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.