* 1905087
* Accelerated Reactions in Droplets and Thin Films: Surface Effects and Analytical Implications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Robert Cooks, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2023
* USD 467,540.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Graham Cooks and his group at Purdue University are
working to explain and exploit a startling but simple fact: the speed of many
chemical reactions increases dramatically as the volume of the reacting mixture
decreases. Because of this, reactions in microdroplets can easily be thousands
of times faster than the same reactions in jars, barrels or industrial vats.
This may offer an alternative to the use of expensive chemical catalysts to save
time and energy. Research in the Cooks group is focused on understanding the
role of the droplet interface in accelerating reactions, particularly those that
are useful in various analytical measurements. Among other potential
applications are studies of the shelf life of pharmaceuticals, and detailed
examination of fast biochemical reactions that occur within living cells. The
project provides training in advanced instrumentation and precision chemical
measurements, and prepares graduate students to contribute to the US workforce
in a field with strong industrial and national security ties. A range of methods
will be deployed to transfer the results of the research and strengthen the
training aspect of the program, including strong industrial interactions,
focused short training courses, inclusion of undergraduates in research, and
collaborative research efforts involving regional institutions with strength in
analytical chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this
proposal are to discover and characterize ways to exploit accelerated reactions
(including derivatization) for chemical analysis in droplets and other confined
volumes, and to elucidate the mechanisms that increase reaction rate constants.
The search for mechanistic knowledge focusses on kinetic studies of surface vs.
bulk reactions as a function of droplet size and reagent concentration. Mass
spectrometry can benefit from as well as probe these reactions. It is the main
measurement tool, along with interfacial vibrational spectrometry. Other target
applications come from both academic and industrial settings. Examples include
chemical reactions involving non-covalent clusters of amino acids and peptide
bond formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.