* 1905336
* Menaquinone biosynthesis via the futalosine pathway
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Tadhg Begley, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2022
* USD 540,000.00

In humans and other mammals, menaquinone is an essential vitamin (vitamin K)
involved in blood clotting and bone formation. Vitamin K deficiency leads to
prolonged blood clotting times and hemorrhaging. With this award, the Chemistry
of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Tadhg Begley
from Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) to study how vitamin K is biochemically
synthesized. The reaction will be tracked over time in order to determine the
unique chemical mechanisms of two enzymes involved in the biosynthetic pathway.
The resulting basic scientific knowledge may help in the design and discovery of
new antibiotics targeting several human pathogens. In addition to the scientific
goals, Dr. Begley will help to increase the participation of students from
diverse backgrounds by mentoring a student and faculty member at Prairie View
A&amp;M University. Dr. Begley also provides research opportunities to
undergraduates and engages with the community through the annual Texas A&amp;M
University Chemistry open house. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research studies
focus on the complete mechanistic characterization of aminofutalosine synthase
(MqnE). This enzyme is unusual in incorporating an adenosyl radical into the
reaction product rather than using it to abstract a hydrogen atom. The studies
determine the conformation of the bound captodative radical by Electron
Paramagnetic Resonance and the trapping of radical intermediates. The mechanism
of MqnE serves as a model system for radical S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM)
enzymes that generate a substrate radical by radical addition rather than by
hydrogen atom abstraction. MqnC catalyzes a spirocyclization reaction and is
also a radical SAM enzyme. MqnD catalyzes the formation of the dihydro-
napthoquinone moiety of menaquinone. Reaction product characterization
differentiates the two proposed mechanisms for this reaction. This research will
characterize all of the enzymes required for the biosynthesis of menaquinone via
the futalosine-dependent pathway, and will develop of new, generally useful,
strategies for studying enzyme-mediated radical additions to benzene rings. The
broader impacts include the mentoring of students and faculty members at Prairie
View A&amp;M University, the development of a set of biological experiments for
the TAMU Chemistry open house, the training of two undergraduates/year in
biological chemistry research, and the organization of the international
conference on biological cofactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.