* 1905302
* RUI: Far Ultra-Violet (172 nm) Photolysis of Gaseous Anthropogenic Pollutants
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Mads Peter Andersen, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 354,468.00

This award is from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division
of Chemistry. Professor Mads P. Sulbaek Andersen of California State University,
Northridge and his group investigate Far Ultra-Violet (FUV) photolysis of
airborne pollutants. Volatile organic pollutants are emitted from domestic and
industrial processes and impact the human and environmental health on local to
global scales. This project investigates the chemistry behind gas-phase Advanced
Oxidation Processes (AOPs), which can assist in purification of air directly in
factory emission points or in building air-conditioning systems. The promise of
AOP is that the technology can limit the high energy consumption associated with
traditional filter-based air-cleaning systems. However, the FUV photolysis and
processes utilized in AOPs may result in compounds more toxic than the parent
pollutant. An accurate understanding of the fundamental kinetics and chemical
reaction pathways associated with FUV degradation of the organic pollutants is
crucial to determining the nature of the resulting compounds and their
environmental fate and impact. The results of this research impact our
understanding at a molecular level of photochemical processes that impact urban
air quality. The project provides training opportunities for undergraduate
students and supports a research-rich learning environment at a primarily
undergraduate, minority-serving, institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photolysis
quantum yields and chemical oxidation mechanisms initiated at FUV wavelengths
(~121-200 nm) are not well known for volatile organic compounds. This project
uses a temperature-controlled advanced photochemical simulation chamber with in-
situ excimer-radiation lamps and multi-pass analytical optics. Reactants and
oxidation products are monitored using optical techniques including Fourier
transform infra-red spectroscopy and high-resolution vacuum UV
spectrophotometry. UV absorption cross sections are measured from 120-200 nm, as
a function of temperature, for important, high-volume compounds emitted from
industrial processes (aromatics, carbonyls, N-containing compounds). The 172-nm
quantum yields of photolysis are measured and the photolysis mechanisms are
investigated as a function of pressure, temperature and O2 partial pressure.
This research provides new knowledge on fundamental photochemistry and is used
for quantitative assessment of the fates and impact of the products formed
during FUV photochemistry of organic gaseous pollutants. The research team is
largely comprised of undergraduate researchers at this minority serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.