* 1905393
* CSBR:  Living Stocks:  Provasoli-Guillard National Center for Marine Algae and Microbiota
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Michael Lomas, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 533,785.00

Microalgae are essential photosynthetic plants that support the diverse ecology
of nearly all aquatic food webs, play a central role in the global environment
and regulating global climate, and more recently support a rapidly growing
global bioeconomy. The National Center for Marine Algae and Microbiota (NCMA) is
one of a small number of global culture collections focused on curating algae
biodiversity, and the only one in the U.S. with a primary focus on marine
microalgae. The NCMA curates over 3,000 distinct algal strains isolated from
around the world representing all classes of marine microalgae currently known
to science. Many of the algae in the NCMA Collection are unique to this specific
collection and thus represent an irreplaceable genetic resource for the global
community. For nearly four decades, the NCMA has provided this unique resource
to researchers, students at all levels, educators and companies worldwide, all
interested in working with microalgae to investigate fundamental questions in
biology, global processes and biotechnology. As an example of the importance of
the NCMA to the research community, each year, 200-300 published papers cite use
of NCMA-curated microalgae strains, with many of these papers being supported by
the NSF and other U.S. federal agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support demonstrable improvements to the NCMA Culture Collection, its
activities, and provide added value to our various stakeholder groups. This
award will allow the NCMA to 1) continue to maximize curated biodiversity of
marine phytoplankton; 2) refine the procedures and formulations for
cryopreservation as a long term management strategy for microalgae collections;
3) integrate imaging cytometry as part of our collection maintenance and
distribution procedures to provide enhanced value related to each strain; and 4)
expand a microalgae education and training portfolio. Specific deliverables from
this award will be documentation of the continued provision of professionally
curated microalgae cultures and culture support services to stakeholders, the
accession of any newly discovered microalgae for support of present and future
science, and expansion of our publically searchable informational database
associated with each accessioned strain to include new scientific information.
In addition, this award will support the inclusion of relatively new instrument
technology, imaging flow cytometry, to allow for the easy generation of basic
reports on cell abundance and condition, including embedded images, to be
provided with each microalgae strain we distribute. These reports will provide
stakeholders much needed information on what to expect for the strains they have
ordered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.