* 1905527
* Lithography on a nanosphere--an optical approach to arbitrarily patterned patchy particles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Hans Robinson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 496,544.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Self-assembly -the spontaneous formation
of well-defined ordered structures from simpler components- is a key mechanism
that enables living organism to develop and grow in size and complexity. If
self-assembly could be fully applied to technological problems, it would make it
possible to create materials and devices that are well beyond the reach of other
fabrication techniques, potentially revolutionizing many areas of materials
science, electrical and chemical engineering, and other fields. One of the
barriers preventing this is the difficulty in making starting components of
sufficient complexity of the required quality for efficient self-assembly to
take place. This project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program at NSF, implements a new technique for making such particles.
The particles are between a few hundred nanometers and a few micrometers in size
and possess surface properties that can be patterned in nearly any
configuration. These so-called "patchy particles" are excellent candidates for
self-assembly starting components. The technique researchers at Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University employ uses light to pattern
spherical particles that are suspended in liquid, and it has very few
restrictions of the distribution and configuration of the pattern fabricated on
the spheres. On the level of basic science, this new route to patchy particles
permits a more thorough exploration of self-assembly, which helps unravel the
principles underlying this complex and only partially understood phenomenon.
Because the same pattern can straightforwardly be projected onto any number of
particles, it potentially makes the technique amenable to future production of
patchy particle on an industrial scale. Thereby, this research may impact a wide
range of fields, but some of the project's initial target structures may be
particularly useful in the areas of flexible solar cells and in microrobotics.
In addition to the scientific and potential technological advances described,
students are benefitting from this research either by direct involvement in the
project and mentoring, or through the insights it adds to the course curriculum
of the new Nanoscience program at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;With this
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF,
researchers at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University develop a new
paradigm for synthesizing patchy particles with a patch distribution that can be
chosen with nearly complete freedom, and to demonstrate the self-assembly of
these particles into well-defined structures, includes some that are not readily
achievable with existing patchy particle fabrication techniques. The project
applies an optical imaging technique to project identical patterns on any number
of dielectric nanospheres and/or microspheres, where functionalization with
ligands containing photocleavable protecting groups (PPGs) ensure that the
optical patterns are transferred into functional groups such as amines, thiols,
carboxyls, etc., which can then be modified further to produce patches with
desired functionality. With functionalizations containing optically orthogonal
PPGs (including o-nitrobenzyl, aminocoumarin, and BODIPY groups), multiple patch
types with distinct properties can be produced through a single exposure, which
is required for full implementation of the patchy particle concept. The basic
building blocks for self-assembly are titania micro- and nanospheres for which a
number of ligands are developed to suit the needs of the project, using
phosphonic acid anchors to form stable bonds with the surface. Titania spheres
are particularly useful for applications beneficial to society, such as photonic
crystals for high efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells. Other potential
applications include TiO2/Pt light-controlled micromotors, or their
photocatalytic properties could be used to directly assist in the surface patch
formation. As part of this project one or more patch-patch interactions (such as
hydrophobic attraction, electrostatic binding, biotin-avidin binding etc.) are
used to achieve several target structures ranging from relatively simple (linear
chains, tetrahedra) to more challenging but previously demonstrated (Kagome
lattices, pentapods) to structures of high interest that have yet to be
assembled (icosahedra, diamond-structure colloidal crystals.) The patterning can
be applied to particles in a bulk suspension and is therefore potentially
scalable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.