* 1905809
* Quantum Straintronics with Single Photon Emitters in van der Waals Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Ajit Srivastava, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This research team will investigate strong
coupling between a single packet (quantum) of light called photon and an
atomically thin mechanical oscillator which can move in many directions. Single
photons which are emitted from these two-dimensional materials can be used to
communicate private data in a more secure fashion than the state-of-the-art.
Moreover, controllable stretching of these two-dimensional materials is expected
to tune the properties of the emitted single photons. Unusual effects such as a
single photon changing the frequency of the oscillator are expected and
represent an unexplored regime of sensitivity. The understanding gained from
such a study can be applied for future technologies based on quantum science
such as quantum sensors which can outperform their classical counterparts.
Integrated with the research, a research-oriented training course in Materials
and Engineering Physics at Emory Physics is preparing undergraduate students as
a part of the future generation of “quantum engineers and scientists” needed for
the next quantum revolution. An annual summer program in partnership with
historically black colleges and universities will be implemented to offer summer
opportunities in the area of materials research to students from
underrepresented communities with an eventual goal of preparing them for
academic careers. In addition, public lectures on scientific topics will be
conducted to engage the local community and inspire younger generation to choose
careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The behavior
of a quantum system coupled to collective excitations of a solid such as
vibrations is widely studied problem exploring the boundary between classical
and quantum world. The recent discovery of atomically thin materials offers an
ideal system to further our fundamental understanding of behavior of quantum
hybrid systems. Owing to their extremely low mass, atomically thin mesoscopic
oscillators have large quantum fluctuations in spite of their many degrees of
freedom. This allows for very strong coupling to other quantum degrees of
freedom such as single photons arising from quantum emitters present in such
two-dimensional materials. The goal is to use dynamic, tunable mechanical strain
as a means of creating and controlling quantum emitters in atomically thin
materials, enabling unprecedented strong, quantum opto-acoustic coupling between
them and creating a playground for simulating and sensing quantum behavior. In
addition to exploring the behavior of quantum emitters and their coupling to
mechanical strain, the goal is to also understand the role played by some of the
defining features of atomically thin materials such as valley pseudospin, Berry
curvature – an effective magnetic field in the reciprocal space, and strong
Coulomb interactions. The understanding gained from this research should allow
for possible on-chip scalability of quantum arrays featuring dynamic control
besides furtherance of fundamental understanding of unexplored regimes of strong
quantum opto-mechanical coupling in a system with strong Coulomb interactions.
These features, which are absent in most other quantum emitters, add richness to
scope of this project and offer potential novel functionalities for quantum
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.