* 1905691
* Ultrafast Dynamics of Iron-Based Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Sergiy Lysenko, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Nontechnical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Recent discovery of high-temperature
superconductivity in iron pnictides has initiated a new era in condensed matter
physics, significantly expanding quantum materials research. The understanding
of fundamental principles of light-matter interaction in iron-based
superconductors on femto- pico- and nanosecond time scales contributes to new
insight into the origin of High-T superconductivity. From a technological point
of view, this knowledge is important for revolutionary applications of all-
solid-state optical systems outside the laboratory because of their ruggedness,
efficiency, compact size and ease of maintenance. The goal of this research is
to obtain new information about transient dynamics of quasiparticles and
nonequilibrium phases, carrier redistribution and relaxation, and ultrafast
manipulation of electronic and structural order in iron-based superconductors.
This knowledge is critical to build all-optical devices based on novel optical
phenomena, and to create high-speed optoelectronic superconducting Q-bits which
can operate at relatively high temperatures, above ~20 K. This project has
significant institutional impact enhancing interdisciplinary advanced-level
training for graduate and undergraduate Hispanic STEM students and postdoctoral
researchers. The research activity integrates a broad spectrum of scientific,
outreach and technical experiences, and most of the research is the part of the
student/postdoctoral training on their ways to careers in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This project
pursues experiments to elucidate the evolution of nonequilibrium phases of iron-
based quantum materials, which is critical for understanding of fundamental
dynamical processes of superconductivity upon photoexcitation. A variety of
powerful femtosecond laser pump-probe spectroscopy techniques are applied to
create and characterize novel quantum phases, quasiparticle relaxation and the
electron-boson interactions. Methods of ultrafast optics provide stimulation and
selective probing of specific degrees of freedom in solids in order to visualize
multidimensional nonequilibrium dynamics on the timescale of lattice vibrations
and to reveal dynamics of spontaneously broken symmetries, to elucidate hidden
phases and features of light-induced suppression/creation of the superconducting
state and to provide new insights into "intertwined" order parameters on
ultrashort time scales. Real-time imaging of nonequilibrium dynamics across
broad length and time scales can provide important information about the scales
over which spin wave functions are coherent. To answer fundamental questions
about the size-dependent quantum material dynamics, a novel time- and angle-
resolved hemispherical light scattering method is applied. This technique
visualizes angular distribution of scattered light at cryogenic temperatures to
monitor transient nonequilibrium processes in grains/domains of different size.
The fabrication of iron-based superconducting epitaxial films is based on new
pulsed laser deposition protocols developed during the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.