* 1905238
* Quantitative assessment of non-covalent interactions in aqueous medium and in hydrophobic cavities using Cucurbiturils
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Eric Masson, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 455,000.00

Living organisms, from single cells to human beings, thrive as a result of an
extremely large number of interactions and reactions between molecules that
include proteins, DNA, sugars and lipids. Drugs also interact with these
chemical structures to counteract symptoms and diseases. A more precise
knowledge of how different chemical structures interact (or "stick" together)
has the potential to enable a better understanding of biochemical processes
involved in diseases and to facilitate drug design. With the support of the NSF
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program, the research
group of Professor Eric Masson at Ohio University designs and synthesizes
hollow, pumpkin-shaped molecules that can accommodate two chemical entities in
its hollow center. By bringing two chemical entities together, the Masson group
seeks to determine how well they interact and to quantify the strength of their
interactions at the molecular level. The research project involves graduate and
undergraduate students (including students from underprivileged backgrounds) and
trains them in organic, analytical and computational chemistry. Among other
outreach activities, Professor Masson also co-organizes a yearly science
communication and policy workshop held at Ohio University and at the University
of Leipzig, Germany. The workshop brings together students from chemistry,
journalism and international studies at both institutions around scientific
themes of societal interest. Through the workshop, students learn to communicate
scientific concepts to non-scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the purpose of
quantifying non-covalent interactions in both aqueous medium and in hydrophobic
cavities surrounded by an aqueous environment, Professor Masson's group designs
supramolecular systems that are water-compatible, versatile for evaluating a
wide range of non-covalent interactions; and geometrically well-defined and far
less complex than natural systems, to avoid secondary perturbations. There are
three specific aims in this project. In the first aim, the Cucurbituril (CB[n])
family of macrocycles is used to encapsulate highly hydrophilic guests and
determine the strengths of the intramolecular hydrogen bonds formed inside the
hydrophobic cavity of CB[n]. In the second aim, "2:1 stacked" ternary complexes
of a variety of 4'- substituted platinum(II) terpyridyl complexes in
curcubit[8]urils (CB[8]) are designed. These ternary complexes serve as self-
sorting probes for quantifying Coulombic interactions between peptides as well
as aryl-aryl "pi-pi" and aryl-cycloalkenyl CH-pi interactions in aqueous medium.
The last aim exploits the use of the "2:1 stacked" ternary complexes as
supramolecular balances for quantifying dispersive "pi-pi" and CH-pi
interactions in aqueous medium. The supramolecular balance is formed by self-
sorting of a platinum complex connected to a triptycene unit (the "wheel") with
another platinum complex without triptycene (the "shaft") in CB[8]. The novel
ternary complexes that are composed of one "shaft" and one "wheel" in CB[8] or
two "wheels" in CB[8] may represent new families of supramolecular brakes and
spur gears.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.