* 1905335
* Microdroplet On-tissue Chemical Reactions for Mass Spectrometric Imaging of the Untargeted Metabolome
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Young-Jin Lee, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Young-Jin Lee and his group at Iowa State University are
developing a new approach to the imaging and characterization of the surface of
biological tissue, involving chemical reactions in surface microdroplets to
improve the ability to detect metabolites (products of cellular processes) on
the surface using the powerful analytical probe know as "mass spectrometry."
This is the first systematic study of reaction acceleration in microdroplets for
on-surface derivatization. Fundamental understanding of on-surface microdroplet
reactions will lead to the effective analysis of small metabolites by mass
spectrometry imaging that are otherwise impossible to detect. The potential
impact spans across many scientific disciplines and analytical projects,
including biomarker discovery, plant metabolomics, food safety, drug metabolism,
and biodefense. A diverse group of students will be recruited to participate in
the project through various channels including the American Chemical Society's
Project SEED for economically disadvantaged high-school students and the McNair
Program for first generation and underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to understand
on-surface microdroplet reactions, find out major driving forces by comparing
neutral vs electrosprayed reagent droplets, and manipulate the reaction
conditions to improve reaction efficiencies while minimizing ion suppression and
cross-reactivity. A selected set of reactions is being studied to achieve these
goals for the derivatization of amines, carboxylic acids, ketones/aldehydes, and
vicinal diols. Furthermore, novel on-surface hydrogen deuterium exchange is
being developed as a way to assist metabolite identification directly from the
tissue surface. Most metabolomics studies are currently being performed without
recognizing cell-specific or tissue-specific metabolism. With the success of
this research, mass spectrometry imaging will allow better understanding of
metabolic biology in multicellular organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.