* 1905098
* Collaborative Research: Improving models of interseismic locking and slow slip events in Cascadia and New Zealand
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Noel Jackson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 03/31/2020
* USD 117,014.00

This project will carry out new analyses of existing geophysical data with the
complementary goals of advancing scientific understanding and improving upon
future earthquake hazard forecasts. Subduction zones are where two tectonic
plates collide and one sinks below the other. Subduction zones produce the
largest earthquakes in the world, such as the magnitude 9.0 Tohoku earthquake of
2011 that caused widespread destruction in northern Japan. This project will
focus on two subduction zone regions: Cascadia in the U.S. and Hikurangi in New
Zealand. Onshore and offshore GPS data will be modeled to determine the amount
of slip released as slow slip events, as steady creep, or where regions are
locked and not slipping. Slow slip events refer to slip on a fault that is
similar to what occurs during an earthquake, but occurs much more slowly and
does not emit damaging seismic waves. Locked regions refer to areas of a fault
in which friction prevents slip, allowing energy to build up for future release
in an earthquake. In contrast to previous modeling work, this project will use
realistic, three-dimensional elastic properties of the earth constrained by
prior seismic studies. The products of this project will directly inform
earthquake hazard forecasts for both the Cascadia and Hikurangi subduction
zones, which have major cities nearby (Portland and Seattle in Cascadia;
Wellington in Hikurangi). Important additional information will be obtained for
an International Ocean Discovery Program project scheduled for the northern
Hikurangi margin in 2018 that is targeting the slow slip region. The project
will support and train an early career female scientist who will be mentored by
a more established female scientist. The project also features public outreach
through public talks in New Zealand and the U.S. and the incorporation of the
results into lecture materials at two universities in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate new and improved catalogs
of slow slip events and plate locking models for the Cascadia and Hikurangi (New
Zealand) subduction zones. A Network Inversion Filter (NIF) technique will be
used to process all available GPS data to identify slow slip events, and produce
models of slip and slip-rate evolution over time. The NIF technique is based on
a Kalman filter approach, which balances a physically reasonable but inaccurate
model of steady slip with noisy data. Additionally, these NIF inversions will
incorporate offshore ocean bottom pressure (OBP) data from the Hikurangi Ocean
Bottom Investigation of Tremor and Slow Slip deployment during the mid-2014 to
mid-2015 time period for the Hikurangi subduction zone. These OBP instruments
recorded a large offshore slow slip event in late 2014. These models include,
for the first time, realistic, three-dimensional earth structure and the effects
topography and bathymetry. Long-term velocities of GPS stations will be modeled
to obtain improved constraints on the plate interface locking region for each
subduction zone. Plate locking indicates how much of the expected motion between
tectonic plates is not occurring continuously at the boundary, and could
therefore be released in earthquakes or slow slip events. GPS station velocities
will be averaged in two ways: first only over times between slow slip events and
second by averaging through slow slip events which will provide two locking
models for each subduction zone. Products will include new realistic 3D locking
models for the two regions, slow-slip event catalogs for both subduction zones
and a full-slip budget with uncertainties for each subduction zone as a function
of location over the time period of study.