* 1905221
* RUI: Exploring Synthesis, Tailoring Structure, Evaluating Properties, and Enabling Patterning of Surface-Anchored Framework Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mary Anderson, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2023
* USD 371,965.00

Professor Mary Elizabeth Anderson of the Chemistry Department at Furman
University is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
(MSN) Program of the Division of Chemistry to investigate the assembly of
surface-anchored metal-organic frameworks and covalent organic frameworks. The
potential for the application of these emerging materials in a wide range of
technologies has led to thousands of these framework systems being synthesized,
typically as microscale powders. In this project, the synthetic conditions for
tailoring the assembly of these materials as nanoscale films, as well as for the
chemical modification of the films post-assembly are investigated and optimized.
Understanding the mechanisms of film formation is crucial for the effective
fabrication of devices that harness the properties of these materials. The
ultimate goal is to develop patterning methods and structural features that are
necessary for the incorporation of these surface-anchored frameworks within
device architectures for practical applications, such as gas storage, chemical
catalysis, chemical sensing, and energy storage. The project engages
undergraduate students and trains future scientists in science and technology at
the interface of chemistry, material science, physics, and engineering in a
research-rich undergraduate liberal arts setting at Furman University. Multiple
facets of this research are integrated throughout the chemistry curriculum and
incorporated as course-based student research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project investigates the major chemical and physical mechanisms that direct the
bottom-up solution-phase assembly of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) and
covalent-organic frameworks (COFs) in thin films. The objective of this research
project is to tailor and pattern the surface-anchored frameworks for integration
into device architectures. Experimental conditions are explored by evaluating
properties of the surface-anchored assemblies, such as film morphology and
thickness, porosity, wettability, adhesion, and deformation. Central to this
evaluation is characterization by atomic force microscopy, ellipsometry, contact
angle goniometry, infrared and Raman spectroscopy, quartz crystal microbalance,
and cyclic voltammetry. Method development is undertaken to pattern surface-
anchored frameworks by nonconventional lithographic techniques, such as imprint
lithography and microcontact printing. The results are expected to contribute to
the fields of surface science, engineering science, nanotechnology, and material
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.