* 1905826
* Design and Preparation of Organic-Metal Halide Hybrids Exhibiting Charge Transfer
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Mark Thompson, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2024
* USD 567,514.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In the last ten years, solar
cells based on hybrid materials that contain organic and inorganic components
have exhibited rapidly improving performance that has now reached levels
competitive with commercial silicon panels. Through this project, which is
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, the
research team at the University of Southern California develops a deeper
understanding of why these materials perform so exceptionally well and
investigates strategies to push the performance of these hybrid materials even
higher in the future. The work is highly interdisciplinary, combining efforts in
organic synthesis, computational chemistry, and physical property measurements
to examine how light interacts with these complex materials. The project also
engages undergraduates from the nearby Cerritos Community College (which is 54%
Latino, 8% African American) and Native American High School students in the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project, which is supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program at NSF, deepens our fundamental understanding of how
organic molecules in their excited state interact within periodic inorganic
structures. In previous studies the organic component has been predominantly
structural in nature, not actively participating in the valence or conduction
bands. In this project the research team at the University of Southern
California focuses on materials where the organic component is an active optical
or electronic element, by making it a major contributor to the valance and/or
conduction bands of the hybrid solid. The principle investigators develop new
material design principles to promote enhanced charge transport of photoexcited
carriers through the solid state. In the process, new understanding is achieved
about how to align the highest occupied (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular
orbitals (LUMO) of organic dyes with the conduction or valence bands of the
extended framework. The materials that are developed during this study act as
model systems to investigate how localized excitons on the organic molecules can
be transferred into the far more delocalized bands of the metal halide region of
the crystal. The systematic investigation involves a combination of materials
design, synthesis, Density Functional Theory calculations, and physical property
measurement to answer fundamental questions about how the organic and inorganic
components interact within the crystal structure. Additionally, the project
engages undergraduates from the nearby Cerritos Community College (which is 54%
Latino, 8% African American) and Native American High School students in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.