* 1905034
* An Analysis of Cultural Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Karen Lupo, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 132,035.00

Dr. Karen Lupo of Southern Methodist University will lead a team of
international researchers to investigate the nature of cooperative mutualistic
relationships among populations with different ethnic identities, subsistence
orientations and political organization. Interactions among prehistoric
populations are widely recognized as processes that ignited cultural change and
had far-reaching consequences influencing the spread of languages, religion,
technology, sociopolitical organizations, economic patterns and human
demography. Some of the most profound impacts occurred when prehistoric food
producing (farmers and herders) populations spread and migrated into new areas
where they encountered indigenous hunter-gatherer's or foragers who did not
produce food. Interactions among populations can take many different forms, from
complete assimilation to competitive exclusion. Interactions can also result in
the formation of cooperative interrelationships in which both groups maintain
their ethnic identities but regularly interact in ways that are mutually
beneficial (also called mutualism). Mutualistic interactions are well-known
among contemporary foragers and food producers but are difficult to explain with
current knowledge. Previous scholarship focused largely on economic exchange as
the driving force behind these interactions, but observations show that these
interrelationships are very complicated and have economic, social and
nutritional benefits for the participants. The question faced by researchers now
is why some population interactions result in the establishment of mutualistic
interrelationships and others do not? An equally important question concerns how
archeologists might recognize similar kinds of cooperative arrangements in the
archaeological record? Ethnoarchaeology, which uses anthropological methods to
identify the material traces of different behavioral processes, is uniquely
situated to investigate all of these questions. This research project will help
build scholarly capacity by providing ethnoarchaeological training to Central
African researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An international team of researchers
from the United States and Central African Republic will use ethnoarchaeological
methods to study cooperative mutualistic interactions among foragers and food
producers in the Central African rainforest, one of the last remaining areas in
the world where these interrelationships persist. The team will collect
information on how these interactions are maintained through observations and
interviews with foragers and farmers. The team will also collect information on
the material traces that result from these interactions and that can serve as a
framework for identifying mutualistic interactions in the archeological record.
These include biomarkers of diet and nutritional health from hair samples and
proxy measurements of economic and social interactions through the contents of
faunal records and household inventories. This interdisciplinary project will
create a unique intersecting dataset that documents how mutualistic interactions
work and are reflected in the material record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.