* 1905045
* In Situ TEM and Ex Situ Studies of Two-Dimensional Nanostructured Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Marija Drndic, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 672,659.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project focuses on an experimental
investigation of novel two-dimensional nanostructured materials towards the
fabrication and synthesis of one-dimensional electronic devices. This research
combines fabrication of devices at the atomic scale in ultrathin materials with
electrical characterization. The research team aims at advancing synthesis,
characterization, and understanding of two-dimensional materials for an atom-by-
atom control of structure-property-performance relationships while monitoring
the evolution during device heating and electron irradiation and recording key
device properties such as electron transport. More broadly, this project has
impacts on education (university and K-12 students, on public forums: festivals
and museum exhibits) and industry (e.g., on electron microscopy companies). The
broader impact also includes the realization of low-dimensional materials and
the advancement of devices including miniaturized electronics with improved
power consumption. Moreover, this project impacts industries developing on-chip
nanoscale devices. Outreach to a broad nanodevice community and to the electron
microscopy industry includes open source software for analyzing data as well as
the development of a novel equipment for advanced electron microscopy. The
educational part provides innovative multidisciplinary learning opportunities
for students at all levels, at the crossroads of electron microscopy and solid-
state materials science in the Greater Philadelphia Area. To exploit the
specific nature of this research project at the interface of physics and
materials science, the PI's team participates in large public events in this
metro area: the Nano Day at Penn, the Philadelphia Science Festival and the
Philly Materials Day. The research team gives nanoscience presentations to high
school students at the Penn Summer Science Academy and participates in the STEM
outreach in the Philadelphia School
District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
project exploits materials growth and materials irradiation by electron and ion
beams to modify materials with nm-scale spatial and density control, towards
engineering of their properties and observations of emerging phenomena that
arise when material and device sizes are reduced and when single atomic layers
of materials are stacked in a well-defined manner. This work establishes a more
complete understanding of transport in low-dimensional materials that can
enhance or replace silicon in future electronic-based devices. Thin atomic
sheets are of particular interest since their electrical properties can be tuned
by their geometry. Utilizing a novel experimental platform pioneered by the PI
and state-of-the-art transmission electron microscopy instrumentation along with
ex situ Raman spectroscopy, photoluminescence, and low temperature measurements,
this project aims at understanding and controlling properties of thin materials
such as nanosculpted structures for new multi-terminal electronic devices and
few-nm-wide metal dichalcogenide nanoribbons. This research includes a
comprehensive analysis toolkit enabling sub-angstrom device fabrication and
atomically resolved property analysis. This work also advances device
fabrication and characterization, thus opening the door to a wealth of
unexplored physics. This research is organized into three primary cross-cutting
themes: (1) growth, stacking, and electron microscopy characterization of two-
dimensional layers and heterostructures, (2) electron beam nanosculpting and
processing into one-dimensional nanodevices, and (3) nanodevice measurements.
This project focuses on new materials including graphene, transition metal
dichalcogenides (MoS2 and WS2) and topological thermoelectrics
(Bi2Se3).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.