* 1905175
* Arsenic Complexation with Reduced Organosulfur Moieties in Soil Organic Matter: Implications for Arsenic Oxidation via Biotic and Abiotic Pathways
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Matthew Reid, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 355,147.00

Supported by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Matthew Reid and his students are studying interactions
between inorganic arsenic and dissolved organic matter (DOM). DOM is a complex
mixture of biomolecules derived from plant residues and microorganisms, and is
an important component of all natural environments. DOM binds arsenic to form
dissolved complexes with significantly different properties than unbound
inorganic arsenic molecules. These reactions influence arsenic concentration in
water and uptake into plants, with important implications for human exposure to
arsenic, a human carcinogen. However, the functional groups of DOM that react
with arsenic are poorly understood. In this project, researchers explore how the
structure of DOM affects its reactivity with arsenic, and evaluate how arsenic-
DOM binding influences arsenic behavior in soils. Throughout this research,
undergraduate and graduate students are trained in experimental methods and
characterization techniques to address fundamental problems in environmental
chemistry. A graduate student is partnering with outreach staff from the Cayuga
Nature Center to develop hands-on activities with a portable X-ray fluorescence
instrument. This outreach strengthens the student's science communication skills
and engages high school teachers and the public with soil chemistry topics of
societal importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, standard humic
substances as well as hydrophobic and hydrophilic DOM fractions isolated from
wetland soils with a range of sulfur concentrations are reacted with arsenite
(As(III)) in order to explore As(III)-DOM coordination reactions. In the first
phase of the research, wet chemical analysis and synchrotron-based XAS are
integrated with laboratory dialysis equilibrium experiments to quantify
conditional distribution coefficients, characterize sulfur speciation in DOM,
and determine the As coordination environment in DOM-bound As. In the second
phase of the research, impacts of As(III) binding by DOM on As(III) oxidation
kinetics via abiotic and microbial pathways are evaluated using laboratory batch
studies. These research activities are designed to test the hypothesis that
thiol functional moieties are high-affinity binding sites for As(III), and that
As(III) bound with thiol functionalities in DOM will be stabilized in its
trivalent oxidation state during oxidizing conditions. Research outcomes are
expected to improve geochemical modeling of As speciation in DOM-rich
environments and provide new insight into arsenic oxidation reactions in redox
dynamic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.