* 1905902
* Nanofibrils: Quest to the Origin of Spider Silk's Strength, Toughness, and Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Hannes Schniepp, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 11/30/2023
* USD 434,931.00

Nanofibrils: Quest to the Origin of Spider Silk?s Strength, Toughness, and
Formation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Spider silk is
an intriguing material that has fascinated researchers and laymen alike.
Featuring outstanding strength and toughness, spider silk outperforms some of
the best man-made materials. These properties are intimately related to the
highly sophisticated structure of silk, revealing different features when
studied at increasing magnifications. Nanofibrils have recently been identified
to play a key role in this structure; their outstanding properties will thus be
at the center of this project and will be studied in terms of their structure,
properties, and functions. Several of the most advanced microscopy and
spectroscopy techniques will be combined to reveal the internal structure of the
nanofibrils, with the ultimate goal of obtaining a complete understanding of
silk fibers across all length scales, starting at the molecular level and
reaching to the size of the entire silk fiber. One of the goals of this project
is to provide the foundations for future efforts to synthesize outstanding
materials inspired by spider silk. Because of the critical importance of
nanofibrils, the project will study the conditions of their formation,
ultimately to enable the fabrication of synthetic fibers made of such
nanofibrils. In this pursuit, several graduate and undergraduate students will
acquire specialized training in materials testing and characterization, high-
resolution imaging, materials manipulation at the nanoscale and computer
modeling. The project includes multiple outreach activities to bring this
exciting spider silk project to students in elementary, middle, and high schools
with the goal of motivating them to pursue careers in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This research
project studies a broad range of aspects of silk nanofibrils, which have
recently been identified as key structural and functional elements in silk
fibers. To fully reveal the hierarchical structure of silk fibers across all
length scales, a broad range of imaging techniques will be employed, including
atomic force microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and transmission electron
microscopy. These techniques will be complemented by spectroscopic and inverse-
space characterization methods, including vibrational spectroscopy, solid-state
nuclear magnetic resonance, and X-ray diffraction. Finite element analysis will
be employed to develop a coherent model of the mechanical properties of silk
fibers, with the ultimate goal of relating the observed macroscopic performance
of a silk fiber to its hierarchical structure across the length scales. Because
nanofibrils are so critical to the performance of silk fibers, this project will
also study their conditions of formation. Molecular self-assembly of silk
proteins is a very promising route to bottom-up fabrication of silk nanofibrils
and will be employed in this project to determine the most critical parameters
of nanofibril formation. The knowledge gained in this project will be critical
to future efforts to synthesize outstanding materials inspired by spider silk:
the hierarchical structure determined in the project will serve as a template
for materials synthesis; the self-assembly mechanisms revealed by the project
can be employed to ultimately realize these hierarchical structures starting at
the molecular scale. The project includes multiple outreach activities to bring
this exciting spider silk project to students in elementary, middle, and high
schools with the goal of motivating them to pursue careers in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.