* 1906492
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging a Solvent Toolkit for Doping and Characterizing Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Wilhelmus Geerts, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 12/31/2023
* USD 200,512.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Solar cells are instrumental to efforts to develop
environmentally friendly power sources. Solar cells based on hybrid
organic/inorganic materials have achieved performance levels comparable to
commercial devices. Properties such as low-cost processing and flexibility make
them an attractive alternative to silicon. However, improving the performance of
hybrid solar cells has been limited by current fabrication and characterization
strategies. The PIs have shown that these materials can be electrochemically
doped by a liquid without dissolving them. This liquid approach yields a toolkit
that can be used to measure and enhance intrinsic electrical properties. This
liquid toolkit will be used to modify and enhance hybrid solar cells. The PIs
will identify promising materials combinations for hybrid solar cells by
computer modeling. Thin films will be prepared, characterized, and optimized for
solar cells. Hybrid solar cells will be fabricated and characterized for solar
power conversion and stability. Additional studies will identify causes of
degradation. These efforts will further the potential of hybrid solar cells to
transform the solar energy landscape. The proposed effort will involve education
and outreach activities to broaden participation of underrepresented groups,
engage the public, and train the next generation of scientists and engineers in
renewable energy. Texas State University is a Hispanic Serving Institution. The
proposed project will leverage this talent pool to increase diversity in
research and STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
will electrically dope and characterize hybrid perovskite (HP) thin films and
solar cell devices using a recently-developed solvent toolkit. This solvent
toolkit is based on a hydrofluoroether (HFE) solvent system that is
nondestructive to HPs and permits electrochemical characterization and
modification of HP thin films. To produce p and n doped devices of favorable
electrical and optical performance, the project team will utilize three
approaches to identify optimal device compositions from the wide range of
possible devices afforded by the solvent toolkit technique. To characterize the
broad potential experimental landscape, numerical modeling with density
functional theory (DFT) will be performed, identifying favorable doping
mixtures. Subsequently, electrochemical study of thin HP films in HFE
electrolytes will be performed to experimentally achieve doping effects such as
improved conductivity and new energy levels. Finally, HP solar cells will be
fabricated from doping strategies motivated by electrochemical study, and
carefully characterized for efficiency, structure and stability. More
specifically, we will utilize DFT with Hubbard correction and spin-orbital
coupling to investigate the effects of different ionic dopants on the band
structure, bandgap, doping energy levels, loss of inversion symmetry, Rashba
effect, spin texture, electron-phonon coupling, and quantum confinement of HP
materials. Electrochemical (EC) doping will be accomplished in HFE solvents with
chronopotentiometry and chronoamperometry and characterized with cyclic
voltammetry, square wave voltammetry, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
with custom multiplexed chips. HP solar cell devices will be fabricated from
films doped by HFE processing and tested for efficiency and lifetime metrics. We
will subsequently investigate how the EC doping of HP films affects device
performance and stability while the device is being stressed with light and
temperature cycles. We will correlate changes in HP-PV device parameters (power
conversion efficiency, short-circuit current, open-circuit voltage, filling
factor, hysteresis, etc.) with structural, chemical, and optical properties as
the device undergoes controlled aging in the air-free
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.