* 1906253
* Electronic spin and valley degrees of freedom - based novel quantum devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mansour Shayegan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 405,000.00

Electrons, besides being charged particles, have an extra, quantum degree of
freedom, namely their spin. In certain materials, electrons also have a valley
degree of freedom, which is related to their momentum. Spintronics and, more
recently, valleytronics, are emerging areas in solid-state science and
engineering. Their broad goal is to utilize carriers' spin/valley degrees of
freedom to realize novel electronic devices that rely on the creation,
manipulation, and detection of spin/valley currents. If successful, such
manipulation could also impact the even more exotic field of quantum computing,
as spin/valley are candidates for registering the quantum bit of information in
quantum computers. The focus of the projects proposed here is to study ballistic
transport in clean carrier systems in layered semiconductor structures. The goal
is to demonstrate and characterize a number of novel, prototype, electronic
devices whose operation relies on the manipulation of spin and/or valley degrees
of freedom. The projects also incorporates comprehensive educational component,
including training of graduate and undergraduate students in fabrication,
characterization, and physics of thin-film semiconductor structures. Outreach
activities involve K-12 demonstrations and teacher training programs in
electricity and magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects proposed here are
aimed at studies of ballistic transport in clean, two-dimensional carrier
systems in modulation-doped semiconductors. The goal is to demonstrate and
characterize a number of devices whose operation relies on the manipulation of
spin and/or valley degrees of freedom. These include a spin-interference device,
a spin-filter, and a valley-filter. The devices will be based mainly on two
different carrier systems: (1) two-dimensional hole system in GaAs quantum wells
which possesses a strong and tunable spin-orbit interaction, and (2) two-
dimensional electron system in AlAs quantum wells where the electrons occupy
conduction band valleys with gate- and/or strain-tunable densities, and also
have a large Lande effective g-factor so that they can be easily spin-polarized.
All the projects described in this proposal will involve fabrication of various
devices using modern crystal growth and lithography techniques, and transport
measurements. The projects will contribute to the fundamental understanding of
the ballistic transport in semiconductor structures. While the proposed
structures would operate mainly at relatively low temperatures, they will serve
as prototypes to demonstrate proof-of-principle concepts that are essential for
advances in the emerging fields of spintronics/valleytronics and quantum
computing. The projects can also lead to the development of unforeseen device
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.