* 1906084
* Collaborative Research - STAR Library Network Phase 3: Enhancing STEAM Equity and Learning Opportunities in Libraries and Their Rural Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Brian Russell, American Library Association
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 223,946.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. This project will
focus on addressing the challenges faced by rural youth with a particular
emphasis on those youth who are English Language Learners. The project will
provide informal education via libraries and librarians which can provide unique
opportunities for rural youth and communities. Building on several years of
research and experimentation, this project will augment the formal education
sector, as well. The settings for the project are 12 rural school districts in
largely Latinx communities. The project partners are the Space Science
Institute, the American Library Association (ALA), the Institute for Learning
Innovation and the Twin Cities Public Television. Expertise from the Latinx
community will play a significant part in the project. The project will engage
learners from diverse backgrounds, ages, and interests in science through a
coordinated and tested strategy incorporating three Learning Pathways (i.e.,
Science Learning Spaces, Programs, and Science Kits) in a public library
environment. The results should yield a model for Nationwide application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals are: 1) to establish learning pathways to
engage rural communities through exhibit host libraries and (2) to increase art-
rich STEM learning opportunities for rural communities through libraries and
their support systems. Building on an established training model, the project
will introduce library staff to the STEAM content of the exhibits and guide them
in developing their own STEAM Learning Pathways. SciGirls digital media, hands-
on activities, family resources, and a training network will expand the depth
and reach of the project. The project draws on existing professional
infrastructure to increase library staff capacity through ALA and the
Institute's established community of practice. The researchers will study the
efficacy of each pathway, alone and in tandem, on participant's interest
development and persistence. The research will use a mixed-methods design-based
approach that involves questionnaires, interviews and case
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.