* 1906322
* Practice-driven Research: Developing Constructivism-informed Tools for Supporting Learning in Informal Contexts
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ron Skinner, Children's Museum of Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 305,356.00

Research on how museum staff are trained continues to emerge. Training varies
considerably across institutions and typically includes observations, shadowing,
and trial and error. While museum educators put high value on increasing
visitor-centered participatory experiences, engagement based on acquisition-
based theories of learning is still common among floor staff, even after
training. Facilitating learning about science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) topics in ways that support visitors in constructing their
own understanding is difficult, especially since floor staff/facilitators may be
working simultaneously with children and adults of a range of ages, backgrounds,
and goals. This project will advance understanding of how to facilitate open-
ended learning experiences in ways that engage visitors in practices that align
with the STEM disciplines. The project will result in an evidence-based
facilitation framework and training modules for training informal science
educators. The work is grounded in constructivist theories of learning and
identity work and focuses on visitors constructing understanding of STEM topics
through active engagement in the practices of STEM. This model also results in
learning experiences in informal settings that are mutually reinforcing with the
goals of schools. This research is being conducted through an established
researcher-practitioner partnership between MOXI, the Wolf Museum of Exploration
+ Innovation and the University of California at Santa Barbara
(UCSB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two primary goals of the work are to (1) enable
visitors to better engage in STEM practices (practice-based learning) and (2)
investigate the role of training in helping facilitators develop the practice-
based facilitation strategies needed to support visitors' learning. STEM content
in this study is physical science. Prior work resulted in two tools that
constitute part of a facilitation framework (a practices-by-engagement matrix
and three facilitation pathways) which help educators identify appropriate goals
based on how the visitor is engaging with exhibits. The development of the final
tool in the framework, facilitation strategies, and the refinement of the first
two tools will be done using a design-based implementation research (DBIR)
approach. Data collection and analysis will be directed and completed by
research-practitioner teams of UCSB graduate students (researchers) and MOXI
educators (practitioners); MOXI educators will be both participants and
researchers. Data collection activities include: video data using point-of-view
cameras worn by visitors and educators; interviews of educators and visitors;
observations of the training program; and educator reflections. In the final
year, a small field test will be done at six sites, representing different types
of museums. Interviews and reflections comprise the data collection at the field
sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.