* 1906396
* Roads Taken: A Retrospective Study of Program Strategies and Long-term Impacts of Intensive, Multi-year, STEM Youth Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Carey Tisdal, Franklin County Historical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,673,758.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This Research in Service to Practice project will bring together representatives
from six long-standing youth programs, experts in the field of out-of-school-
time youth programming, and education researchers to collaboratively explore the
long-term (15-25 years) impact of STEM-focused, intensive (100+ hours/year),
multi-year programming. The six partnering programs have maintained records with
a combined total of over 3000 alums who participated between 1995 and 2005. This
four-year research project uses an explanatory, sequential, mixed-method design
to carry out four steps: (1) identify and describe the impact on the lives of
program alums who are now ages 30 to 45; (2) identify causal pathways from
program strategies to long-term outcomes; (3) develop an understanding of these
pathways from the perspective of the people who experienced them; and (4)
disseminate this knowledge broadly to those associated with STEM-focused
programming. Research questions include: How did these programs affect youth's
lives as they progressed toward and into adulthood? What program strategies and
what participant attributes contributed most to the staying power of these
effects? What life events and social structures supported and inhibited
participant outcomes? This project describes the effects, identifies the causal
pathways, and produces materials that programs can use for both strategic
planning and generating support resources. Additionally, this project provides
research methodology for organizations that want to conduct their own
retrospective research and lays a foundation for a more comprehensive study that
includes programs without historical documentation. The project aligns with
NSF's Big Idea "NSF INCLUDES: Transforming education and career pathways to help
broaden participation in science and engineering" by providing essential
information about the long-term effect of interventions on educational and
career pathways in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's approach involves
three phases: (1) research preparation, (2) causal structural modeling of survey
data from approximately 2,000 respondents, and (3) rich qualitative follow-up.
Human ecological and self-determination theories inform data collection and
analyses at every project phase. In the preparation phase, program staff
complete program profiles from an historic perspective by identifying program
strategies that may have included, for example, scientific research, robotics
development, teaching science in informal settings, and working in scientific
research labs. In the quantitative phase, the project will recruit alums who
attended one of the 6 youth programs between 1995 and 2005 to submit a current
resume and complete an online questionnaire, based on the following scaled
variables: retrospective recall of basic psychological need satisfaction and
frustration in relation to perceived program strategies; STEM identity (at three
time periods: pre-program; post-program; and current); current well-being;
career influences; and career barriers. The questionnaire also includes open-
ended questions about life events related to the following categories: family
and friends, school and work, and living conditions. Analysis of the
questionnaire will lead to development of a causal structural model. In the
qualitative phase, data will be collected from a purposefully selected sample of
30 alums based on findings from the quantitative phase. Methods include
interviews, photo journals, and STEM pathways maps. Analysis of interviews,
resumes, and photo journals take place within the structure of basic
psychological need satisfaction and motivational quality across ecological
systems over time. Qualitative analysis uses the constant comparative method,
and findings are used to update and refine the final causal structural model and
inform overall findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the 1990s, out-of-school time programs have
engaged youth from underserved communities in STEM learning and in building
interest in STEM careers, yet these programs often based on untested assumptions
that participation has lasting effects on education, career, and life choices
related to STEM. This Research in Service to Practice project has the potential
to 1) guide practitioners in program improvement and improved program outcomes;
2) provide insight into achieving program goals, such as equity, increased well-
being of participants, an informed citizenry, and a diversified STEM workforce;
and 3) inform multi-stakeholder decision-making with respect to this type of
programming. This research also builds a foundation of research data collection
and analysis methods to guide and support future research on long term-impacts
and youth STEM programming. Dissemination strategies include a website,
webinars, video, infographics, conference presentations, and written reports to
reach stakeholders including practitioners, researchers, administrators, and
funders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.