* 1906885
* Developing a Live Science Show and Educational Outreach Resources to Engage Hispanic Students and Families  in the Rio Grande Valley in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Karen Lozano, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,529,801.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. Many of the Hispanic children and families who
live in the Rio Grande Valley lack opportunities to engage in inspirational and
educational experiences introducing Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) concepts and related careers. The University of Texas, Rio
Grande Valley (UTRGV) will adapt and research the "Energy and U Show," which
will introduce thousands of children and families to an exciting and dramatic
that shows interconverting different forms of energy. The show will meld the
excitement of chemical demonstrations and the natural connection between energy
and STEM education in a fully produced, on-stage science extravaganza. A
foundational philosophy of the show is that there is additional real value in
getting children and youth onto a college campus. For many of its participants,
this is their first time sitting in a seat at a university, the first
opportunity for them to envision themselves in this environment. In partnership
with the University of Minnesota, which originally developed the show, UTRGV
will adapt the show, now presented in English, to a bilingual, culturally
accessible format that is designed to Hispanic family audiences and student
groups in learning about energy and related careers. Evaluation results
demonstrate that the show has effectively engaged thousands of Minnesota
students. The target audience will be upper elementary (4th-5th grade), middle
school students, and their parents. This project will be led by UTRGV, nation's
second-largest Hispanic Serving Institution, with a student enrollment of
28,000, of which over 90% are Hispanic and more than 60% are first-generation
college students). In addition to the show, the project will include: (1) a
manual to guide implementation of the program and related resources at different
national or international venues; (2) educational resources for parents,
teachers and school counselors introducing STEM careers and specific STEM
college majors; (3) mentoring of UTRGV faculty in outreach activities; and (4)
dissemination of the show to other campuses and venues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct ongoing research and evaluation
guiding the adaptation of the show and investigation of factors contributing to
positive educational impacts of the project, which will be carried out by a
bilingual/bicultural researcher. Project research instruments will measure
student level of engagement, interest and learning, as well as college interest,
in surveys and analysis of data pre and post demonstration. The project will
specifically investigate the impact of language on student impacts. Each
component of this project will be studied to determine program intervention
effectiveness (the scientific demonstration and language of the demonstration).
To determine program effectiveness, a baseline of data before program
implementation will be established concerning Hispanic students, their
persistence, and perceptions of the environment. The project will measure parent
perceptions of STEM careers for their children through pre and post
demonstration surveys and focus groups. Student and parent research participants
will be able to use surveys or respond to other research activities in the
language of their choice. Project findings will contribute to the knowledge base
concerning how linguistically and culturally adapted science shows and related
resources adapted into can have positive impacts regarding the STEM knowledge
and careers of students and parents from low-income and Hispanic
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.