* 1906129
* Modeling, Analysis, and Computation of 2D Layered Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mitchell Luskin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 259,443.00

Experimental methods for interleaving layers of 2D materials have been developed
with endless possibilities for creating stable structures with desired
electronic, optical, magnetic and thermal properties. This project will develop
mathematical models and computational methods to guide the search and design of
2D materials with optimal properties. This approach makes possible the long-
sought goal of atomic-level control of nanostructures as building blocks for
creating devices of desirable properties and performance characteristics. The
mathematical modeling, analysis, and computation from the atomic to macroscopic
scale developed by the project will contribute to the design of new materials
leading to applications in incommensurate 2D materials. This effort will impact
the development of materials and devices with desired characteristics and
performance for a wide range of applications of interest including ultra-fast
electronic, opto-electronic, and magnetic devices; nonconventional optical and
photonics devices; and communication devices. The challenge of modeling layered
incommensurate heterostructures will also promote the development of multiscale
models for many other aperiodic materials systems such as composites, atomically
engineered structures, and bio-materials. 2D materials research is an ideal
platform to motivate new mathematics training and curricula in the analysis,
modeling, and computation of quantum electronic structure and transport, and
mechanical and topological properties of materials. The project's graduate
student training and outreach to underrepresented student populations will
broaden the diversity of the mathematical research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main issue encountered in the mathematical
modeling of layered 2D materials is that the lattice periodicities of different
layers do not match and thus lead to incommensurate structures. New theory and
computational methods that do not use Bloch-Fourier methods will be developed to
accurately predict material properties in currently inaccessible regimes. This
project will utilize the notions of local configuration space and locality to
give new formulations and computational methods for the electronic density of
states and for transport properties such as conductivity. New momentum space
formulations and corresponding fast computational methods will be developed that
exploit the structure of the momentum space Hamiltonian. Novel models and
computational methods will also be developed and analyzed that extend our model
for electronic density of states and conductivity to include mechanical
relaxation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.