* 1906327
* I-Corps Teams:  Commercial evaluation of bismuth microparticle composites for radiation shielding applications
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Andrea Goforth, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be
replacement of toxic, lead-based radiation shielding materials with non-toxic
bismuth composites that are lighter weight and have equivalent or better
radiation shielding protection. These bismuth composites can be flexibly
fashioned into a variety of shapes, including aprons, gloves, hats and drapes,
to provide custom protection for medical and other radiation-exposed workers.
Because of the reduced weight burden and increased flexibility of the bismuth
composites relative to lead, we expect that our product will significantly
reduce physical strain on personnel who wear these garments, while also being
biologically and environmentally safer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will evaluate the commercial potential of radiation shielding bismuth
composite materials, which are produced using our patented technology, in
several different market spaces, including medical, dental, veterinary,
electronics, and military sectors. Based on initial prototypes and measurements
of X-ray attenuation, we calculate that we will be able to produce a flexible
radiation protective barrier that is 50% lighter than traditional lead-based
barriers, with the same or better shielding protection. The patented method to
produce the X-ray opaque material is highly scalable, and the proposed work will
determine effective commercialization strategies for this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.