* 1906793
* Collaborative Research: Cool Science: Art as a Vehicle for Intergenerational Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Lois Hetland, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,404,452.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. This program will
derive knowledge on extreme weather and its concepts to be shared with youth in
the Boston and Kansas City areas. Subsequently, the youth will share this
knowledge by displaying it as art work on the rapid transit systems. The art
projects will culminate in broad-based exhibition at the end of each group's
sessions. The project will involve 200 youth per region resulting in an impact
of 1000 youth per year, 80 adult mentors and 20,000 adult transportation riders
in learning about extreme weather concepts. Participant organizations are the
University of Mass-Boston, University of Mass-Lowell, The Massachusetts College
of Art, the University of Kansas Center for Research Inc., and the Goodman
Research Group Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to bring
the topic of extreme weather to the foreground by educating youth and in turn
having them educate a selected group of adults that use the rapid transit
system. Groups of youths will learn about the topic through a series of meetings
with mentors who are experts on the issues around extreme weather. The youth
will derive their own art-works with their interpretation. These art-works will
be displayed on the rapid transit systems in New England (Merrimack Valley and
Worcester regions) and the Mid-West (Topeka and Kansas City areas). Using a
quasi-experimental mixed methodology (demographics, bus ridership, initial level
of science awareness, and interest) the goal is to understand science learning
outcomes associated with the creation and public display of youth art. Research
questions of importance in this regard are 1. In what ways does blending art
with the science enhance youth learning about extreme weather concepts? 2. To
what extent does youth art support adult learning of science? and 3. How does
regional context affect learning about extreme
weather?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts will result from the youth
diversity as well as the diversity of riders of the rapid transit systems where
the art of extreme weather is displayed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.