* 1906305
* Novel determination method of geochemical response time for volcanic activity monitoring
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Reika Yokochi, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2021
* USD 60,001.00

Volcanic activities release elements from magma at depth into shallow
underground fluids which seep as hot springs. Helium is an element highly
enriched in magma, thus it can be easily detected as magmatic isotope signal in
the hot spring water. The magmatic helium signal appears to respond to eruption
cycles at some volcanos, but the association between its variation and observed
volcanic activities is often indecisive, making it difficult to use as an
eruption forecasting tool. In those studies, the temporal variations of the
volcanic signals from hot springs were compared with the volcanic activities of
time that the samples were collected. However, the volcanic signal may travel
for substantial time period underground before seeping from the springs so that
the volcanic signature we detect could reflect the magmatic activity of tens of
years ago. In order to evaluate the time scale of the possible delay, the
proposed project will determine the travel time of the shallow subsurface fluids
that carry the magmatic helium signals using radioisotopes of Kr and Ar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ontake and Unzen volcanos, Japan, were selected as
candidate sites because of their relatively recent volcanic activities and
abundant helium monitoring records. Radioisotopes of Kr and Ar will be analyzed
by Atom Trap Trace Analysis (ATTA) at Argonne National Laboratory and by low
level decay counting at University of Bern. The chronological information will
be used for re-interpreting the relationship between local geotectonic
activities and He isotope records as well as for assessing the possibility of
recovering 'fossil' magmatic signatures. This is the first application of these
novel tools to a volcanic aquifer system. This work will provide fundamental
knowledge to evaluate the feasibility of forecasting volcanic eruptions using
geochemical tracers including helium. Two students will be trained in the
international fieldwork and laboratory work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.