* 1906408
* The STEM Ambassador Program: Supporting Scientists' Engagement with Public Audiences
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Dennis Schatz, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 06/30/2023
* USD 977,089.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of settings. Fostering greater
inclusion in science creates benefits for both science and society. In this
Innovations and Development project, the University of Utah will investigate how
to sustain and scale the STEM Ambassador Program (STEMAP), begun in 2016 with
AISL funding. STEMAP developed an innovative process to train scientists to
engage members of the public, who cannot or do not gain access to science via
conventional science education venues (such as museums, schools, zoos), by
implementing activities in non-traditional settings. The 65 scientists trained
by the initial STEMAP effort effectively engaged in over 45 settings including
an affordable housing development, a youth residential treatment center, a state
prison, a cooking class, a daycare facility, and several senior centers. The
number of scientists applying to the program quickly exceeded STEMAP's capacity.
Other institutions expressed interest in replicating the training. This project
will explore strategies for scaling and sustaining public engagement training to
support more scientists who can engage more people in more venues. Outcomes will
serve to inform the broader implementation of STEMAP and the efforts of other
public engagement programs, many of which face similar scaling and
sustainability challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scaling and sustaining public
engagement of science (PES) programs is a central challenge for many in the
informal science learning community. This project will explore strategies to
scale and sustain the STEM Ambassador Program. Research questions include: (1)
How do different program formats increase or restrict program capacity and
engagement outcomes? (2) What benefits accrue to scientists and their
institutions by participating in public engagement in science activities that
might serve as motivators to continue these activities? (3) Are funding and
organizational models developed in business and other professional settings
applicable to sustaining these programs? To address scalability, this project
will explore the effectiveness of three dissemination formats: (1) the creation
of a mentorship program for in-person trainees, (2) a train-the-trainer
approach, and (3) online training with in-person mentorship. The project team
will create an evaluation toolkit with participant surveys, rubrics for
observers, and "on-the-spot" assessment tools developed under AISL Award 1811022
to assess the effectiveness of engagement activities delivered by trainees in
each of the three formats. To address sustainability, the project team will
document the values of public engagement training to both the participating
scientists and their institutions via surveys and interviews. Consultants from
the business sectors will create a PES Campus Council to explore possible
financial, organizational, and leadership plans that will help sustain
engagement efforts. Outcomes will be published in peer-reviewed journals and
compiled into a dissemination framework to inform actions to scale and sustain
STEMAP and other public engagement of science programs to engage more hard-to-
reach audiences. Inverness Research will serve as the project's external
evaluator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.