* 1906957
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Transfer of Antimicrobial Resistance Genes between Humans, Animals, and the Environment in urban Bangladesh
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Erica Fuhrmeister, Fuhrmeister, Erica
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This research
will investigate the spread of antibiotic resistance, which is a rising threat
to society, affecting both low-and high-income countries alike. While the global
spread of antibiotic resistance is readily observed, the transfer of antibiotic
resistance at the household scale is not well understood. The Fellow will
explore how antibiotic resistance genes propagate between humans, animals, and
the environment in low-and middle-income countries at the household level. This
project will identify the most important environmentally-mediated pathways for
the transfer of antibiotic resistance between hosts. The knowledge obtained from
understanding how antibiotic resistance spreads can be used to better devise
policy, engineering controls, and suggest behavior to combat antimicrobial
resistance. To increase minority participation in the biological sciences, the
Fellow will incorporate antibiotic resistance and genomics in a teaching module
to be used in local community colleges in Boston. The goal of this module is to
expose students to research and introduce them to scientific challenges that
face our society today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antibiotic resistance can spread
through two main mechanisms: propagation of antibiotic resistant bacteria and
transfer of antibiotic resistance genes. This research aims to characterize both
mechanisms of resistance spread in environmental transmission pathways (between
humans, water, animals, soil) using recently developed metagenomic tools. Long
and short read sequencing will be used to obtain strain-level information on
antibiotic resistant bacteria. Additionally, complimentary methods (qPCR) will
be used to identify key reservoirs of antibiotic resistance genes by quantifying
the abundance of genes in different household samples (humans, animals, water,
soil). Beyond this research, the Fellow will develop and implement a teaching
module for community colleges centered around sequencing. Not only will
community college students learn about the latest sequencing techniques, but
also the data they collect will directly contribute to a crowd-sourced database
that maps antibiotic resistance in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.