* 1906338
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:   Genetic analysis of elk scat for diversity and diet
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Seafha Ramos, Ramos, Seafha
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow, a
Yurok tribal member, will expand ongoing research in the integration of
Indigenous and Western science approaches to wildlife conservation. Strong
collaborations between the fellow, Humboldt State University, the Yurok Tribe of
California, the Spokane Tribe of Washington, and Redwood National Park will
serve as a model for facilitating research under various management types. The
fellow will focus on Traditional Ecological Knowledge and a genetic analysis of
elk fecal samples from Yurok ancestral lands and the Spokane reservation to
identify individuals and diet. The fellow will also conduct outreach activities
in both tribal communities, as well as, at national conferences and Humboldt
State University. The project and outreach activities will serve tribal
communities by highlighting Indigenous science and providing opportunities to
inspire and engage people of all ages in science. The research will serve the
broader society by providing an example of an integrated scientific approach, as
well as contributing to the scientific literature on genetic diversity and diet
of these elk populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yurok Traditional Ecological
Knowledge as related to elk will be integrated with the Yurok portion of this
study through the analysis of interviews with Yurok-affiliated community
members. The successful Spokane elk management program will inform potential
management strategies for Yurok, where the elk population is limited as compared
to surrounding lands. Genotyping of individuals will be conducted through the
amplification of 11 polymorphic microsatellite markers specifically designed for
elk and the calculation of Probability of Identity. Plant samples will be
collected and analyzed to create a reference library of DNA sequences with which
to compare diet items from the fecal samples. Diet will be determined via
metabarcoding and shotgun sequencing analyses, with subsequent sequence matching
in the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool available through the National Center
for Biotechnology Information. Training activities will include wet lab
techniques for elk individual identification and diet, as well as attendance at
bioinformatics workshops. Broadening participation activities will include
outreach to tribal peoples, from youth to college level, and engagement with
students from various backgrounds at Humboldt State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.