* 1906433
* Collaborative Research: Head Start on Engineering: Developing a Learning Community to Study and Support Family-level Interest in Engineering
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Annie Douglass, Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 370,335.00

There are several critical reasons to understand and support interest
development in early childhood: (a) as a primary motivator of engagement and
learning; (b) interest development in preschool predicts important learning
outcomes and behaviors in early elementary school; and (c) early childhood
interests motivate ongoing interest development. Thus, there is growing
recognition that interest is not just important but fundamental to education and
learning. Head Start on Engineering (HSE) is a multi-component, bilingual
(Spanish/English), family-focused program designed to (1) foster long-term
interest in the engineering design process for families with preschool children
from low-income backgrounds and (2) support family development and kindergarten
readiness goals. The HSE program, co-developed with the Head Start community,
provides families with developmentally appropriate, story-based engineering
design challenges for the home and then connects these to a system of
strategically aligned Informal STEM Education (ISE) experiences and resources.
This current project, HSE Systems, builds on a previous HSE Pathways project
which (a) established that participating families develop persistent
engineering-related interests; (b) highlighted the value that the Head Start
community has for the program and partnership; and (c) generated a novel,
systems perspective on early childhood interest development. The aim of HSE
Systems is to develop and test a model of early childhood STEM engagement and
advance knowledge of how the family as a system develops interest in STEM from
preschool into kindergarten.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the Design Based
Implementation Research (DBIR) process, the team will iteratively refine and
improve the HSE program and theory of change using ongoing feedback and data
from staff, families, and partners. It is also designed to explore program
impacts on family interest development over a longer period, as children enter
kindergarten. The DBIR work will focus primarily on the program model questions,
while the case study research will focus on the family interest questions, with
both strands informing each other. The initial work is organized around a series
of feedback and design-testing cycles to gather input from families and other
stakeholders, update the program components and activities in collaboration with
families and staff, and prepare for full implementation. During the next phase,
the team will implement the full program model with six Head Start classrooms
and track family experiences and interest development into kindergarten. During
final implementation phase, the team will finish data collection, conduct
retrospective analysis with all the data, and update the program model and
theory of change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments. It will directly address the AISL program goals by
broadening access to early childhood informal STEM education for low-income
communities, with a focus on Spanish-speaking families, and building long-term
skills and learning dispositions to support STEM learning inside and outside of
school. Beyond the topic of engineering, HSE supports Head Start school
readiness and child and family development goals, which are the foundation of
lifelong success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.