* 1906873
* Fostering Enduring Interest in STEM through Exoplanet Education and Interactive Exploration and Creation of Potentially Habitable Worlds
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Neil Comins, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,738,242.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. It is estimated that
there could be 40 billion earth-sized planets orbiting in the habitable zones of
stars in the Milky Way. Major advances in long range telescopes have allowed
astronomers to identify thousands of exoplanets in recent decades, and the
discovery of new exoplanets is a now a common occurrence. Public excitement for
the discoveries grown alongside these discoveries, thus opening new
possibilities for inspiring a new generation of scientists and engineers that
may dream of one day visiting these planets. This project investigates the use
of interactive, intelligent educational technologies to generate interest in
STEM by allowing learners to explore and even create their own exoplanets.
Research will occur across several informal learning contexts, including summer
camps, after school programs, planetarium shows, and at home. The approach is
based on the idea of "What if?"questions about Earth (e.g., "What if the Moon
did not exist?"), designed to trigger interest in STEM and frame exploratory and
elaborative discussions around hypothetical science questions that are
subsequently linked to the search for habitable exoplanets. Learners are able to
interact with and explore scientifically accurate simulations of alternative
versions of Earth, while making observations and posing explanations for what
they see. Technology-based informal learning experiences designed to act as
triggers for and sustainment of interest in STEM have the potential to plug the
leaky STEM pipeline, and thus have profound implications for the future of
science and technology in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
seeks to advance the science of designing technologies for promoting interest in
STEM and informal astronomy education in several ways. First, the project will
develop simulations for exploratory learning about astronomy and planetary
science. These simulations will present hypothetical worlds based on what-if
questions and feasible models of known exoplanets, thus giving learners a chance
to better understand the challenges of finding a habitable world and learning
about what is needed to survive there. Second, a new PBS NOVA Lab will be
developed that will focus on Exoplanet education. This web-based activity has
the potential to reach millions of learners and will help them understand how
planets are formed and the requirements for supporting life. Learners who use
the lab will have an opportunity to invent their own exoplanets and export them
for first-person exploration. Third, researchers on the project will design and
implement Artificial Intelligence-based pedagogical agents to support learning
and promote interest. These agents will inhabit the simulations with the
learner, acting as a coach and guide, and be designed to be culturally
responsive and personalized based on learner preferences. Fourth, interactive
exoplanet-focused planetarium shows, that will involve live interaction with
simulations, will take place at the Fiske Planetarium (Boulder, CO). Finally,
the project will develop a server-based infrastructure for tracking and
supporting long term development of interest in STEM. This back-end will track
fine-grained behaviors, including movement, actions, and communications in the
simulations. Such data will reveal patterns about how interest develops, how
learners engage in free-choice learning activities, and how they interact with
agents and peers in computer simulations. A design-based research methodology
will be employed to assess the power of these different experiences to trigger
interest and promote learning of astronomy. A range of different pathways for
interest in STEM will therefore be considered and assessed. Research will
measure the power of these experiences to trigger interest in STEM and promote
re-engagement over time. Innovation lies in the use of engaging and intelligent
technologies with thought-provoking pedagogy as a method for extended engagement
of diverse young learners in STEM. Project research and educational resources
will be widely disseminated to researchers, designers developers and the general
public via peer-reviewed research journals, conference presentations, informal
STEM education networks of science museums, children's museums, Fab Labs, and
planetariums, and public media such as public television's NOVA science program
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.