* 1906486
* Empirical testing of how changing regulatory module membership affects module function within central metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Daniel Kliebenstein, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,032,981.00

In teamwork a group uses coordinated directions to maximize their success. This
concept is also thought to be at the core of how metabolism functions in life. A
team of genes/enzymes are organized by directions from a transcription factor to
function as a cohesive unit. Understanding how biological modules function is
essential for all efforts to either engineer or improve organisms for nearly any
purpose. However, this concept has not actually been tested. This project uses
genome engineering approaches to cause individual genes to lose their ability to
function as a gene and test how the module functions. This effort trains
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to integrate synthetic biology
engineering with genomics and computational data analysis. The project provides
direct research experience to first-generation and transfer undergraduate
researchers to broaden the future pool of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project tests a foundational assumption of biology, that the members of a
network are coordinately regulated to optimize the trait being produced by the
network and to maximize efficiency. However, it is not clear that all of the
genes in a holoenzyme or metabolic pathway need to be coordinated or that there
is some threshold at which genes can be dropped from a regulatory module without
functional consequence. This project uses genome engineering to directly test
this theory by manipulating promoters to remove genes and pathways from specific
regulons. The effect of these manipulations is measured with a wide array of
phenotyping platforms to test consequences at all levels of a trait from
transcript to metabolite to whole organism. These results allow a direct
empirical test of how module membership at the holoenzyme, pathway or super-
pathway level influences those modules' function. The project directly measures
how many members of a regulon must be coordinated to create the proper trait
response. These results contribute to the development of new theories and
concepts to improve the understanding of how organisms
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.