* 1906719
* Advancing the Understanding of the Impacts of Wave-Induced Temperature Fluctuations on Atmospheric Chemistry
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Susan Solomon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 627,604.00

This research links atmospheric dynamics to atmospheric chemistry through
efforts to quantify the influence of atmospheric waves on the chemistry of the
lower stratosphere and upper troposphere. Changes in temperature due to these
waves will be modeled using the Whole Atmospheric Community Climate Model
(WACCM). This work will provide new tools for use by the broad community of
atmospheric modelers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is divided into 3
parts. Part 1: Evaluate the amplitude of gravity-wave induced temperature
perturbations due to mesoscale gravity waves, using the Community Earth System
Model (CESM) parameterizations for gravity waves, and applying these in the
chemical scheme of WACCM, focusing on heterogeneous halogen chemistry effects on
liquid atmospheric aerosols as well as polar stratospheric clouds. Part 2:
Evaluate the chemical composition responses to equatorial waves at low latitudes
using WACCM, focusing on the effects of heterogeneous halogen chemistry and
circulation changes induced by the waves. This work will target responses in NO,
NO2, N2O5, HNO3, ClONO2, HCl, ozone, and related species such as OH, examining
inter-annual variations, and searching for evidence of these in satellite data.
Part 3: Study the influence of gravity waves on a comprehensive range of gas-
phase reactions and study the effects on atmospheric composition from the
tropopause region to the stratopause. This effort will focus on the influence of
wave activity on the distributions of N2O5, NO, NO2, HNO3, and other species
subject to thermal decomposition including PAN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.