* 1906113
* Examining the correlated molecular mechanisms of self and heterospecific pollen-pistil recognition
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Robin Hopkins, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 09/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Flowering plants display their charismatic flowers open and ready for
pollinators or wind to bring pollen for reproduction. Determining how plants
successfully reproduce requires understanding the molecular mechanisms
underlying how female reproductive organs (pistils) recognize and accept high
quality pollen while rejecting low quality pollen. The recognition between
pistils and pollen is significant for two important mate choices in plants -
distinguishing between self-pollen and non-self-pollen as well as between pollen
from the same species and pollen from different species. This research
investigates the molecular mechanisms underlying self-pollen reject and foreign-
species pollen rejection in Phlox drummondii, a native Texas wildflower. In this
species there is extensive natural variation in the ability of pistils to
recognize and reject self and foreign pollen and the variation in these two
recognition systems is highly correlated across individuals. This research
involves a detailed genetic investigation of molecular mechanisms causing
pollen-pistil recognition and the causes of the correlation between
incompatibilities. Specifically, this research combines quantitative genetic
dissection of variation in incompatibilities, with genome-wide gene expression
analyses, and an artificial selection experiment to discover new mechanisms of
pollen-pistil interactions in a species that has evolved self and foreign
incompatibly independently of those found in model plant systems. This research
will be complemented by outreach activities associated with the local natural
history museum. The scientists will create educational activities for elementary
and high school students, provide teacher professional development workshops
about floral diversity, and organize public lectures on plant science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the long-standing hypothesis
that self and heterospecific pollen-pistil incompatibility systems are
mechanistically linked by dissecting the molecular basis of variation in
incompatibility within a non-model wildflower species. Specifically, this
research will determine if self and heterospecific recognition share genetic
mechanisms, if the breakdown of self and heterospecific incompatibility involves
multiple genes including genes outside the self-identity locus, and if the
correlation between self and heterospecific incompatibility could constrain the
evolution of pollen-pistil recognition. To accomplish these goals, this research
will determine the molecular mechanisms underlying incompatibly through whole-
genome gene expression analyses, characterize the genetic architecture of the
breakdown of self and heterospecific pollen recognition through genetic mapping
experiments, and quantify the genetic constraint imposed by the correlation
between incompatibilities using an artificial selection experiment. This
integrative research will test specific hypotheses about the genetic basis of
incompatibly in plants while discovering new mechanisms of pollen-pistil
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.