* 1906736
* Maryland Sports Data Analytics Camps for Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Lawrence Clark, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chia Shen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,701,408.00

NSF proposal #1906736&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;African
American and Latinx youth are often socialized towards athletic activity and
sports participation, sometimes at the expense of their exploration of the range
of potential career paths including those in the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. This project will immerse middle
school youth in the rapidly growing world of sports data analytics and build
their knowledge of statistics concepts and the data science process. The project
will focus on the STEM interests and knowledge development of African American
and Latinx youth, an underrepresented and underserved group in STEM. Researchers
will explore the ways youths' social identities can and should serve as bridges
towards future productive academic and professional identities including those
associated with STEM learning and the STEM professions. The outcomes of the
project will advance knowledge in promoting elements of informal learning
experiences that build adolescents' motivation and persistence for productive
participation in STEM courses and careers. This project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning program (AISL), which seeks to advance new
approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development of
STEM learning opportunities for the public in informal environments, and the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers program (ITEST),
which funds projects that leverage innovative uses of technologies to prepare
diverse youth for the STEM workforce, with a focus on broadening participation
among underrepresented and underserved groups in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period, 250 middle school
learners in the West Baltimore, Maryland and Hyattsville, Maryland areas will
engage in three main learning activities: Summer Camp (three weeks), Sports Day
Saturdays, and a Spring Summit. Through a partnership between the University of
Maryland and Coppin State University, the project will utilize resources in
multiple departments and units across both universities, and engage with youth
sports leagues such as the American Athletic Union (AAU) to support
participants' engagement in the data science process including collection of raw
data, exploration of data, development of models, visualization, communication,
and reporting of data, and data-driven decision making. Furthermore, youth
participants will attend local AAU, college, and professional sporting events,
and interact with members of coaching staffs to better understand the ways
performance data technologies are utilized to inform recruitment and team
performance. The mixed-methods research agenda for this project is guided by
three main questions: (1) What elements of the project's model are most
successful at supporting congruence of adolescents' academic identity, including
STEM identity and social identity including athletic identity? (2) What elements
support adolescents' motivation, and persistence for productive participation in
current and future STEM courses? (3) To what extent did the project appear to
influence participants' perceptions of their future professions? At multiple
points throughout the experience, participants will complete surveys designed to
document and assess statistics and data science knowledge; interest in STEM
careers; academic, social and athletic identity development; and STEM course
taking patterns. Researchers will also observe project activities, interview a
focal group of participants, and survey participants' parents to identify
elements of learning experiences that encourage and support adolescents'
interest in STEM disciplines and STEM professions. The project team will develop
conceptual and pedagogical frameworks that support middle school youth'
engagement and interest in science, engineering, technology, and mathematics
through repurposing spaces where these youths frequent. A major outcome of the
project will be workforce preparation and offers a promising approach for
encouraging youth to persist along STEM pathways, which may ultimately result in
broadened participation in STEM workforces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.