* 1906682
* Collaborative Research: Developing Leaders, Transforming Practice in K-5 Mathematics: An Examination of Models for Elementary Mathematics Specialists
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Nicole Rigelman, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2024
* USD 973,501.00

Minimal rigorous research has been conducted on the effect of various supports
for quality mathematics instruction and providing guidance on the development
and use of Elementary Mathematics Specialists (EMSs) on student achievement.
Portland Public Schools (PPS), Portland State University, and RMC Research
Corporation will study the Developing Leaders Transforming Practice (DLTP)
intervention, which aims to improve teachers' instructional practices, increase
student mathematics understanding and achievement. The project team will
evaluate the efficacy and use of EMSs by testing four implementation models that
consider the various ways EMSs are integrated into schools. DLTP builds on EMS
research, investigating EMSs both as elementary mathematics teachers and coaches
by articulating four models and examining their efficacy for both student and
teacher learning. This study has the potential to provide benefits both within
and beyond PPS as it informs the preparation and use of EMSs. Determining which
model is best in certain contexts provides a focus for the expansion of
mathematics support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DLTP enhances the research base by
examining the effect of teacher PD on student achievement through a rigorous
quasi-experimental design. The project goals will be met by addressing 4
research questions: 1) What is the effect of the intervention on teacher
leadership?; 2) What is the effect of the intervention on teachers' use of
research-based instructional practices?; 3) What is the effect of the
intervention on a school's ability to sustain ongoing professional learning for
teachers?; and 4) What is the effect of the intervention on student mathematics
achievement? Twelve elementary schools in PPS will select elementary teachers to
participate in the DLTP and adopt an implementation model that ranges from
direct to diffuse engagement with students: elementary mathematics teacher,
grade level coach, grade-level and building-level coach, or building-level
coach. The research team will conduct 4 major studies that include rigorous
quasi-experimental designs and a multi-method approach to address the research
questions: leadership study, instructional practices study, school study, and
student achievement study. Several tools will be created by the project - a
leadership rubric designed to measure changes in EMS mathematics leadership
because of the project and a 5-part teacher survey designed capture EMS
leadership skills, pedagogical content knowledge, use of research-based
practices, and school climate for mathematics learning as well as implementation
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.