* 1906489
* Complex Interstellar Molecules: Their Synthesis and Utility as Probes of Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Eric Herbst, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 519,987.00

Motivated by recent observational findings, this research project will
investigate computationally the formation of interstellar complex organic
molecules (COMs). Results from the study will allow astronomers to understand
how COMs are formed in interstellar clouds and the level of molecular complexity
that builds under the extreme conditions of interstellar space. The project will
train graduate and undergraduate students in advanced techniques of
computational astrochemical research, and it will include outreach activities to
enhance the visibility of astrochemistry in the broader scientific community and
the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will investigate a range of
new gas-phase and solid-phase chemical processes and generate rates and
theoretical formulations for incorporation into large-scale astrochemical
networks. The formation mechanisms investigated will enable quantitative
interpretation of high angular resolution studies of molecules in interstellar
clouds and star-forming regions, allowing competing ideas on the formation of
COMs to be tested by means of unified, comprehensive models. Results from the
project would also enable effective exploitation of astronomical facilities
built with significant public investment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.