* 1906072
* Classical Methods in Motivic Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Haynes Miller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2023
* USD 158,900.00

The subject of algebraic geometry concerns itself with the study of systems of
polynomial equations. As it turns out, solving such systems exactly is, apart
from a few very special cases, essentially impossible. We thus attempt to
describe the solution sets more qualitatively. One classically fruitful approach
to this is to consider the set of solutions as a topological space, an object
sitting in some higher dimensional space. For instance, the equation x^2+y^2=1
describes a circle of radius 1. Topologists have invented invariants for
qualitatively describing topological spaces, and we can just attempt to work out
these invariants for the special spaces we are interested in. Taking this idea
to its extreme, one arrives at a field called motivic homotopy theory. It
provides novel ways for qualitatively describing solutions of systems of
polynomial equations, and has in the past twenty years been successfully applied
to several longstanding open problems in algebraic geometry. This project aims
to deepen our understanding of motivic homotopy theory by exploring further not
only its parallels with classical topology, but also what happens where these
parallels break down.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of several
parts. One set of parts explores properties of motivic highly structured ring
spectra, called normed spectra (introduced in collaboration with M. Hoyois). The
Principal Investigator (P.I.) will (1) study power operations in normed spectra
and deduce splitting results for normed spectra of positive characteristic and
stability results for the motivic homology of symmetric groups and (2) construct
further normed spectra, such as a normed spectrum structure on the motivic
spectrum KO representing hermitian K-theory. Another set of parts explores the
passage from unstable to stable motivic homotopy theory. Specifically the P.I.
will (3) study the motivic Barratt-Priddy-Quillen map, and (4) study an unstable
motivic homology Whitehead theorem. These goals will be achieved by using
techniques from higher category theory, classical stable homotopy theory,
algebraic topology and algebraic geometry. The results in parts (1) and (2) can
be used to more effectively study algebraic varieties using cohomology theories;
for example by exploiting the cohomology operations present in theories
represented by normed spectra. Parts (3) and (4) are more useful for studying
the motivic (stable) homotopy category itself, and hence the totality of all
cohomology theories for algebraic varieties at once.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.