* 1906360
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Secure and Efficient Solutions for Post-Quantum Cryptography for Codes with Compact Representations
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Edoardo Persichetti, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,946.00

Current public-key cryptography is based on well-known problems from the area of
mathematics called Number Theory. These problems are vulnerable to attacks able
to exploit the superior computational power of Quantum computers (such as Shor's
algorithm). Small Quantum computers are already a reality, and the cryptographic
community is currently hard at work to design the new cryptographic standards
which will become actual once sufficiently large Quantum computers finally
become available, making current cryptographic solutions obsolete. Code-based
cryptography is one of the most accredited candidates to provide secure
cryptographic primitives in the Post-Quantum era. In this project, we seek to
create efficient and long-term secure cryptographic primitives from code-based
cryptography. The project's novelties are the investigation, development, and
deployment of techniques to obtain code-based cryptosystems featuring efficient
performance and small public keys. The project's impacts are a substantial
contribution to the standardization effort led by the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST), as well as a boost of the US and Israeli
footprint in the area of post-quantum cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team of researchers, composed of a US investigator and an Israeli counterpart,
proposes to employ a recent approach based on so-called Reproducible Codes to
shorten the key size of cryptosystems based on codes defined by a sparse parity-
check matrix. These include two of the current candidates to NIST's
standardization effort, both of which have been admitted to the second round of
the competition. Furthermore, the investigators seek to incorporate techniques
to reduce the decoding-failure rate of such cryptosystems, in order to design
schemes that allow the usage of static, long-term keys. Finally, the team plans
to produce efficient and secure implementations for all the primitives
investigated, which will safeguard against side-channel attacks and other
physical and engineering attacks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.