* 1906414
* Submanifolds and Cobordisms in Contact and Symplectic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* John Etnyre, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2023
* USD 468,162.00

Contact structures are natural objects, born over two centuries ago, in the work
of Lie concerning solving differential equations, Gibbs concerning
thermodynamics, Huygens concerning geometric optics, and Hamilton concerning
classical mechanics. They have been studied by many mathematicians and seem to
touch on diverse areas of mathematics and physics, but only in the last few
decades have they moved into the foreground of mathematics. This is due to the
remarkable breakthroughs in field, resulting in a rich and beautiful theory with
many applications both inside mathematics and to science and engineering. In
this project the PI will consider a variety of questions about various spaces
with contact structures, focusing on objects inside of them, relations between
them, and other structures on them. This will not only further our understanding
of the field, but also its impacts on other areas of study. The PI will also
devote significant time to helping graduate students and postdoctoral scholars
become productive researchers in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
investigate contact and symplectic structures through a variety of techniques,
but focusing on their submanifolds and connections to Riemannian metrics. Recall
that in dimension 3 understanding Legendrian and transverse knots in a contact
manifold has gone hand in hand with advances in our understanding of contact
structures and their subtle links with topology. For example the first proof of
existence of contact structures came from surgery on transverse knots and the
famed tight versus overtwisted dichotomy comes down to the types of Legendrian
or transverse knots a contact structure supports. The PI will continue his
investigations of such knots in 3 manifolds, focusing on qualitative features of
them. Also recall, that many important concepts in contact geometry are
expressed in terms of submanifolds of the contact structure (for example, Giroux
torsion, open book decompositions, etc). Trying to understand how these various
submanifolds interact and how various surgery constructions affect them will be
another focus of the PI. The PI will also consider higher dimensional contact
manifolds where much less is known. Here, basic questions about the existence
and isotopy classification of contact submanifolds (a generalization of
transverse knots) and isotropic submanifolds will be considered - as will
surgery constructions and how they affect various properties of contact
manifolds. Riemannian metrics have long been known to have deep connections with
the smooth topology of manifolds and more recently it has been shown that
contact structures do as well. The PI will continue to explore relations between
these two geometric structures with the goal of seeing key properties of a
contact structure (such as tightness) reflected in Riemannian metrics that are
adapted to them. This will hopefully lead to a more complete understanding of
the general picture of contact structures on 3 manifolds and create new tools
for studying higher dimensional contact manifolds. The PI will also explore
recent conjectures of Eliashberg about the existence of symplectic structures by
explicitly verifying them in some nontrivial cases and exploring inductive
approaches to proving them in some general settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.