* 1906227
* Chromatic Phenomena with an Equivariant Perspective
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Agnes Beaudry, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2023
* USD 324,175.00

The project supported by this award is part of a large scale effort to
understand the homotopy groups of spheres, one of the fundamental problems in
topology. The spheres, which are among the simplest geometric objects, are
building blocks for more complex entities. The homotopy groups of spheres are
collections of continuous functions between spheres considered up to
deformations. They are used to study the connections between these basic
components. These groups and the tools used to study them have deep connections
with other fields. For example, there are connections with number theory as
interesting functions and sequences appear as patterns and structure in the
homotopy groups of spheres. There are connections with differential geometry, as
these groups are used in the classification of geometric objects. Recently, the
tools used to study the homotopy groups groups of spheres have also been used in
physics in the classification of phases of matter. Although the study of the
homotopy groups of spheres is notoriously difficult, a bridge has been built
between algebraic geometry and algebraic topology that allows us to use
sophisticated algebraic theory to enable calculations of the homotopy groups of
spheres. This bridge is known as chromatic homotopy theory and is the central
theme of this project. Duality and invertibility are ubiquitous concepts in
mathematics which are central to understanding relationships between
mathematical objects. The project supported by this award studies these
phenomena within chromatic homotopy theory. The project also proposes theory and
computations that will provide data to help study these fundamental
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of chromatic homotopy theory is the
study of a higher analogue of the homotopy category of spectra local with
respect to mod p K-theory: The K(n)-local stable homotopy category. It is
equivalent to the homotopy category of K(n)-local E-modules in G-equivariant
spectra, where Morava E-theory E is a higher analogue of p-complete K theory and
the stabilizer group G is a generalization of the group of Adams operations. The
strategy of the proposal is to restrict problems to finite subgroups F of G and
use the theory of finite resolutions to pass from information obtained from
finite subgroups to information about the K(n)-local category. An important
circle of ideas in the proposal concerns duality and invertibility. The PI and
collaborators study K(n)-local Spanier-Whitehead duality using techniques from
equivariant homotopy theory. They use an analogue of the J-homomorphism to
compute the duals of homotopy fixed point spectra for the action on E of some
finite subgroups F of G. This homomorphism is also used to study Picard groups
of categories of K(n)-local E-module F-spectra. The PI is an expert in
computations at chromatic height 2 for p = 2 and proposes projects to further
our understanding in this difficult case. These include the computation of the
Picard group of the K(2)-local category, the study of K(2)-local Brown-Comenetz
duality and computations of K(2)-local homotopy groups for finite spectra.
Advancements in chromatic homotopy theory at height 2 have informed our
understanding of K(n)-local phenomena. The PI proposes various projects to
generalize this insight at higher heights. Finally, the project also examines
one of the most important problems in chromatic homotopy theory, the chromatic
splitting conjecture, which plays a central role in the relationship between
chromatic homotopy theory and the algebraic geometry of formal
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.