* 1906595
* Cambio: A Professional Development Approach for Building Latinx-focused Cultural Competence in Informal Science Education Institutions
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Martin, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,821,709.00

This project in the Advancing Informal STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics) Learning program's Innovations in Development track aims to
build professional capacity in Informal Science Education (ISE) institutions for
effective engagement of Latinx audiences. A collaboration between The
Exploratorium and the Children's Discovery Museum (CDM) of San Jose, Cambio is a
professional development project based on the premise that developing cultural
competence specific to Latinx communities and STEM learning, together with
organizational change capacity, will enable ISE institutions to improve their
ability to be inclusive of Latinx communities, cultures, and audiences. Cambio's
ultimate aim is to broaden participation in STEM by building the ISE field's
capacity to effectively engage Latinxs in informal STEM learning. ISE
institutions and other out-of-school programs and organizations have an
important role to play in inspiring and preparing the next generation of Latinx
STEM students, employees, and educators. Cambio participants will deepen their
engagement with the research and practice relevant to this role and build an
understanding of what broadening Latinx engagement can and should look like in
their institutions. Working with expert instructors and coaches, and together as
peers, Cambio participants will apply what they learn to real-world strategic
initiatives they implement at their home institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
heart of the Cambio project is the creation of a professional development (PD)
model for ISE institutions and their staff that synthesizes: (a) current
knowledge about strategies for Latinx engagement in informal STEM learning; (b)
previous NSF-funded projects that leveraged that knowledge to chart a way
forward for the field; and (c) CDM's Cultural Competence Learning Institute
professional development program for building cultural competence, inclusion,
and organizational change in museums. This synthesis will form a robust
professional development platform that has the potential to create a field-wide
shift in the way informal science institutions approach working with Latinx
audiences. The Cambio professional development program will include: a new
professional development framework and curriculum that will reach 54
practitioners in 15 institutions; the development and dissemination of
professional development tools and resources for use by ISE practitioners; a
Community of Practice focused on Latinx engagement in informal STEM learning;
evidence of the efficacy of the Cambio PD model; and knowledge generated by
formative and summative evaluation that will inform other ISE efforts focused on
increasing the participation of Latinxs in STEM. A STEM focus will be woven
throughout the professional development experience that focuses explicitly on
areas of intersection between Latinx culture and identities and STEM.
Practitioners will increase their expertise in designing experiences that will
invoke emotional engagement, spark curiosity and excitement, in ways that
explicitly value Latinx identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.