* 1906160
* LSAMP BD: Boise State University - Pacific Northwest Alliance - PNW Graduate Fellows Program
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Tammi Vacha-Haase, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on PhD matriculation and completion.
BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher education
contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2018-2022 Strategic
Plan, namely to "foster the growth of a more capable and diverse research
workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the Nation." The
vision of this grant is to provide a national model to produce underrepresented
scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
performance site for this LSAMP BD Activity is Boise State University (BSU), one
of the 10 college and universities included in the Pacific Northwest Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (PNW LSAMP). The immediate goal of
the PNW Graduate Fellows Program at BSU is to recruit and retain a cohort of
twelve LSAMP students through to graduation with a STEM doctoral degree. To
ensure the success of underrepresented minority (URM) students at the graduate
level, the project will provide a comprehensive framework for academic
achievement by emphasizing multidisciplinary learning, building a sense of
community and social networking events, incorporating inclusive mentoring
strategies that enhance diversity and inclusion, encouraging scientific writing
skills development to increase science identity, and integrating career
exploration and professional development. Ultimately, the program will be the
catalyst to fundamentally transform the structures, mindsets, processes, and
programming at BSU so that the institution increases the overall representation
and success of historically URM students in their completion of STEM doctoral
degree programs. Moreover, the lessons learned from this program will be shared
extensively with the other universities in the PNW LSAMP Alliance, across the
LSAMP national network, and more generally with the national STEM higher
education arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.