* 1906109
* University of Missouri Black Migrations Symposium
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Tristan Ivory, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2020
* USD 19,982.00

The Department of Black Studies and Department of Statistics at the University
of Missouri, Columbia, will host a Symposium entitled "Black Migrations" on
February 7-8, 2019. This symposium topic was chosen to coincide with the theme
of the 2019 Black History month. Migration has played a central role in the
histories of Africans and their descendants. For some, migration was entirely
voluntary while others were forced to move due to violence, political
destabilization, ecological degradation, or other upheavals. Black migrations
have also resulted in more diverse and stratified interracial populations that
have reshaped the societies of the receiving areas. In more recent periods,
scholars have begun exploring the impact out-migration and return migration have
had on the development and stability of various majority black societies. In
addition, scholars, students, and activists have been examining the relation
between relocation and conceptualizations of blackness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-day symposium will examine black migrations to
include relocations within and beyond the US. Symposium organizers will seek
papers from scholars and students that discuss various periods and streams of
migration that have shaped the histories and contemporary realities of African
people and their descendants. An important aspect of this conference is that it
will also bring together academic statisticians and geographers who are working
on the modeling of migrations and related problems (e.g., population flows).
This is a unique opportunity to link the STEM discipline of Statistics with an
important and timely topic that has not traditionally made use of advanced
statistical methodology. That is, Statistics has a long history of considering
models for demographic population change (e.g., flow models) but there is little
cross-disciplinary interaction between statisticians and researchers who have
focused on Black Migration. This may be the first such symposium that seeks to
bring these groups together. Thus, an important goal of the symposium is to
encourage the interchange and mutual understanding of research ideas in
statistics, geography, and black migrations, and to give motivation and
direction to further research progress, particularly for young researchers, in a
manner not ordinarily possible at other meetings. The meeting will be primarily
pitched towards graduate students and early career researchers. Symposium
details can be found at https://blackstudies.missouri.edu/feature/2019-black-
migrations-symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.