* 1906248
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Evolution of body shape in carnivoran mammals
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Chris Law, Law, Chris
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Mammals vary by a magnitude of shapes from robust tank-like
elephants to elongate rodents. What contributes to this range of body shapes?
Why do some closely related species exhibit similar body shapes (e.g. mice and
rats) whereas others belong to groups with members that hardly resemble one
another (e.g. elephants and manatees)? Can unifying evolutionary or ecological
patterns that led to this diversity in mammalian body shapes be identified? And
could these patterns have led to the major transitions that we observe in
primates and even human lineages? To answer these questions, this project will
assemble a database that records body shapes in mammals and test questions about
the ecology and evolution of body shapes and the underlying forms that
contribute to diverse body plans. The fellow will also work the American Museum
of Natural History to showcase the great diversity of mammalian body
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the major patterns and adaptive
significance of phenotypic variation is a central goal of evolutionary biology.
In vertebrates, body shape diversity is one of the most prominent features of
phenotypic variation that can lead to increased diversification, niche
specialization, and innovations within a clade. However, biologists still lack a
full understanding of the underlying morphological components that contribute to
body shape diversity, particularly in endothermic vertebrates such as mammals.
Consequently, little is known about the morphology, ecology, and evolution of
mammalian body shapes as well as the underlying traits that contribute to
different body plans. This research will test hypotheses pertaining to the
evolutionary integration of the cranial, axial, and appendicular components that
contribute to body shape diversity, and the adaptive significance of body
shapes. To accomplish these goals, this research will generate the first
quantitative database of mammalian body shapes using skeletal specimens held at
natural history museums and test the following hypotheses: H1) skeletal
components contributing to body shape diversity in carnivorans are
evolutionarily integrated, H2) the relationship between body shape and limb
length in mammals follows a similar trend as ectothermic vertebrates, and H3)
locomotor and dietary ecologies influence the evolution of carnivoran body
shapes. The fellow will also work the American Museum of Natural History to
showcase the great diversity of mammalian cranial, axial, and appendicular
skeletons and their contributions towards generating diversity and disparity in
mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.