* 1906242
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Lessons from museums: impacts of urbanization on biodiversity and the importance of natural history collections
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Selina Ruzi, Ruzi, Selina
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow who will utilize biological collections in innovative
ways. Habitat loss from urbanization is a threat to species biodiversity. Most
studies compare rural and urban biodiversity, rather than looking at how the
species present in one location change through time. Museum collections can
provide valuable historical data on what species have been collected in an area
for decades. The fellow will use the bee and ant specimens at the North Carolina
State University Insect Museum to understand biodiversity change in Wake,
Durham, and Chatham counties, North Carolina. These counties contain three
metropolitan areas that have undergone extensive urban growth. Bees pollinate a
large proportion of agricultural crops, and are critically important in
maintaining native plant biodiversity. Ants engage in plant defense, seed
dispersal, and help decomposition in the soil. These activities make both bees
and ants important for ecosystem function. The research will use trait-based and
landscape-scale analyses to assess how bee and ant biodiversity have changed
over time, and to identify drivers of change. The project will also evaluate
ways to increase public appreciation of museum natural history collections which
tend to be inaccessible and undervalued. This information will also provide best
practices for urban planning decisions that protect ecosystem services and
create models for how educational materials can be evaluated and
implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has four objectives: (1)
Determine how biodiversity of bees and ants have changed with urbanization
intensity over the past 100 years, specifically with regards to whether there is
a reduction in native species. Urban intensity will be evaluated using road
density as a proxy. (2) Use a trait-based approach to determine how the
urbanization process has affected which species persist, and (3) use machine
learning and simulation models to predict how projected patterns of urbanization
will affect future biodiversity patterns. Morphological traits (e.g., body size)
will be measured from physical specimens, while other traits (e.g., nesting
location) will be collected from literature and species descriptions. (4) Create
immersive (e.g. virtual reality) and standard media experiences using the
results from objectives 1-3 to illustrate how bee and ant biodiversity has
changed over time, and assess the effectiveness of these experiences in
increasing public opinion of and appreciation for, publicly funded museum
collections. The fellow will receive training in urban ecology, social science,
taxonomy, and methods including machine learning and geospatial analyses. The
fellow will also be trained in science communication and directly engage with
museum visitors through museum events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.