* 1906774
* Establishing a learning network to connect museums, scientists and rural communities to discuss scientific information to inform transdisciplinary problem-solving.
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Lauren Giarratani, Carnegie Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,254,205.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. This collaborative
project will facilitate rural community education on climate impacts. The
Carnegie Natural History Museum and the University of Pittsburgh will work
together to form a network of interested community members in Mercer County and
Powdermill Nature Reserve in western Pennsylvania to explore the impacts of
climate and how its effect could be mitigated or accommodated. The project is
has three related ideas: (1) museums hold valuable resources for understanding
environmental change, (2) museums are not serving rural audiences well, and (3)
complex socio-scientific environmental topics are deeply connected to social
decision making in rural communities. This project will bring an inclusive
approach to the discussion of socio-scientific issues in rural Western PA,
through building relationships between local public audiences, STEM
professionals, and informal learning specialists, creating opportunities for co-
development of resources and building organizational capacity. The overarching
goals of the project are to explore how museums can better serve rural
stakeholders and increase the capacity for science-based conversations about
human-caused climate impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a
cross-disciplinary team with Carnegie Museum of Natural History providing
expertise in interpretation and ecological science, the University of Pittsburgh
Center for Learning in Out of School Environments (UPCLOSE) providing expertise
in learning research, and rural Hubs centered at Powdermill Nature Reserve (PNR)
and the Mercer County Conservation District providing expertise in environmental
education, conservation, and engagement with rural communities. The Hubs will
coordinate professional development workshops, collaborative design sessions,
and community gatherings to bring local stakeholders together to examine and
adapt existing resources, including environmental science data and climate
education tools, to local issues. These activities will be structured through a
Research Practice Partnership. Each will have its own unique mix of geography,
demographics, resources, and challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research
questions are: 1. How can the project effectively support the creation of
socially safe spaces for rural Western PA communities to have science-based
discussions around climate impacts? 2. How does work with rural partners
influence the development of the museum's Center for Climate Studies and its
mission to offer programs designed to support public engagement?&lt;br/&gt;3. In
what ways have museums been able to support learning about climate topics in
rural communities? Data will be gathered from interviews and case studies. There
will be two longitudinal studies of local network change and museum change. A
survey will also be done to assess the impact of the project on the public.
Protocols will be developed in collaboration with the
Hubs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.