* 1906462
* Meeting: FASEB Conference on Mechanisms in Plant Development Meeting to be held on July 28 - August 2, 2019 at St. Bonaventura University, Olean (NY)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Kenneth Birnbaum, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 06/30/2020
* USD 19,310.00

The 17th International Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology
(FASEB) meeting on Mechanisms in Plant Development will be held on July 28 -
August 2, 2019 at St. Bonaventure University in Olean, New York. This meeting
will bring together leading researchers from around the world to exchange
unpublished ideas and advance concepts and new research directions for the field
of plant developmental biology. Invited speaker sessions will focus on broad
areas of plant development such as "Establishing the Body Plan", "Cell-Cell
Communication", "Developmental Plasticity", "Maintaining the Meristem", and
"Cellular Specialization". With NSF support, the meeting will promote the
participation and recognition of early career scientists and those from
underrepresented groups through numerous networking opportunities, poster
sessions and career development workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference,
which has been held at regular intervals for the past 25 years, is a unique
international meeting devoted entirely to the field of plant developmental
biology. The small size of the meeting leads to intense discussion of new ideas
and emerging techniques in this exciting and rapidly moving field. It will bring
together plant biologists using evolutionary, genetic, genomic, cell biological
and computational approaches for exchange of ideas. The meeting includes
outstanding researchers from around the world, presenting cutting edge,
unpublished research on the mechanisms that control establishment of new tissues
and lead to the self-organization of the plant body plan. This conference is an
important and unique scientific meeting where the intersections of plant
development, signaling, modeling and genomics are explored through talks, poster
sessions, and intensive scientific discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.