* 1906230
* I-Corps: A Deep Learning Toolbox for Subsurface Imaging in Exploration for Oil and Gas
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Xuqing Wu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to meet the
increasing demand of energy consumption and maintain a healthy oil and gas
output in the US. Machine vision and automatic data picking are viable
approaches to keep up with the data multiplication of seismic surveys. The
proposed product is the first one that is aiming at minimizing labor burden in
seismic data processing by using a deep neural network with a novel and
efficient transfer learning strategy. If successful, the novel deep transfer
learning approach will build the foundation for adopting advanced deep neural
network technologies by many other industrial applications. In addition to the
Oil and Gas industry, the product can also be used in other important areas such
as geothermal energy exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
to explore the market potential for a product to automatically identify unique
patterns embedded in the seismic data. The intellectual merit of this proposal
lies in the theme of a novel deep transfer learning approach, which will ease
the training burden of the deep neural network and solve the training data
shortage problem by utilizing discriminative unsupervised feature learning to
learn high-level representations that are more invariant to variations between
the synthetic and real data. The innovativeness of our proposal is that it is
aimed to build a reliable system to perform various pattern recognition tasks
required by the seismic data processing and be adaptive to different datasets
acquired through seismic surveys. This product has the potential to save up to
20% to 50% of the total seismic processing time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.