* 1906889
* Research Synthesis: Examining the Role of Authenticity in Informal Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* James Kisiel, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,989.00

Museums, science centers, zoos and other informal science education (ISE)
institutions often focus on the idea of "authenticity" to engage the public.
Authenticity includes providing something real, original, or even awe-inspiring
to the visitor or learner--be it an object, a context, or an experience. While
those educators, exhibit designers, and program developers who work in ISE
settings often recognize authenticity as an important part of many informal
learning experiences, this may be simply be an assumption driven by tradition in
practice versus a strategy supported by evidence. This project seeks to better
understand how and/or why "the real thing" may (or may not be) important for
supporting informal science learning. By examining what is already known about
authenticity and learning, the project will inform best practices in ISE as well
as point to gaps in knowledge that might need further research. It is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research synthesis takes a systematic
approach to identify and compile both theoretical and empirical literature to
better understand the role authenticity may play in supporting informal science
learning. This project will gather ISE literature related to the effects of
"authenticity" on learner outcomes, and will look to neighboring disciplines
such as psychology, anthropology, media studies, linguistics, marketing and
others to seek relevant theoretical perspectives and empirical work that might
further understanding of the potential role of authenticity in ISE. The initial
phase of the project will focus on gathering theoretical perspectives and
positions that help explain the value or importance (or perhaps non-importance)
of "realness" as it relates to learning, interest, and experience. A panel of
experts from multiple disciplines will convene to help identify key perspectives
and frameworks that may clarify the role or impacts of authenticity. A second
phase focuses on gathering and assessing empirical studies that support (or
refute) the relevant perspectives and theories identified from the initial
multi-disciplinary foray into authenticity. To ensure breadth and depth of
review, the PIs, research librarians, graduate students, and special topics
classes will engage in identifying, evaluating, summarizing, and synthesizing
the relevant research (including gray literature) to produce an initial
synthesis report that will be reviewed by select experts from the earlier panel.
A second convening of practitioners (exhibit developers, educators, program
designers, etc.) will be used to further contextualize the findings in ways that
may better inform current practices in providing effective ISE. The resulting
products include a peer-reviewed research synthesis and a practitioner
handbook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project's Broader Impacts lie in the
potential to inform ISE practice in exhibit and program design and in the
delivery of ISE-related experiences. Although the importance of the authenticity
of an object or experience may ultimately be determined by the individual, this
study will be able to provide guidance to help practitioners and scholars in
making sometimes difficult design choices. Such insights may also inform other
learning environments (e.g. the classroom) as well as other disciplinary areas
(e.g. history, anthropology, art).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.