* 1906884
* Building More Inclusive Makerspaces to Support Informal Engineering Learning Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Keith Braafladt, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,034,194.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. The project will refine, research and
disseminate making exhibits and events that the museum has developed and tested
to support early engineering skill development. The project will use cardboard,
a familiar and flexible material, to support the activities. The goal is to
develop insights and resources for informal educators across the museum field
and beyond into how to effectively structure and facilitate open-ended maker
education experiences for visitors that expand the number and kinds of museums
and families who can engage in these activities. Maker education is often linked
to Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) learning and uses
hands-on and collaborative approaches to support activities and projects that
foster creativity, interest, and skill development. To address patterns of
inequitable access to and participation in both formal and informal learning
opportunities, the project will be designed to engage families from under-
represented communities and research how they participate in informal
engineering activities and environments. The project will make a suite of
resources available for museums and other ISE practitioners that will be
developed through iterative testing at all of the different settings. These
resources will be made widely available via an open access online
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research how effectively the use
of cardboard making exhibits and events engage families, particularly families
from underrepresented groups, in STEM and early engineering. The project's
theoretical framework combines elements of: (1) learning sciences theories of
family learning in museums; (2) making as a learning process; (3) early
engineering practices and dispositions, and (4) equity in museums and the maker
movement. The research will be conducted within two multi-month implementations
of a large-scale Cardboard Engineering gallery at the Science Museum of
Minnesota and two-week scaled implementations of the gallery at each of three
recruited partner museum sites. The project design interweaves evaluation and
research aims. Paired observations and surveys will be used to research how
effectively the project is working in different venues. This integration of
research and evaluation will generate a large data set from which to generalize
about cardboard making across contexts. Case studies will be used to identify
barriers to engagement that can be remedied, but they will provide a rich data
set for understanding family learning and engineering in making. Research
findings and products will be posted on the Center for Informal Science
Education website and submitted for publication in peer-reviewed journals such
as Visitor Studies, ASTC Dimensions, the Journal of Pre-College Engineering
Education Research and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.