* 1906780
* Collaborative Research: Improving Energy Reliability by Co-Optimization Planning for Interdependent Electricity and Natural Gas Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Lei Wu, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2020
* USD 199,804.00

The electricity grid and the natural gas network are two essential
infrastructure systems in the U.S. energy industry. They are designed and
managed independently. However, because of the planned retirement of many coal-
fired generators, the deeper penetration of renewable energy sources, and the
commercially sustainable gas price, their interactions have intensified over the
last five years. Hence, in order to ensure environmentally friendly, reliable,
and cost-effective electricity and gas production and delivery, it is important
to jointly optimize these two systems. However, due to their scales,
complexities, and requirements/regulations, such a co-optimization planning
problem is very challenging in both modeling and computation aspects. To address
this critical challenge, this project will build analytical decision support
models and design efficient solution methods to aid the energy industry in
formulating and computing practical-scale co-optimization problems. The
effectiveness and benefit of co-optimization planning will be demonstrated and
evaluated through an actual microgrid project and industrial collaborations. In
addition to including doctoral students in research and creating educational
materials for the next generation energy system planners and operations
researchers, concrete projects will be designed to involve underrepresented
students on utilizing analytical/computational tools to address real energy
problems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Previous research on co-optimization planning
of electricity and gas systems is limited, while also often neglecting critical
reliability considerations, key random/uncertain factors, or the long-term
multi-stage nature of planning problems. This research project will address
these shortcomings by (1) investigating key interactions between electricity and
gas systems with different spatial-temporal granularities as well as multiple
planning and operation levels; (2) building a set of co-optimization planning
models that simultaneously consider the multi-stage planning horizon, the hourly
chronological operation details with critical random/uncertain factors, and the
requirements of long-term reliability and short-term flexibility; (3) designing
and implementing high-performance computational methods and tools through
advanced decomposition strategies, strong approximation approaches, and
effective hybrid methods; and (4) validating, demonstrating, and promoting the
developed models and computational tools through an on-going microgrid project
and established industry connections.