* 1906995
* I-Corps Teams:  Leaf Global Fintech: Virtual Banking Beyond Borders
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Christopher White, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Vipin Chaudhary
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is to enable an underserved
market?refugees?to access formal financial services through a mobile device and
blockchain technology. Through this project, refugees will be able to avoid
carrying cash while escaping conflict, retain access to savings typically lost
during flight, and create an economic identity to establish themselves in a new
country. The results of cross-border digital financial services include: (1)
refugees will experience increased access to funds, which positively impacts
long-term health and education; (2) refugees will be less dependent upon host
states and foreign aid; (3) cross-border trade will increase, thus bolstering
regional security. The commercial potential of this project is large, as
refugees have been proven a viable market for commercial banking but have
historically been excluded from the formal financial system. Of the 68 million
people forcibly displaced around the world in 2018, 60% have access to mobile
networks that provide the infrastructure for offering digital financial services
even without a smartphone. New blockchain technology makes cross-border
financial services lucrative with amounts previously too small to be profitable,
thus opening the market to individuals at the bottom of the pyramid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project seeks to address how to deliver
virtual financial services in low technology environments using existing mobile
networks and consumer behavior patterns. The technology utilizes mobile money, a
USSD-based system common in emerging markets, as the cash-in and out point for
customers. Transactions are stored on a transparent (yet de-identified) digital
ledger that securely tracks assets across borders and fiat currencies.
Blockchain technology presents new ways of meeting the financial needs of
vulnerable populations, while a low-tech front-end ensures adoption in
environments in which distribution is challenging. Customers use a custom
USSD/SMS interface to create an account, send money for safekeeping, check
balance, and disburse funds across borders. Customer identity is managed using
biometrics such as facial and vocal recognition and a PIN. This type of cross-
border, digital savings product integrated with USSD and blockchain has never
been offered. The platform reliably links identity and provides the unique
combination of asset storage and transport across borders. The digitization of
cross-border money movement could reduce theft and corruption by up to 80%. This
project seeks to prove that virtual financial services offered through mobile
network infrastructure can bring new access to populations historically excluded
from the formal economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.