* 1906553
* Thermal conductivity and diffusivity of human cells as biomarkers in early-stage ovarian cancer detection
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Tae-Youl Choi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Currently, there is no reliable test for early diagnosis of first time or
recurrent epithelial ovarian cancers. This project will develop a new technique
of micropipette thermography, which, if successful, will lead to new insights
into mechanisms of cancer progression, early cancer detection, and early cancer
diagnosis. This research proposes that specific cell types possess
characteristic responses to heat that can be used to identify the cell type.
Characterization of this property may introduce a new class of cellular thermal
markers for normal or diseased cells. Significant broader impacts included the
training and mentorship of graduate, undergraduate and high school students in
thermal sciences. This will occur through hands-on learning experiences in the
nano and bioengineering program that will combine approaches from different
fields of study to reveal information about a life
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project objectives are: (1) to
determine the thermal characterization profiles of a cell line panel of serous
epithelial ovarian cancer progression. A 3D model of epithelial ovarian cancer
will be prepared as a test bed. Microsensors and the accompanying technical
method for both the thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity from previous
published work will be used on clinically relevant serous epithelial ovarian
cancer cell lines; (2) to correlate the thermal characterization profile with
the proliferation characterization profile as a Transition Prediction Model in
epithelial ovarian cancer. Subsequent analysis of the thermal-probed cells will
use fluorescence analysis to determine resazurin-detected proliferation. A
linear regression analysis will be performed to determine whether the profiles
for thermal characterization along with proliferation characterization are
correlated with cancer transition. It is noted that novel thermal properties
could supersede the current paradigm which emphasizes the reliance on extensive
genomic and proteomic analyses. Moreover, the added value of this project is the
identification of (and continued inquiry to understand) cellular inherent
thermal properties. The technology and method, if successful, will allow for a
non-invasive tool, faster diagnosis of epithelial ovarian cancer with expedited
next step bio-specimen determinations for early validation of the method and
technology. Indeed, this empirical study of thermodynamics cell properties will
advance recently proposed theories of heat transfer roles in metabolic
reprogramming, bioenergetics, and oxidation-reduction metabolism status in
cancer cell survival. This kind of novel discovery will open doors for new
therapies. Furthermore, future real-time diagnosis at the location of the cells
in question, when combined with laparoscopy, may result in early detection and
diagnosis. This technology ostensibly will extend to other circulating blood
tumors and disease models, providing for future advancements in cancer detection
and therapy solutions. Underrepresented students will be the first-choice
recruits through the University of North Texas McNair Scholars Program, National
Science Foundation Research Experience for Undergraduates program. Texas Academy
of Mathematics and Sciences high school program will also be
included.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.