* 1906147
* Building Capacity in and Access to Informal STEM Learning Settings for Participants with Disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Sheryl Burgstahler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,867.00

Consideration of the needs of individuals with a wide range of disabilities is
not always considered in the early design stages of an informal STEM learning
(ISL) activity or program. The primary access approach for people with
disabilities becomes the provision of accommodations once the ISL product or
environment is created. In contrast, the Universal Design approach considers
users with a wide range of characteristics throughout the design process and
works to create products and environments that are accessible, usable, and
inclusive. This project, called AccessISL, led by the University of Washington's
DO-IT (Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking and Technology) Center and
Museology Program, includes an academic museology program and local ISL sites,
representing museums, zoos, aquariums, makerspaces, science centers, and other
sites of informal STEM learning. Insights will be gained through the engagement
of people with disabilities, museology graduate students and faculty, and ISL
practitioners. The AccessISL project model, composed of a set of approaches and
interventions, builds on existing research and theory in the fields of education
science, change management, effective ISL practices, and inclusive design
processes. The project will collect evidence of policies and practices (or lack
thereof) that improve the inclusiveness of ISL with respect to a wide range of
disabilities and considers approaches for the design and development of new
strategies; explores what stakeholders need to make change happen; uncovers
challenges to the adoption of inclusive practices in public ISL settings and
explores ways to overcome them; and proposes relevant content that might be
included in museology curriculum. This project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following two objectives:
&lt;br/&gt;*For ISL personnel and museology faculty: to increase knowledge,
skills, and actions to make ISL programs, facilities, courses, and resources
more welcoming and accessible to participants with disabilities and embed
relevant practices within their work. &lt;br/&gt;*For postsecondary STEM
students with disabilities and museology students: to increase knowledge and
skills in advocating for ISL offerings that are welcoming and accessible to
everyone, including those with a wide variety of disabilities, and to encourage
individuals with disabilities to pursue careers in ISL.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs a student-centered approach and a set
of practices that embrace the social model of disability, social justice
education, disability as a diversity issue, intersectionality, and Universal
Design. A leadership team of interns--each member a STEM student with a
disability or a museology graduate student--along with project staff will engage
with the University of Washington's Museology Program to identify and implement
strategies for making ISL activities and courses more welcoming and accessible
to individuals with disabilities. An online community of practice will be
developed from project partners and others nationwide. A one-day capacity
building institute will be held to include presentations, student/personnel
panels for sharing project and related experiences, and group discussions to
explore issues and further identify systemic changes to make ISL programs more
welcoming and accessible to individuals with disabilities. As prototypes of the
AccessISL Model are developed, evaluation activities will primarily be formative
(looking for strengths and weaknesses) and remedial (identifying/implementing
changes that could be made to improve the model). The model will continue to be
fine-tuned through formative evaluation. Evaluation of the model components will
focus on the experience of a range of stakeholders in the project. Specifically,
quantitative data collected will include levels and quality of engagement,
accessibility recommendations and products developed, and delivery of ISL
services. Qualitative data will be collected through observations, surveys,
focus groups, interviews, and case studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AccessISL
project products will include proceedings of an end-of-project capacity building
institute, promising practices, case studies, a video, and other online
resources to help ISL practitioners and museology faculty that will result in
making future ISL opportunities more inclusive of people with disabilities.
AccessISL will advance knowledge and ensure long-term impact using multiple
strategies: &lt;br/&gt;*broadening the STEM participation of people with
disabilities as well as women, racial/ethnic minorities, and other
underrepresented groups through the application of universal design
&lt;br/&gt;*strengthening associations and creating synergy and durable
relationships among stakeholders, &lt;br/&gt;*encouraging teaching about
disability, accessibility, and universal design in museology courses,
&lt;br/&gt;*empowering students with disabilities and current and future ISL
practitioners to advocate for accessible ISL and develops an infrastructure to
promote accessible ISL programs nationwide, and &lt;br/&gt;*contributing to the
body of promising practices with products that will (a) enhance understanding of
issues related to the inclusion of people with disabilities in ISL programs and
(b) promote inclusive practices. &lt;br/&gt;Outcomes will benefit society by
making STEM opportunities available to more people and enhancing &lt;br/&gt;STEM
fields with the talents and perspectives of people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.