* 1906574
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Tempo and mode in the abyss: evolution following colonization of the deep sea
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Elizabeth Miller, Miller, Elizabeth Christina
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 03/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Fish entered the deep sea many times from shallow habitats,
where most marine life on Earth lives. It has long been thought that evolution
proceeds slowly in the cold and dark environment of the deep sea (defined as
below 200 meters). In conflict with this view, however, many deep-sea families
have a surprising diversity of species and body forms. By combining a family
history of shallow and deep fish lineages with 3-D scans of fish specimens, the
fellow will understand how quickly deep-sea forms evolved relative to the pace
of evolution in their shallow relatives. This project has the potential to
transform our understanding of the formation of biodiversity in the world's
oceans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate diverse data types
including time-calibrated molecular phylogenies, palaeoceanographic proxy data
for past oceanic conditions, and 3-D scans of preserved fish specimens. The
first objective is to reconstruct ancestral depth and habitat types on a large
phylogeny of all ray-finned fishes. This will allow the fellow to identify the
number and timing of all known transitions to the deep sea, as well as possible
conditions that favor such transitions such as life habits or oceanographic
conditions. Broad-scale analyses across fishes will be paired with detailed
investigations within three focal groups of varying ages with both shallow and
deep members (lizardfishes, anglerfishes, and snailfishes). The fellow will
collect 3-D microcomputed tomography scans to analyze the rate and direction of
body shape evolution following deep-sea transition. Towards this goal, a new
phylogeny of the anglerfishes (Lophiiformes) will be constructed with
unprecedented taxonomic sampling. This project will primarily utilize specimens
and tissues housed at the Burke Museum at the University of Washington, as well
as scanning technology housed at Friday Harbor Laboratories. The fellow will
gain training in the use of modern technology and approaches for studying the
evolution of morphology in a phylogenetic framework. In addition, the 3-D scans
will become publicly available, and will be used in K-12, undergraduate, and
public outreach educational materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.