* 1906441
* Deformation Spaces of Geometric Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Richard Canary, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2023
* USD 401,372.00

In this project the PI will investigate deformation spaces of geometric
structures. A surface is a space which looks locally like the two-dimensional
plane. Examples are the surface of a football or a donut. Surfaces arise
naturally in the mathematical fields of topology, complex analysis, and
dynamics. Classical Teichmuller theory is an area of mathematics that studies
the space of all geometric shapes on a fixed surface. It also interacts with
other scientific fields, e.g. through its connections with string theory in
theoretical physics. The PI's research lies in two types of generalizations of
Teichmuller theory. Three-dimensional generalizations of surfaces are called
three-manifolds, and these are locally like the three-dimensional space we live
in. The PI will continue a long-term project to classify and understand possible
shapes of three-dimensional manifolds. In Higher Teichmuller Theory, the PI will
study deformation spaces of geometric structures on higher-dimensional spaces
with an emphasis on understanding the metrics, or distance functions, on these
spaces. The PI will also contribute to the mathematical community through
involvement in the Inquiry Based Learning Center at the University of Michigan,
curriculum development for undergraduate courses, serving as editor of
mathematical journals, organizing conferences, and mentoring undergraduate
students, graduate students and postdoctoral assistant
professors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Higher Teichmuller theory studies geometric
representations of hyperbolic groups into semi-simple Lie groups, usually of
rank at least two. It is guided by inspiration from Teichmuller theory and the
overall goal is to create a general theory with some of the beauty and depth of
classical Teichmuller theory. The PI will use dynamical and geometric tools to
study pressure metrics on Hitchin components. In particular, the PI will
investigate an analogy between augmented Teichmuller space and an augmented
Hitchin component introduced by Loftin. The PI will also study deformation
spaces of finite area projective surfaces, Liouville currents associated to
Hitchin representations, the class of groups which admit Anosov representations
of specified type and the structure of spaces of Anosov representations. In the
field of Kleinian groups, the PI will use tools developed in the proof of the
Ending Lamination Conjecture to build combinatorial model manifolds for
hyperbolic three-manifolds with freely indecomposable fundamental group. This
project is expected to yield a finer understanding of Thurston's skinning map
and to allow the PI and his co-authors to establish an iterated bounded image
theorem, which was used by Thurston in the original proof of the Geometrization
Theorem for Haken 3-manifolds, but whose proof remains elusive. The PI will also
use dynamical tools to study deformation spaces of geometrically finite groups,
with the goal of proving analyticity of the Hausdorff dimension of the limit set
and producing pressure metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.