* 1906607
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Identification and regulatory effects of metabolites responsible for plant immunity
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Korey Brownstein, Brownstein, Korey
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. As the global
population increases, people need affordable and obtainable resources to prevent
crop losses. This project will provide researchers and farmers with new
bioactive metabolites for protecting crops against plant bacteria. These
compounds are expected to be more affordable and less harmful than existing
chemicals. As bacteria become resistant to chemical sprays, it is crucial to
discover ways to improve crop yields. The premise of this study is to develop
novel tools for crop protection that will improve food security. As an
underrepresented minority (URM), the Fellow will inspire URM students to develop
a passion for plant science. Undergraduate students from The University of
Chicago interested in impactful research and graduate school will also be
mentored. Both groups will shadow the Fellow through the research project,
utilizing various instruments and receiving an introduction to the finer points
of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial infection of crops is a major
concern for farmers. Depending on the crop, yield losses can be significant.
Research using the model plant Arabidopsis has provided insights into plant-
microbe interactions. However, incomplete databases have limited the
capabilities of identifying new signaling metabolites that set the basal defense
state of Arabidopsis. The goal of this work is to identify metabolite-based
natural modulators of plant immunity and the immune-related proteins they
regulate. Arabidopsis plants will be exploited to produce high levels of basal
metabolites with potent immune-regulatory properties. Mutant and transgenic
plants with high levels of such metabolites will be used to discover which
immune proteins are affected using a comparative proteomics approach. Metabolite
extracts from such plants will be analyzed by chromatography techniques,
fractionated, used for bioassays, and characterized by NMR to identify novel
immune-modulating metabolites. These discoveries enable researchers to better
understand metabolite-protein interactions in disease resistance models and have
the potential to provide farmers with new crop protection methods ensuring food
security. Many individuals do not realize how the farm to table food chain
works. Therefore, the Fellow will also develop a plant science kit in
collaboration with an inner-city elementary school in Chicago. This kit will
allow students to discover how the farm to table cycle works and why food
security is important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.