* 1906216
* Singular Metrics in Kahler Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Gabor Szekelyhidi, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2023
* USD 296,378.00

A central theme in the PI's research is the connections between partial
differential equations (PDEs) such as Einstein's equations in general
relativity, and the algebraic or geometric properties of the spaces on which
these equations are studied. Much research has been focused on the study of PDEs
on smooth spaces, where the local geometry has a very simple model, however
singularities can arise naturally in nature, the most well known being black
holes. The current research project focuses on the study of PDEs on such
singular spaces. This study will have applications in algebraic geometry, where
singular spaces play a central role in modern research, as well as in the theory
of partial differential equations. At the same time, singular spaces occur
naturally as limits of families of smooth spaces, which could collapse in
certain directions for instance. In this way the proposed research will shed new
light on the behavior of such families. Aside from pursuing these research
projects, the PI will continue training PhD students and postdoctoral
researchers. In addition the PI will also co-organize a yearly summer workshop
for&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students aimed at conveying ideas in geometry to
them which do not typically appear in the undergraduate curriculum. The PI will
also co-organize a yearly bridge program aimed at helping incoming graduate
students with diverse backgrounds get up to speed, to ensure their
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to investigate
singularities in Kahler geometry from different points of view. On the one hand,
singularities can arise in the limit of a sequence of smooth spaces, and it is
important to understand the structure of such limit spaces. The PI will study
the question of when the limit space can be identified with a singular Kahler
space, building on work of Donaldson-Sun as well as Liu and the PI. Of
particular interest are non-collapsed limit spaces of Kahler manifolds with
Ricci curvature bounds, however the PI will also investigate the much less
understood collapsed limit spaces. In a related direction, the PI will study
canonical metrics, such as Kahler-Einstein metrics, on singular complex
varieties, in particular the behavior of such metrics near the singular set. A
good understanding of the geometry of such singular metrics would lead to
applications of differential geometric techniques to the algebraic geometry of
singular varieties. Finally, in relation to the collapsing theory of Kahler
manifolds, the PI will study the construction of canonical metrics on fibrations
that are almost collapsed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.