* 1906167
* Collaborative Research:  Integrating vital rates to predict the net effect of functional traits on fitness
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Margaret Moore, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2024
* USD 402,289.00

One of the greatest challenges facing ecologists is predicting how species will
respond to changing environmental conditions. One promising approach to advance
prediction in ecology is to determine how traits of species determine their
success in a given environment. Traits are attributes of species, such as plant
height or body size, that influence their performance (survival and
reproduction). In this project the researchers will establish relationships
between traits and performance of key plant species to make general predictions
about how other species in plant communities will perform. Climate scientists
predict that drought may occur more frequently in the southwestern United
States. Plants that can resist wilting during dry periods are likely to be
winners during long-term drought, so this project will help determine which
species will win and lose in a drier climate. This study will train
undergraduate students, graduate students, and a secondary school teacher how to
quantify plant traits and use them to model population dynamics. By linking
physiological traits to plant performance, the results of this study will be
used to develop general predictions for plant responses to environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theory predicts that functional traits determine
fitness differences among species, but direct evidence for this is still lacking
for long-lived organisms. Given the inherent difficulty of quantifying fitness,
ecologists typically link traits to vital rates rather than to fitness itself.
However, analyzing trait-vital rate relationships in isolation can be misleading
because of well-documented trade-offs among vital rates. Individual growth rates
can be a poor proxy for fitness because the growth-mortality tradeoff can
generate variation in growth rates that yield equal fitness. This research will
contribute new understanding of the net effects of functional traits on fitness
by integrating rates of growth, survival and reproduction across multiple
populations of coexisting perennial plant species. This contribution will fill
an important gap in knowledge by demonstrating how effects of traits on
individual vital rates compare to the net effect of traits on total fitness.
Evolutionary models of dynamic fitness landscapes will be confronted with
experimental data to test predictions of how traits influence fitness in
response to experimental rainfall manipulations. This research will provide an
empirical foundation for theories that integrate population ecology,
evolutionary biology, and ecophysiology, by developing generalizable trait-based
models of population dynamics to predict responses to changing environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.