* 1906333
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Evolution and mechanisms of specialization in an endangered plant lineage
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Shayla Salzman, Salzman, Shayla
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. This project advances the study of symbiosis, evolutionary
biology, and conservation biology and has broader impacts for both the general
public and students from kindergarten through graduate school. Interactions
among species are hugely important for generating the wealth of biodiversity
seen today, yet highly specialized interactions between species are rare in
nature and are thought of as evolutionary dead ends. The project details the
evolutionary history of Zamia cycad plants, their symbiotic insects and the
symbiotic gut bacteria of those insects. It assesses the effects of species-
interactions on evolutionary trajectories, with comparisons between mutualistic
and parasitic insects and amongst insects and bacteria. This evolutionary
analysis of an entire network of interacting partners is the first of its kind
and will show that specialized lineages are not necessarily evolutionary dead
ends and define the mechanisms of species interactions that can lead to lineage
diversification. Finally, this work highlights an endangered plant lineage,
defines conservation status of symbiotic insects, and describes the necessity of
interactions for lineage persistence. This system is ideal to engage the general
public in conservation concerns through presentations with the Atkins Center for
Sustainability and popular science articles in the Cycad Society Newsletter. The
project has broad applications for student engagement as well through
presentations at New York high schools, home schools, and youth detention
centers, and intensive workshops and laboratory mentoring opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the
ancient plant genus Zamia and its multiple specialized relationships to describe
the evolutionary history of a species interaction network and the potential for,
and mechanisms of, lineage diversification in highly specialized interactions.
It will utilize DNA extractions from preserved and pinned museum collections to
build phylogenetic hypotheses for the entire network of partners: plants,
pollinating and herbivorous insects, and insects' symbiotic gut bacteria. The
contribution of species interactions to lineage diversification in evolutionary
time will be assessed using comparative evolution of morphological traits from
museum collections along with non-morphological phenotypic traits from living
collections. Lineage diversification in ecological time will be analyzed using
population genetics of host-shifting insects in living collections. Finally,
insect mechanisms of host perception that contribute to partner fidelity and
partner diversification will be described using chemical ecology and insect
physiology methods. The fellow will receive training in phylogenetic, population
genetic, quantitative morphometric, chemical ecology and insect physiology
methods at Cornell University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.