* 1906933
* STEM Ecologies of Learning for Families: Supporting Intergenerational Learning through University-Prison Partnerships
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Cynthia Graville, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2024
* USD 287,354.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. The project will develop and research the ways
in which maker education activities can be leveraged to support
intergenerational learning in hyper-vulnerable populations, such as families
with an incarcerated parent. Maker education is often linked to STEM learning
and uses hands-on and collaborative approaches to support activities and
projects that foster creativity, interest, and skill development. Research has
shown that maker education activities support STEM learning and creativity, the
development of STEM identities and dispositions, and create pathways towards
STEM careers. The project will develop a series of project activities including
bringing Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) learning
experts to a women;s minimum-security facility for lectures on research and a
set of workshops exploring maker activities for the incarcerated women and their
children. By researching trauma-informed maker practices for families with an
incarcerated parent, the project will develop research findings related to and
practical resources for supporting these practices in other informal STEM
learning contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While evidence shows that maker pedagogy
can be effective in supporting STEM learning for diverse populations, little is
known about how it might support STEM learning for incarcerated women and their
children. The project will investigate: (1) the everyday STEM practices of
incarcerated women and their children and how these practices can be supported
and extended through maker activities; (2) how incarcerated women and their
children are perceived with respect to STEM and the impact these perceptions
have on developing STEM identities; and (3) what design principles for
developing STEM learning emerge through the project research. Program activities
and related research will be designed and researched through the collaboration
of incarcerated women, university researchers from the project university
partners, the Saint Louis University Prison Program, and the Federal
Correctional Institution-Camp (Greenville Women's Minimum Security Facility).
The project will use Social Design Experimentation (SDE) as the primary research
method, which is used to design and study education interventions on site. SDE
is unique in that participants, researchers and other stakeholders collaborate
to meet the goals of the project and related research. Project deliverables,
which will be widely disseminated to researchers and educators, will include
articles in peer-reviewed and educator publications, strategies and design
principles for developing maker education opportunities for hyper-vulnerable
populations, and practical recommendations for a maker kit to facilitate STEM
maker education activities and family interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.