* 1906367
* GOALI: Fluctuation Electron Microscopy Studies of Ultra-Low Expansion Glasses and Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Michael Treacy, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 536,611.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: High precision instruments and tools, such as space-
telescope mirrors and stages in chip-fabrication chambers, are often subjected
to large temperature changes and so they need to be made from materials that do
not change size or shape with temperature. A family of ultra-low expansion
materials (ULE) are produced by Corning Research and Development Corporation
that meet these demanding requirements. They are a glassy mixture of titania and
silica, but their precise structure and zero-expansion mechanism are not well
understood. This research is investigating the ULE structures at the atomic
level using a specialized microscope technique called fluctuation electron
microscopy (FEM). FEM is a statistical technique that explores subtle traces of
atomic ordering in otherwise disordered materials. There are two broad goals to
the research. The first is to determine how the structure of the ULE materials
change as a function of titania content and processing conditions, and to
explain their low-expansion mechanism. The second is to develop the FEM
technique into a fully quantitative tool for the study of all disordered
materials, particularly glasses and amorphous ceramics. Aram Rezikyan of Corning
Inc. is the industrial partner in this project; the PI and co-PI are joined by
an additional industrial researcher who is conducting simulations. A graduate
student is interacting closely with Corning and is learning instrumental and
analytical skills that are valuable for a future career in materials science.
High School students participate in this research during the year via a science-
mentoring program (the SCENE program) run at Arizona State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: An ultra-low expansion material (ULE)
is made by Corning Research and Development Corporation as a solid solution of
titania (TiO2) and silica (SiO2). The composition and processing conditions can
be adjusted to give it a zero coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) at a
specified temperature. It is highly desirable to develop materials with a zero,
or close to zero, rate of change of CTE over a wide range of temperatures. To
achieve these properties, the detailed structure of the ULE glass-ceramic
material must be determined, and the mechanism responsible for the zero
expansion needs to be understood in detail. Because the material is a disordered
glass, standard diffraction and imaging methods do not give a clear picture of
the structure. In this project, fluctuation electron microscopy (FEM) is being
used to detect and explore the medium-range order that is present at the 1- to
2-nm length scales in these otherwise long-range-disordered materials. There are
two broad goals of this research. The first is to apply the FEM method to study
the structure-property relationships of ULE TiO2 - SiO2 glass ceramics. The
manner in which composition and medium-range order at length scales less than 2
nm affect properties is being examined. The second is to advance FEM as a
quantitative technique for studying disordered materials, such as ceramics and
glasses, by improving experimental and modeling protocols for investigating
electron-beam-sensitive materials. A graduate student is developing high-level
skills in many aspects of transmission electron microscopy, as well as
developing FEM as a quantitative tool for studying glassy
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.