* 1906381
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Leaky Landscapes:  Using Arctic catchments to assess ecosystem 'openness'
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Arial Shogren, Shogren                 Arial          J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2022
* USD 155,250.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The project
seeks to understand the connection between land and aquatic ecosystems in a
warming Arctic. This scientific challenge has been identified by the
international community and Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) field stations
in the Arctic. The Arctic ecosystem is being altered rapidly and systematically
as a result of the changing climate. One critical element of change is
permafrost thaw, which allows previously trapped nutrients to 'leak' in Arctic
landscapes, although there is little agreement about the ultimate fate of the
leaked material. To fill this knowledge gap, the project will use continuous and
geographically extensive monitoring of river water quality to reveal landscape
features that influence nutrient release from land to streams. In addition, the
fellow will enhance public awareness of unique but globally-significant Arctic
ecosystems through the use of technology to bridge the field to classroom gap.
Hosted at Michigan State University, the fellow will work in partnership with
the Arctic LTER at Toolik Field Station and Kellogg Biological Station
LTER.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The postdoctoral fellow will use existing and planned
LTER data collection to integrate Arctic ecological understanding at the plot
and watershed-scales. The project will create a number of research products with
broad interest to hydrologists, ecologists, and biogeochemists, including: 1)
Analyses of synoptic and continuous data of catchment hydrology and
hydrochemistry that have not yet been applied to the Arctic, and 2) Improved
fundamental understanding of Arctic ecosystem 'hotspots' for nutrient fluxes.
Further, the research is integrated with an education plan aimed at increasing
participation of under-represented groups in Arctic research in three stages: 1)
Developing K-12 lesson plans in partnership with Kellogg Biological Station
Teacher Training Workshops, 2) Publishing these teaching plans as open-source
Data Nuggets, and 3) Reaching K-12 classrooms through the free and broad-
reaching 'Skype a Scientist' program. The project will expand current efforts at
Michigan State University and the Arctic LTER aimed at understanding
hydrochemical fate and transport, and will directly link to the Kellogg
Biological Station LTER's outreach mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.