* 1906071
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Using the Hurricane Michael Event Layer for Developing a Paleo-Tempestite Archive at Strandplain Swales, St. Vincent Island, Florida
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2018,10/31/2022
* Mead Allison, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 10/31/2022
* USD 37,200.00

The project is a rapid-response study of the Hurricane Michael event along the
Florida Panhandle coast that experienced the most severe geomorphological impact
of this high Category 4 storm in October 2018. Research will focus on collecting
cores and samples from sediments deposited by Hurricane Michael on beach ridge
swales of St. Joseph Island, Florida and in the area of the Florida Apalachicola
Delta. These recently deposited sediments and deposits will have relevance to
establishing possible reconstructions of hurricane events over the last ~3,000
years that have impacted this section of the Gulf Coast of the US. Further study
of collected sediments and geomorphic changes will help provide detailed
information about the frequency, intensity, and wind fields (i.e., direction of
storm approach) of strong storms and hurricanes in the past. Broader impacts of
the work include student training in rapid response sampling techniques and in
providing information that can be used by coastal managers, residents, insurance
companies and policy makers regarding the frequency and intensities of
hurricanes in this part of the US Gulf Coast. The data collected may also allow
inference as to the impacts of human and other environmentally-induced climate
change on future hurricanes and the development of new and high-quality proxy
records for understanding past storm events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane
Michael, the strongest hurricane known to hit the Florida Gulf Coast, provides
an opportunity to examine how a storm event layer (i.e., tempestite) is recorded
in strandplain deposits. This research will sample Hurricane Michael deposits on
St. Vincent Island, Florida and those in the wetlands of the Apalachicola Delta
and adjacent mainland. Project objectives are to (1) map the characteristics
(e.g., thickness, granulometry, primary sedimentary structures) of the Michael
event layers in the study area as it is expressed across multiple subaerial
swales, swale ponds, and coastal wetlands; (2) collect and sample cores of the
Hurricane Michael event layer using procedures that will preserve the optically
stimulated luminescence signature of the sand fraction; and (3) gather a
comprehensive record of ancillary Hurricane Michael datasets from multiple
sources (i.e., agencies and individual investigators). Goals are to build a
dataset to allow construction of key spatio-temporal parameters shaping the
morphological response of coastal systems, like St. Vincent Island, to major
storms and how various parameters, such as wind field, storm surge level, wave
field, and coastal currents evolved over the course of the storm. The Michael
dataset will provide critical information that can aid in recognizing paleo-
tempestites in the St. Vincent record, improve our understanding of how
optically stimulated luminescence is expressed in hurricane tempestites, and
allow calibration of hindcast models of process-geomorphological response that
can reconstruct individual paleo-events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.