* 1906188
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: The evolution of mate-choice traits and genomic architecture of speciation in swallows \(genus Hirundo\)
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Drew Schield, Schield                 Drew           R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Characterizing biodiversity (the diversity of life on the
planet) is a central goal of evolutionary biology. This research aims to
understand how changes in an organism's genome create new species. The Fellow
will use data from natural history collections combined with genome data to
understand how swallows may have formed new species. To increase broader
participation in science, the Fellow will also mentor students from
underrepresented groups at the host-lab institution, and organize outreach and
entertainment events with local businesses to promote engagement between
scientists and the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accumulation of
genomic resources has allowed for recent advances in our understanding of the
genomic basis of reproductive isolation and has led to the hypothesis that non-
random associations between loci that confer barriers to gene flow may be
powerful drivers of speciation. However, further empirical demonstration of this
'coupling' of barrier loci is required to confirm its importance in speciation.
This research will address this need through integrative analysis of phenotypic
data collected from natural history specimens and newly-generated genomic data
from representatives across the swallow genus Hirundo. Because Hirundo includes
lineages at various stages of the speciation continuum and considerable
phenotypic variation in mate choice traits, it is an ideal system to test for
empirical evidence that the coupling of barrier loci underlying selected traits
drives speciation. Further, this research will thoroughly examine the genomic
architecture of speciation by quantifying genetic diversity, the recombination
landscape, and genomic composition and structure in regions underlying mate-
choice traits. Ultimately, this study will integrate analyses of phenotypic data
and comparative population genomics to test the importance of coupling between
divergent traits in the process of speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.