* 1906654
* Water Values--Advancing Informal STEM Learning through Native Voices, Planetariums, and Reciprocal Collaboration
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jonee Brigham, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 296,092.00

Water is an essential, basic need. It is the sustenance for living organisms.
For many Native American communities, like the Ojibwe tribes of Minnesota, water
is a sacred valuable life source that permeates all aspects of their culture. In
these communities, water stories are often used to communicate the value and
impact of water on their lives and the lives of others. These stories signal
geohydrologic, sociocultural, and sociopolitical societal shifts over time. This
pilot study will explore the feasibility of using Native water stories and
informal learning experiences to bring water science and issues of water
sustainability to youth and public audiences. A significant outcome of the pilot
will be a youth-museum-educator co-created public planetarium show and program
based on the water stories collected and archived. This approach is particularly
novel. It provides an entry into STEM through a dynamic, multimedia context that
typically does not engage youth as co-creators of the experiences. Water Values
will give voice and a public platform to youth and their communities to elevate
ecological issues that are relevant and timely within their own communities. It
will also promote scientific discourse through field experiences, interactions
with scientists and STEM professions, and community leadership development.
Further, this pilot will also test a reciprocal relationship model among its
partners. Analogous feasibility research to the Water Values pilot does not
exist in the current NSF portfolio. Therefore, the project will not only
contribute to the emerging literature base on the intersectionality of STEM,
storytelling and Native cultures, but it will also contribute to broader
discourse about water health, access, management, and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pilot study will bring together the
long standing gidakiimanaaniwigamig program, with its master teachers who are
experts in culturally responsive education for Native American youth, and the
Bell Museum, which has decades of experience in developing informal STEM
learning programs for a broad community. Thirty-five middle school aged youth,
five educators, and over 200 community members will engage in the work. During
the summer residential program, youth will be exposed to STEM content and
important water science concepts through field-based research and a culturally
relevant, placed-based curriculum focused on water and communicating water
stories. These experiences will be extended during the academic year through
weekend science activities that will focus on the compilation of water stories
from Native communities, especially from the Ojibwe tribes of Minnesota, and
creatively integrating the stories into a fully operational youth-museum co-
created public planetarium program. This capstone planetarium show and program
will be piloted at the Bell Museum. With regards to the research, four
overarching question will guide the study: (1) How does participation in
creating water journey stories increase Native students' motivation to learn and
engage with STEM, (2) How does participation in creating and presenting water
journey stories build change in sociopolitical awareness among Native students?
(3) How do Native community members engage with water stories for sociopolitical
change and greater participation in STEM? and (4) How does collaboration between
gidakiimanaaniwigamig, the Bell, and the UMN impact STEM interest and
participation in students and a Native community for transformative experience?
Data will be collected from the youth participants, instructors and leaders, and
community members. These data will be collected from content surveys, student
logs, self-reported intrinsic motivation instrument, observations, and
artifacts. The results will be disseminated through various mechanisms within
and beyond the target communities. Formative and summative evaluations will
inform that work and will be led by an external evaluation firm, Erikkson
Associates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This feasibility study is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.