* 1906015
* Genome Evolution in Polar Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Joanna Kelley, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 02/28/2023
* USD 831,214.00

Fish that reside in the harsh, subfreezing waters of the Antarctic and Arctic
provide fascinating examples of adaptation to extreme environments. Species at
both poles have independently evolved ways to deal with constant cold
temperature, including the evolution of antifreeze proteins. Under freezing
conditions, these compounds attach to ice crystals and prevent their growth.
This lowers the tissue freezing point and reduces the chance the animal will be
injured or killed. While it might seem that the need for unique adaptations to
survive in polar waters would reduce species diversity in these habitats, recent
evidence showed higher speciation rates in fishes from polar environments as
compared to those found in warmer waters. This is despite the fact cold
temperatures slow cellular processes, which had been expected to lower rates of
molecular evolution in these species. To determine how rates of speciation and
molecular evolution are linked in marine fishes, this project will compare the
genomes of multiple polar and non-polar fishes. By doing so, it will (1) clarify
how rates of evolution vary in polar environments, (2) identify general trends
that shape the adaptive trajectories of polar fishes, and (3) determine how
functional differences shape the evolution of novel compounds such as the
antifreeze proteins some polar fishes rely upon to survive. In addition to
training a new generation of scientists, the project will develop curriculum and
outreach activities for elementary and undergraduate science courses. Materials
will be delivered in classrooms across the western United States, with a focus
on rural schools as part of a network for promoting evolutionary education in
rural communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand the biology of
polar fishes and the evolution of antifreeze proteins (AFPs), this research will
compare the evolutionary histories of cold-adapted organisms to those of related
non-polar species from both a genotypic and phenotypic context. In doing so,
this research will test whether evolutionary rates are slowed in polar
environments, perhaps due to constraints on cellular processes. It will also
evaluate the effects of positive selection and the relaxation of selection on
genes and pathways, both of which appear to be key adaptive strategies involved
in the adaptation to polar environments. To address specific mechanisms by which
extreme adaptation occurs, researchers will determine how global gradients of
temperature and dissolved oxygen shape genome variation and influence adaptive
trajectories among multiple species of eelpouts (family Zoarcidae). An in-vitro
experimental approach will then be used to test functional hypotheses about the
role of copy number variation in AFP evolution, and how and why multiple
antifreeze protein isoforms have evolved. By comparing the genomes of multiple
polar and non-polar fishes, the project will clarify how rates of evolution vary
in polar environments, identify general trends that shape the adaptive
trajectories of cold-adapted marine fishes, and determine how functional
differences shape the evolution of novel proteins. This project addresses the
strategic programmatic aim to provide a better understanding of the genetic
underpinnings of organismal adaptations to their current environment and ways in
which polar fishes may respond to changing conditions over different
evolutionary time scales. The project is jointly funded by the Antarctic
Organisms and Ecosystems Program in the Office of Polar Programs of the
Geosciences Directorate, and the Molecular Biophysics Program of the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.