* 1906104
* Electrically tunable cholesteric optical filters
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Oleg Lavrentovich, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2022
* USD 502,049.00

General description. Optical imaging is a cornerstone of our interaction with
the surrounding world. In some cases, this interaction does not require any
special instruments, as Nature provided humans with power of sight.
Technological applications in areas such as biomedical and chemical analysis,
food and agriculture, aerospace and defense increasingly rely on the ability to
control light transmittance and reflectance, to separate different "colors" of
light. The project proposes to develop simple and compact devices that could
selectively reflect or transmit different colors of light in a broad range from
ultraviolet to visible and infrared parts of the spectrum. The idea is to use a
newly discovered liquid crystal structure with electrically controlled
periodicity. The device represents a thin film of the liquid crystal sandwiched
between two transparent electrodes. By changing the applied voltage, one changes
the period of the structure and thus s the colors of light transmitted or
reflected by the film. The device will help to image details that are not
accessible by a human eye. The objectives are to characterize experimentally and
theoretically electro-optical performance of these liquid crystalline films in
various device geometries with controlled direction of light propagation, to
explore them as tunable reflectors, diffraction gratings, light attenuators, and
rotators of light polarization. The project has the potential for enormous
societal benefits in areas ranging from existing technologies (such as improved
displays) to new technologies, such as tunable "smart windows", shutters,
attenuators, tunable lasers, optical limiters, polarization rotators. The
proposed research provides a superb platform to educate students at graduate and
undergraduate levels in materials science, electro-optic phenomena, optics, and
advanced microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;Technical description. The current challenge in
the field of optical imaging and especially multispectral imaging can be
formulated as a two-fold task: (1) to find the means to easily select and adjust
the spectral bands parameters such as peak wavelength and bandwidth and (2) to
make the spectral imaging compact and affordable. This project proposes to
develop new electrically tunable optical filters based on cholesteric liquid
crystals (LCs) with oblique helicoidal structure (ChOH) that would fulfill both
of the requirements above. ChOH, discovered very recently, features a single-
mode modulation of the optic axis (the director of molecular orientations) with
a period that is tunable by the applied electric field. The intellectual
significance is in unveiling the potential of ChOH electro-optics in a broad
spectral range from UV to Vis and IR. The oblique helicoidal structure of ChOH
with periodic modulation of the director but homogeneous molecular density is
new to the field of LCs and soft matter in general. Its predecessor, the so-
called twist-bend nematic phase NTB, has been discovered only a few years ago
and is currently enjoying an explosive growth of research as the fine details of
the oblique helicoidal structures and their response to the external fields are
not understood well. The proposed research will result in the new knowledge of
how the structure of ChOH is shaped by the externally applied electric field and
confinement geometry and how ChOH can be used in the design and fabrication of
the new generation of electrically tunable optical elements such as filters,
gratings, polarization rotators, attenuators. The electrically adjustable period
of ChOH represents a new mode of the electro-optical response of LCs. The
transformative value of the project is in the potential for new design concepts
for tunable electro-optical devices performing in a broad spectral range from UV
to Vis and IR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.