* 1906518
* LSAMP BD: University of South Florida Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (FGLSAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Dwayne Smith, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,074,987.00

According to the U.S. Census Bureau by the year 2020 more than half of the
nation's children will come from minority racial and ethnic groups. In response
to these changing demographics, a recent report by the White House Office of
Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) has addressed the need to increase the
participation of individuals from historically underrepresented groups in
science and engineering to help maintain this nation's global leadership in
technology and innovation and advance national prosperity. The University of
South Florida (USF) will serve as the 2019-2021 Bridge to the Doctorate (BD)
institutional site for the NSF Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (FGLSAMP). This FGLSAMP BD Project seeks to build upon
both FGLSAMP's prior successes and USF's preeminence as a global research
university by institutionalizing evidence-based practices in the academic and
social integration, comprehensive scholar development, and professionalization
in the sciences of graduate students from historically underrepresented groups.
The 2019-2021 FGLSAMP BD Activity will facilitate increased intellectual
exchange and promote greater diversity and inclusion across all USF STEM
departments. The overarching aim of this cohort will be to ensure that 100
percent of FGLSAMP BD fellows complete their STEM PhD within five years after
entering their doctoral programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through "lesson learned"
from seven prior BD site awards and partnerships with four USF Colleges, the
Office of Graduate Studies, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and the Florida
Education Fund's McKnight Doctoral Fellowship program, USF has been recognized
as a national leader in minority STEM graduate education. Measurable objectives
for the 2019-2021 USF FGLSAMP BD Activity will include: 1) recruiting twelve
(12) LSAMP former participants as fellows by fall 2019 into STEM graduate
programs (MS or PhD); 2) providing faculty-mentored research-training for all
fellows throughout their two-year NSF fellowship tenure; 3) initiating
professional development activities to facilitate competitive Graduate Research
Fellowship Program (GRFP) applications from BD fellows and FGLSAMP undergraduate
scholars within the Alliance; 4) supporting the 100 percent transition of USF
FGLSAMP BD fellows into STEM PhD programs through interactions with supportive
role model scientists and LSAMP undergraduate scholars; and 5) fostering greater
inclusion within STEM graduate departments with new faculty and graduate student
mentor training initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.