* 1906030
* Prediction and synthesis of metal oxide nanosheets and nanoscrolls
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Arunima Singh, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2023
* USD 391,378.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal oxide materials have
many applications in electronic, chemical, and optical devices. Atomically thin
materials in the form of nanosheets have further advantages due to their high
surface areas and their remarkably different properties compared with their bulk
counterparts. However, most metal oxides exist in bulk crystals that cannot
easily be formed into nanosheets. In this project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the
research team develops a new plasma-based synthesis method to convert atomically
thin metal sulfides and selenides into metal oxide nanosheets and nanoscrolls.
Theory and data mining in materials databases are used to identify target
materials and plasma conditions. Close integration of theory and experiment are
used to determine the underlying mechanisms of the metal oxide conversion
process and to establish the fundamental roles of material structures and plasma
components for converting metal sulfides and selenides into metal oxides. This
project will also enhance education and outreach efforts by the PI and co-PI to
increase scientific engagement and participation from underrepresented groups
through a range of activities aimed at the general public, high school students,
undergraduate students, and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:
Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets offer
advantages such as increased specific surface area, improved mass and charge
transport, increased surface interactions, and processability into flexible thin
films that can be useful in a wide range of applications. Among known 2D
materials, the majority of them have layered three-dimensional (3D) bulk
counterparts held together by weak van der Waals (vdW) forces. In contrast, many
metal oxides do not have layered vdW bulk crystal forms so that 2D nanosheets
cannot be formed from top-down exfoliation, while bottom-up growth methods
require challenging development of synthesis procedures. Thus, there is a need
to develop new synthesis methods for 2D metal oxides that are generalizable and
cost-effective. In this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the research team
establishes plasma-assisted conversion synthesis (PACS) as a powerful general
approach to synthesize 2D metal oxide nanosheets and nanoscrolls by conversion
from layered metal sulfides and selenides. Ab initio theory and data mining in
materials databases are used to identify and predict new metal oxide materials
that do not have layered 3D bulk counterparts, which will then be synthesized
using the PACS process. This project develops a detailed fundamental
understanding of how 2D metal oxides with no known layered vdW counterparts can
be formed by plasma-assisted conversion from 2D metal sulfides and selenides.
The underlying mechanisms of the oxidation and scrolling processes are
elucidated through closely coupled theory and experiment to determine
mechanistic details of the roles of point defects, grain boundaries,
compositions, and reactive intermediates. The resulting metal oxide nanosheets
and nanoscrolls have potential applications in electronic, magnetic, and
electrochromic devices, photocatalysis, and chemical sensing. The software and
computational tools developed in this project are widely applicable to other
researchers in the field. The education and outreach efforts advance the PI and
co-PI's goals in increasing participation from female students, first-generation
and underrepresented groups via open house events for the general public, hands-
on activities for high school students, and advanced research training
experiences for undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.