* 1906954
* Investigating How Museum Experiences Inform Youths' STEM Career Awareness and Interest
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Nicole Kowrach, Museum of Science and Industry
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,223,658.00

Museums in the US receive approximately 55 million visits each year from
students in school groups. Field trip visits to an art museum have been found to
positively impact critical thinking skills, empathy and tolerance - an increase
that can be even more significant for youth from rural or high-poverty regions.
While field trips are popular, especially at science museums, there have been no
experimental studies about their impact on STEM career choices and interests,
much less any which used a culturally sensitive and responsive approach. Given
the resources put into field trips, this study investigates if causal links can
be drawn between museum experiences and impact on youth. The Museum of Science
&amp; Industry uses a Learning Labs approach for engaging its visitors. These
"Learning Labs" are facilitated experiences that run roughly an hour. Currently
there are 12 lab topics. This study focuses on MedLab--one of the learning labs
--as the setting for the research. MedLab is designed for on-site and online
experience using ultra-sophisticated and highly versatile technology in
challenges taken from research on the top healthcare issues that face
adolescents in their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is informed by
research and theory on Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT) and Racial and
Ethnic Identity. The former describes a process many follow when thinking about
career options, broadly. The latter describes how people see themselves in the
world through their membership with a racial and/or ethnic group. Both processes
can collectively influence STEM career choices. This study follows an embedded
mixed-method design. The quantitative portion includes an experimental,
pre/post/delayed post-test design of both educators and their students using
multiple measures taken mostly from previously published instruments. The
qualitative portion includes observation rubrics of MedLab sessions along with
interviews and focus groups with staff, educators, students and families that
take place both within and outside of the museum. This is an experimental study
of moderate size of both heterogeneous teacher and student populations in real
world settings. It involves comparing youth and educators that participate in
MedLab with those who do not. By conducting research that looks at each
community through the lens of their unique experiences, the research will
measure their impact more sensitively and authentically, addressing a gap in
current literature on informal science, technology, engineering, or mathematics
(STEM) career education with diverse students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program and the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program. The
AISL program seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. The ITEST program seeks to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers STEM-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.