* 1906091
* EAGER: Characterization of Atmospheric Pollen under Weather Extremes
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Elizabeth Stone, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 359,998.00

The goal of this project is to evaluate the concentrations and properties of
atmospheric pollen particles that rupture under extreme weather conditions.
Pollen fragments can contribute significantly to atmospheric particle number and
mass during spring and summer thunderstorms and rain events. There is currently
little information about the size-resolved concentrations and properties of
pollen fragments in the atmosphere. Because pollens pose significant health
risks to populations with respiratory diseases, understanding when and why high
levels of pollen fragments occur will serve as a strong scientific basis to
protect sensitive populations, through early-warning systems and/or other
mitigation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field measurements of size-resolved
atmospheric pollen fragments will be made in spring and summer in suburban Iowa
City IA under a variety of meteorological conditions, leading to a better
understanding of exactly when peak concentrations of airborne pollen fragments
occur and how long they persist in the atmosphere. Chemical methods will be
applied to quantify molecular tracers of pollens in size-resolved ambient
particulate matter samples. Optical microscopy will be used to identify intact
pollens based on diagnostic traits of size and shape, exine sculpturing, and
features of apertures (size, number, and type) using pollen identification keys
for the Midwestern United States. Species of pollen fragments will be identified
and quantified using highly-specific enzyme immunoassays in size-resolved
particulate matter samples. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project is highly
exploratory as it seeks to characterize an atmospheric phenomenon of unknown
frequency. The project's success depends on the precise occurrence of a
combination of seasonal and meteorological factors that are conducive to
producing fragmented pollen particles. The potential benefit to be gained from
this research is significant, as a better understanding of the conditions under
which pollen fragments are formed will enable improved predictions of high
allergen content in the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.