* 1906727
* Control of Dynamically Coupled Agile Legged Robots and Bioinspired Robotic Tails
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2023
* USD 396,036.00

The objective of this project is to understand the principles of dynamics and
control that intrinsically couple legged robots with bioinspired robotic tails
to achieve agile animal-like locomotion. This research hypothesizes that spatial
robotic tails can augment the performance of legged robots by enhancing their
stability and maneuverability. The research will establish a firm analytical
foundation that enables: (a) systematic investigation and analysis of the
effects of robotic tails on the stability of highly-agile maneuvers of legged
robots, and (b) development of control algorithms for agile legged locomotion
with bioinspired robotic tails. The theoretical innovations will be reduced to
practice by incorporating spatial robotic tails on legged robot testbeds. This
research will enable to build legged robots with agility and stability that are
seen in animals to effectively and rapidly navigate in unstructured, hazardous
and complex environments which will lead to faster search and rescue or
exploration of dangerous environments. Additional deliverables of this project
include dissemination of research results, engineering education and research
experiences for students and science teachers, new engineering curriculums, and
outreach and diversity initiatives for students, teachers, and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
establish a strong foundation for a paradigm shift from traditional control
algorithms that only address legged locomotion without bioinspired robotic tails
to resilient control algorithms that intrinsically couple legged robots with
bioinspired robotic tails to achieve agile and dexterous animal-like locomotion.
The research draws upon robotics, controls, and hybrid systems theory to fuse
observations from nature in the transformation of state-of-the-art methods for
the control of agile legged locomotion. The research will create innovations in
analysis by studying the effect of tails on the stability of legged locomotion
and innovations in control by creating a systematic framework to design robust
control algorithms that coordinate the robotic tail motion with that of the
quadruped by enhancing its dexterity, agility, and maneuverability. The research
has broad societal impacts by enabling the next generation of agile autonomous
legged robots to efficiently overcome obstacles in natural environments and to
effectively assist, or stand in for, humans in dangerous situations such as in
disaster areas. The integrated education plan involves creation of new courses
as well as STEM-based outreach initiative for K-12 students, teachers, and
under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.