* 1906014
* NSF-BSF: Surface-Sensitive Spectroscopy and Microscopy on Metal/Oxide Interfaces at Atmospheric Pressures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Miquel Salmeron, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 03/31/2023
* USD 305,073.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface science is the field of
elucidating the fundamental aspects of chemistry and physics occurring on the
surface of materials with the goal of providing fundamental information to the
industrially important fields of catalysis, electrochemistry, corrosion, and
lubrication. Classical surface science is carried out in refined conditions of
vacuum pressures and very low temperatures; conditions which are almost as empty
and cold as outer space. Surface science, as practiced until the end of the 20th
century, has provided much of our present understanding of solid surfaces,
thanks to an extensive array of surface-sensitive microscopy and spectroscopy
techniques, which have revealed the atomic, electronic, and chemical structure
of many crystal surfaces. However, real surfaces are always in contact with
gases or liquids, and our knowledge of surfaces under such realistic conditions
is far less extensive, because only a few experimental techniques can probe
surfaces in realistic conditions. This lack of knowledge is referred to as the
pressure-temperature gap between surface science and chemical technologies. This
project focuses on silver and copper catalysts supported on alumina for ethylene
oxidation reaction. This is a commercially important reaction because the annual
global demand for ethylene oxide is over twenty five million tons. The merit of
this project is not limited to providing an atomic and molecular level
understanding of ethylene oxidation reaction, but will also serve as a
benchmark, for other fundamental reaction studies. The metal/oxide interface is
a highly complex system (multicomponent, multiple interfacial boundaries) and
poorly understood, and adds complexity due to presence of environmental reagent
gases. The project aims to shift the current paradigm by simultaneously bridging
the complexity gap in parallel to the pressure and temperature gaps. Therefore,
the project includes developing novel techniques and methods that will be
applicable to other metal/oxide systems and other reactant gas admixtures. A
measure of its importance is seen in the fact that more than 90% of the
catalysts used in the industrial processes are metals supported on oxides.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalytic reactions occur typically at high
pressures (&gt;1 bar) and temperatures (&gt;295 K) in most industrial processes
compared to the rarefied ultra-high vacuum (UHV) pressures and cryogenic
temperatures used in traditional surface science studies. To bridge this
pressure gap and temperature gap between science and technology the proposed
studies will be performed at 295 K and above, and in the presence of gases in
the Torr-bar pressure range, thus approaching the range relevant to industrial
production, while avoiding significant sacrifices in terms of measurement
resolution and accuracy. This will involve the utilization of microscopy and
spectroscopy techniques, namely x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), infrared
reflection absorption spectroscopy (IRRAS), and scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM), that have been specially adapted in the last decades to be performed at
ambient pressures. Chemical, atomic, and electronic structure of the Ag/Al2O3
and Cu/Al2O3 metal/oxide surfaces under ethylene epoxidation reaction conditions
will be investigated. This commercially important reaction has an annual global
volume of 25 billion kg ethylene oxide produced in 2013. Because Al2O3 is a
strong dielectric, new tools and methods are introduced in addition to those
mentioned above: Freestanding ultra-thin membrane approach, and atomic force
microscopy (AFM) imaging and spectroscopy. Combining these four techniques will
provide unparalleled mechanistic insights into catalytic reactions occurring on
model heterogeneous catalysts, particularly to ethylene epoxidation reaction
chosen in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.