* 1906706
* Food for Thought: Igniting, Engaging, and Measuring Family STEM Learning Using a Food Lab
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* John Dunlosky, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,290,718.00

Families play a large role in igniting children's interest in science pathways,
but they may not always have access to high-quality materials that demonstrate
clear connections between science and their daily lives. This project will
address this issue by developing high-interest materials that teach the science
of food preparation to families with children ages 7-13. These materials include
the following four components: (a) Food Labs, food-based investigations taking
place in museums or in food service facilities; (b) take-home kits allowing
families to conduct similar types of Food Labs at home; (c) a series of question
starters called Promoting Interest and Engagement in Science (PIES) designed to
facilitate meaningful family conversations around food preparation; and (d) a
mobile app designed to deepen families' understandings of relevant science
concepts and containing embedded measures of STEM learning. This project will
advance knowledge regarding features of take-home materials that foster family
science learning and ignite children's interest in science
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development Project will
result in empirically-tested instructional materials that support families, with
children ages 7-13, in conducting scientific investigations and holding
scientific conversations related to food preparation. Kent State University, in
partnership with The Cincinnati Museum Center and La Soupe, a food service
provider for families who face food insecurity, will collaboratively develop and
test the four interrelated sets of instructional materials mentioned above that
are designed to deepen families' scientific content knowledge related to the
chemistry of food preparation. To iteratively design and evaluate these
materials, the team will conduct both laboratory and in-vivo experiments using a
Solomon design with a pre- and post-demonstration survey. The survey will
measure children's interest, knowledge, and engagement. For a month after
interacting with instructional materials, families will document their science
activity at home through the app. Additionally, through analyzing audio-
recordings, the team will determine whether and how families ask questions using
the PIES materials. Finally, post-demonstration interviews with participating
families will focus on the usability and accessibility of the instructional
materials. Quantitative and qualitative analyses of the pre-post surveys,
interview transcripts, and audio-recordings will be used to improve the
instructional materials, and the revised materials will be re-assessed using the
same experimental methods and outcome measures. The final set of instructional
materials will be developed and widely disseminated for easy use at other
science museums, food service providers, and in families' homes. This project
leverages partnerships to generate empirical knowledge on features of learning
environments that support family science learning and engagement, resulting in
empirically-based materials designed to broaden participation in science. This
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes
providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.