* 1906013
* Collaborative Proposal: Multidimensional Tracking of Local Environment-Affected Transport Pathways in Perovskite Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Mark Siemens, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

Organic metal halide perovskites have gained enormous research interest as
materials for solar cells, and their efficiencies are now approaching those of
conventional silicon devices. Additionally, they allow for more scalable
fabrication and for the development of higher efficiency tandem devices with two
different absorbers. Perovskites have a complicated crystal structure with many
forms of disorder. Despite this complexity, they have a robust ability to
transport charges without losses that reduce efficiency. However, fundamental
questions regarding the role of the disorder and its effect on the generated
photocurrent remain unanswered. This project uses advanced, ultrafast
spectroscopy to measure the effects of disorder on energy and charge carrier
flow in perovskites. These results are directly coupled to the subsequent device
behavior. Overall, this project provides an understanding of the fundamental
physics of the materials while also providing guidance on practical methods to
improving device efficiencies. The principal investigators will use this
research topic to engage with K-12 students, undergraduate students, and
community college teachers in research. They will also reach out to the general
public through public lectures, hands-on presentations at a local amusement
park, and online classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is
to measure the effect of spatial irregularity from defects and mobile cations on
exciton and free carrier transport in perovskite thin-film photovoltaic
materials and devices. Multidimensional coherent spectroscopy experiments will
be performed in a tight feedback loop with controlled and scalable synthesis
enabling new understanding of microscopic carrier transport to spark
transformative gains in device efficiency. Experiments are performed on
perovskite materials and photovoltaic devices in order to: 1.) quantify the
effect of defect density on carrier transport and dynamics through a novel
implementation of multidimensional coherent spectroscopy; 2.) measure the effect
of both static and dynamic cation disorder on carrier lifetime; 3.) optimize
material composition and device architecture through close coupling between
optical experiments and device fabrication; and 4.) characterize scalable
deposition techniques and their effect on film heterogeneity at varying size
scales. As part of the work, new experimental approaches are developed,
including a) simultaneous detection of photoluminescence and photocurrent
through multidimensional spectroscopy and b) energy-coupled deposition of the
perovskite materials to yield improved film quality for scalable device
fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.