* 1906164
* Scalable Symbolic Control: Computationally Efficient Design of Feedback Control Algorithms to Satisfy Complex Requirements
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Murat Arcak, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 06/30/2023
* USD 488,404.00

Scalable Symbolic Control: Computationally Efficient Design of Feedback Control
Algorithms to Satisfy Complex Requirements&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to develop design methodology for feedback control algorithms that satisfy
complex safety and performance requirements. Rigorous design tools that meet
such requirements are of utmost importance in manufacturing, autonomous
vehicles, and infrastructure systems, such as smart cities, traffic networks,
the power grid and water networks. The growing sophistication of these systems
demand equally sophisticated control methods that are applicable to the complex
requirements and large-scale models describing their operation. The project
addresses this demand with a combination of tools from control theory, which
traditionally deals with feedback regulation of dynamical systems around desired
set points or trajectories, and formal methods used for verification of software
and hardware systems. Merging tools from these areas is an exciting research
opportunity but relies on a symbolic representation of continuous dynamical
systems studied in control theory to be compatible with the models used in
formal methods. Existing tools for obtaining symbolic representations require
computations that do not scale well to large systems. To overcome this problem
the project will exploit structural system properties inherent to classes of
dynamical systems and eliminate key computational bottlenecks. The results will
be demonstrated on autonomous docking of ships, a challenging maneuver that
continues to be performed manually due to the high risk of collision combined
with strict requirements for precision. This system is representative of a wide
range of other applications and is an excellent test bed for control algorithms
that meet complex requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symbolic control is an
increasingly popular approach that translates the control synthesis problem from
the continuous- to the discrete-state domain, allowing the designer to address
complex control requirements expressed as automata or temporal logic formulas.
Indeed, for finite discrete-state transition models, such as those that arise in
software and hardware verification and synthesis, the formal methods community
has developed number of efficient algorithmic tools to enforce such
requirements. Bringing these tools to control theory is an exciting opportunity,
but the computations involved in the design procedure do not scale well to
systems with large state dimension and complex, nonlinear dynamics. This project
aims to overcome key computational bottlenecks and achieve scalability by
exploiting structural system properties. The research tasks include: 1)
Developing scalable and broadly applicable reachability analysis methods, which
are needed when obtaining a discrete-state representation of a continuous-state
system; 2) Exploiting sparsity structures and symmetries intrinsic to the
dynamical model to dramatically reduce the number of times that reachability
computations are invoked, 3) Further improving scalability by first reducing the
order and complexity of the dynamical model with a rigorous procedure offering
guaranteed error bounds. Successful completion of these research tasks would
elevate symbolic control to become a broadly applicable tool for safety-critical
systems with complex, nonlinear dynamics. The results of the project will be
demonstrated on autonomous docking of ships, a challenging maneuver that
continues to be performed manually due to the high risk of collision combined
with strict requirements for precision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.