* 1906099
* Conference: 2019 Organellar Channels and Transporters GRC/GRS; August 3-9, 2019; Mount Snow, VT
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Sheng Luan, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 04/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

Organelles such as nuclei, mitochondria and chloroplasts, play essential roles
in cellular dynamics and function. This project will support young faculty,
under-represented minority scientists, graduate students, and postdoctoral
scientists in attending the 2019 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and associated
student/postdoctoral scientist-run Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on "Organellar
Channels and Transporters". These GRS and GRC will be held in West Dover,
Vermont, on August 3-4 and August 4-9, 2019, respectively. The meetings will
bring together scientists from many disciplines working on a wide variety of
intracellular organelles in animal, plant, and fungal systems to facilitate
interdisciplinary collaborations. The meetings provide unique training
opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral scientists to closely
interact with scientific leaders studying cellular organelles, enhancing both
research and training in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will
consist of platform sessions, short talks, poster sessions, round tables, and
informal conversations that will provide ample opportunity for sharing the
latest research results as well as technical and conceptual advances and
exploring collaborative possibilities. The aim is to capture the most recent
discoveries in the field and the emerging trends of integration among different
organelles and processes, as well as their relevance for the understanding of
fundamental cell biological questions. In particular, the meetings will cover
structural and functional analyses of channels and transporters that reside in
various organelle membranes ranging from chloroplasts, unique to plant cells, to
vacuoles shared by plant and fungal cells, to nucleus and mitochondria common to
all eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.