* 1906157
* LSAMP BD: University of Idaho - All Nations LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Jerry McMurtry, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,074,990.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on PhD matriculation and completion.
BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher education
contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2018-2022 Strategic
Plan, namely to "foster the growth of a more capable and diverse research
workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the Nation." The
vision of this grant is to provide a national model to produce underrepresented
scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
performance site for this LSAMP BD Activity is the University of Idaho (UI), one
of the 35 college and universities included in the All Nations Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (ANLSAMP). The UI has its home on the
ancestral homelands of the Nez Perce people, and is in close proximity to the
traditional homelands of numerous Federally recognized Tribes both in Idaho and
in the Northwest. The uniquely positioned project will bring to the forefront
Indigenous values and ways of knowing to support Tribal sovereignty and self-
determination through developing and seeking to understand culturally responsive
educational pathways in which Indigenous scholars can thrive, from the
baccalaureate to doctoral degrees. The project will be grounded in the core
values of Indigenous methodologies for research, training and mentoring and
builds on the success of recruitment, mentoring, and community-building lessons
learned from ANLSAMP and campus programs which have demonstrated success with
Native American students. The program will solely support LSAMP Native American
students, which are historically underrepresented in the STEM disciplines, by
providing: 1) culturally responsive recruitment which is connected to existing
LSAMP and other Native American focused undergraduate programs and involves the
prospective students' whole community; 2) an intensive community-based
orientation to graduate school; 3) support for students financially and through
a culturally-responsive mentoring model; 4) activities designed to support
strong mentee/mentor relationship; 5) monthly seminars and professional training
and support for both students and their faculty mentors; and 6) culturally
responsive research projects grounded in an understanding of Indigenous
Knowledge and Western science. In due course, the model created and researched
through the ANLSAMP BD at UI will lead to a significant increase in Native
American PhDs entering academics, government, and the private
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.