* 1906787
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:   Role of early spontaneous neural activity in neocortical circuit assembly
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Sheenah Bryant, Bryant, Sheenah Lynn
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This project
aims at further understanding how adult behavior is shaped through events that
occur during brain development. These studies will include new and interesting
techniques that will manipulate early brain activity in mice. These NSF funds
are also being used to improve networking among underrepresented students
through development of an open access website which archives the achievements
and research interests of scientists from underrepresented groups. As a Native
American herself, the fellow will visit several tribal colleges to attract
Native American students into biology. Work throughout the project will engage
underrepresented students in numerous aspects of biology and science in general.

New bioluminescent optogenetics technology will be used to unravel the dynamic
interactions of subtypes of neurons underlying the wiring blueprint assembled
during distinct time windows in the developing brain. Bioluminescent
optogenetics utilizes light emitted from a luciferase, triggered in the presence
of a small molecule substrate, to activate a tethered light-sensing ion channel,
for rapid non-invasive manipulation of cell excitability. Using this tool, the
project will test the hypothesis that altering neural activity during early
postnatal development in genetically determined populations in the immature
cortex modifies synaptogenesis and circuit assembly, and consequently affects
circuit connectivity and behavior in the adult organism. Specifically, the
Fellow will utilize electrophysiological recordings in brain slices and in live
animals to: 1) characterize the functional changes resulting from induced
developmental hyperactivity throughout development and in the adult, 2) define
the role of layer-specific subtypes of pyramidal neurons in establishing neural
circuit trajectories, and 3) determine whether modulation of pyramidal activity
during distinct periods of postnatal development will have differential impacts.
The project includes wide-ranging training activities for the Fellow,
encompassing comprehensive training in scientific skills and concepts, research
communication, and development of professional skills. Furthermore, the Fellow
is taking on mentoring, teaching and outreach activities towards students from
underrepresented groups, particularly Native Americans, in order to promote
their recruitment and participation in biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.