* 1906890
* Extreme Metamaterial Lattices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Roderic Lakes, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 381,732.00

Spongy (cellular) materials are used for many purposes including seat cushions,
sponges for cleaning, protective gear such as helmets and athletic pads, for
flotation, and in lightweight panels in aircraft. The shape of the pores has not
traditionally been subject to control. Additive manufacturing (3D printing) has
recently allowed greater control over the shape of the microstructure in
cellular materials. Metamaterials are materials with unusual or extreme physical
properties. Among the first are the negative Poisson's ratio materials developed
in our laboratory. These materials expand when stretched in contrast to rubber
and common materials. Nevertheless, the freedom allowed by cellular
microstructure has not been substantially exploited. To expand the freedom of
design, this award supports fundamental research on the freedom associated with
material heterogeneity in spongy solids. Insights from this study are intended
to lead to superior materials that avoid concentration of stress around holes or
cracks. New materials are to be developed with unusual and extreme deformation
response to temperature and electric fields. We expect that the research to
provide synergism with other branches of study including materials science,
biomechanics, geomechanics and as well as nano-materials research. As with prior
projects, this award will allow undergraduate students and minority students to
participate in research and will facilitate incorporation of the fruits of
research in the educational mission of the university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current cellular solids, including truss lattices, have
been understood using classical elasticity which is now known to be overly
restrictive for such materials. A novel class of extreme lattice materials will
be designed, synthesized via additive manufacturing and experimentally
characterized. These heterogeneous materials will exhibit more freedom than
known materials. They will be inspired by generalized continuum concepts.
Materials will feature controlled nonlocality, immunity from stress
concentration, control of Poisson's ratio, piezoelectricity and thermal
expansion and multifunctional capacity. 3D materials will be designed for high
levels of piezoelectric and thermoelastic response. Materials exhibiting new
phenomena including electric field-twist coupling, squeeze-twist coupling and
temperature-twist coupling will be developed. The research is intended to
achieve better understanding of heterogeneous materials in the presence of
stress concentrations and to provide new tools to enable the synthesis of new
materials that are immune to stress concentration ands are expected to be
tough.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.