* 1906759
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Resurrecting natural history collections to assess evolutionary responses to climate change
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Kyle Christie, Christie, Kyle
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 11/30/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Understanding how organisms cope with environmental change is a
fundamental goal in biology, and one that is increasingly pressing in the arid
Southwestern U.S., where severe drought over the past several decades has
challenged organisms in unprecedented ways. There are generally two ways that
organisms can acclimate to a changing climate: Non-genetic changes and genetic
changes. Genetic changes are passed down across generations, allowing offspring
to be more successful in the future. This research will use preserved seed
collections, together with natural populations that have descended from these
same ancestors, to create an 'evolutionary time machine'. By resurrecting seeds
of dormant plant ancestors, and growing them together with their offspring under
common conditions, this research will expose evolution in action. Determining
whether adaptation can keep pace with a rapidly changing climate has major
implications for predicting the future of biodiversity, and the fate of
individual populations and species. This work will advance a basic understanding
of adaptation, and will also inform management decisions, promoting ecosystem
health and preserving biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In investigating
adaptation we are often limited to the endpoints of past processes, however
resurrection experiments allow us to leverage preserved propagules to quantify
evolutionary change across time. The fellow will resurrect dormant seeds of
Plantago patagonica, a widespread annual plant, from herbarium collections, and
will compare them to contemporary genotypes collected from the same locations in
a series of common gardens. By replicating resurrections across an environmental
gradient in northern Arizona, this work will simulate future drying and warming,
and will assess how patterns of local adaptation might constrain adaptive
potential. This framework facilitates an understanding of the role of gene by
environment interactions, and provides a framework for predicting future
responses to climate change. This work expands past resurrection implementations
by growing ancestors and descendants in natural field environments, across a
gradient of abiotic conditions, and by combining experimental data on phenotypic
responses with genetic data documenting the demographic implications of
selection. In addition to its contributions to basic science, this work will
promote a better understanding of evolutionary biology in the local community
through collaborations with a non-profit STEM center. The fellow will also lead
undergraduates and members of the community in collecting seeds for a seed bank
repository associated with the Southwest Experimental Garden Array; this effort
will foster an appreciation for local plant biodiversity, and will amass seed
resources from across a remarkable environmental gradient in northern Arizona to
be used for future local adaptation and resurrection
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.