* 1906708
* I Am a Scientist: Moving African American youth beyond participating in STEM activities to committing to a STEM identity
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Harrison Pinckney IV, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Adrienne Dixson
* 01/31/2023
* USD 299,788.00

Recognizing that race can influence African American youths' perception of which
academic disciplines and careers are available to them, this pilot study will
explore how African American youths' physical and social communities can be
leveraged to support the evolution of their STEM identity and their ability to
recognize their potential as scientists. Unfortunately, many of these youths
live in communities that are void of critical resources that research has
demonstrated time and time again are critical for success in STEM disciplines
and careers. This lived reality for many African American youth is the direct
result of long-standing disparities in access and opportunities, fueled by
racial socialization and biased institutional structures. This pilot will
empower youth to recognize these disparities and use science to provide
solutions. One perilous societal disparity experienced in many predominately
African American communities is the lack of access to fresh produce and healthy
food. As a mechanism for potential resolution, this project will consider the
utility of community gardens to address this important community need and as a
strategy to engage youth in STEM content and skill development. While this
notion is not novel to NSF, the intent to utilize an augmented reality (AR)
storytelling platform for data collection and project experiences is innovative.
This technology will also provide a space for participants to share their work
with each other and their broader communities. To our knowledge, this pioneering
approach has not been previously piloted in this context. In addition, the pilot
will engage multiple youth serving community-based organizations such as park
and recreation centers and faith-based organizations in this work, which is also
innovative. This is significant, as youth serving community-based organizations
are often play important role in the social, educational, and cultural lives of
youth and their families in communities. These organizations are often at the
heart of the community, figuratively and literally. If successful, this pilot
could be transformative and provide a strong basis to support similar work in
other communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the two-year project duration,
eighty African American youth ages 11 -14 will participate in the year-long
program, across three youth-serving, community-based organizations at four
sites. They will be exposed to relevant agricultural, geological, engineering
and technological content through a newly developed curriculum called
"Cultivating My Curriculum." Community mentors and undergraduate role models
will facilitate the instruction and hands-on experiences in the garden and with
the AR platform. A capstone event will be a held for the participants and
community to convene to learn more about the results of the pilot and share
recommendations with community leaders for improving the disparities identified
during the pilot. The research component will focus on: (a) the impact of the
sociocultural theoretical framework grounding the work on youths' STEM
identities, (b) the integration of the AR tool, and (c) mentorship. Formative
and summative evaluation will take place through focus groups, surveys,
journals, and youth storytelling. Ultimately, the project endeavors to advance
the narrative that African Americans are scientists and that science can be used
to improve the lives of African Americans and other groups challenged by
structural and racial disparities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This pilot study is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.