* 1906009
* Sustainable Triblock Copolymers with Supramolecular Interactions for Improved Performance
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2025
* Megan Robertson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2025
* USD 822,277.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our society's dependence on
petroleum feedstocks for polymers has drawbacks of a limited raw material
supply, generation of harmful environmental emissions and plastic waste, and
unpredictability in feedstock prices and availability. Though many prior studies
have developed routes to sustainable materials from a variety of resources such
as plant sugars, plant oils, plant terpenes, carbon dioxide, polysaccharides,
rosins, and microbial polyesters, challenges still persist in their broad
implementation in society. One significant challenge is that new polymers must
meet the performance and property expectations of existing materials in order to
be adopted. However, new polymers developed from sustainable sources are rarely
simple drop-in replacements for conventional polymers. The persistent challenge
that this project addresses is that many sustainable polymers have features
which significantly and adversely impact their properties and limit their use.
The knowledge developed in this project will provide a route to overcoming these
limitations, enabling the potential of widespread adoption in applications. This
project will also use outreach programs to cultivate knowledge among students
and the general public on the important role of polymers in society and their
environmental impacts. The Materials Day at UH program, providing opportunities
for hands-on laboratory experiences, will be expanded with new modules in
sustainable polymers. Undergraduate and graduate students will gain valuable
experiences through involvement in the research projects. Finally,
demonstrations on sustainable polymers will be developed for the Houston Energy
Day festival. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing advanced polymeric materials from
sustainable sources with superior physical properties and greater function is a
fundamentally important challenge in reducing the environmental impact of
polymers. Vegetable oils and their fatty acids are convenient sources for
polymers due to their wide availability, ease of functionalization, and lack of
toxicity. The long alkyl chains of the fatty acids comprising vegetable oils
have a large impact on the resulting polymer properties, which are tunable
through choice of vegetable oil feedstock. Unfortunately, polymers with bulky
constituents, such as the long alkyl side-chains of fatty acid-derived polymers,
typically exhibit poor mechanical performance due to lack of entanglements. In
this project, supramolecular interactions will be incorporated into the
vegetable oil-derived polymers as a route to improve their mechanical behavior.
The central hypothesis of this work is that the incorporation of supramolecular
interactions in sustainable triblock copolymers will lead to a new class of
sustainable materials with enhanced physical properties. Long-chain
poly(meth)acrylates will be modified with functional groups to promote hydrogen
bonding and ionic interactions. These materials will be incorporated as the
midblock of ABA triblock copolymers. The effective crosslink density and
viscoelastic properties of the materials will be quantified. Finally,
relationships between the strength, dynamics, and type of supramolecular
interactions and the polymer physical properties will be established. These
materials will be explored as thermoplastic elastomers, shape memory materials,
and self-healing materials. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.