* 1906494
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Deciphering the evolutionary dynamics of wild bees in a warming world
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Evan Kelemen, Kelemen, Evan Patrick
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The fellow is investigating the environmental causes of recent
decreases in animal body size. Across species and the globe, animal body size
has decreased suggesting a response to some major environmental change occurring
over the past 50-100 years. This research clarifies what environmental factor is
driving this decrease in body size by untangling the effects of two common
factors known to affect animal body size, temperature and resource abundance.
Additionally, while most studies have not considered if species have been
responding genetically to climate change, this study sheds light on whether
temperature or resource abundance is causing populations to evolve. Uncovering
what pressures organisms are responding to and how they are responding is
fundamental to our understanding of how organisms react to rapid environmental
change and will affect conservation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow is
combining museum specimens of the native bee Ceratina calcarata from the past
hundred years with climate and land use data to reconstruct how bee populations
have responded to environmental change. Since close populations have experienced
similar temperature but different land use regimes, a proxy for local resource
abundance, the fellow has the opportunity to uncouple the effect of temperature
and resource abundance on body size. The fellow is tracking the temporal changes
in body size among these populations to see if size correlates with the average
yearly temperature or the local resource abundance. The fellow is also using
comparative genomics of historical and recent populations to determine if
temporal and spatial changes in gene frequencies at areas of the genome
identified as being under selection correlate predictably with temperature or
resource abundance, indicative of adaptive evolution. The fellow is being
trained in molecular genetics and genomic methods, which will expand the
fellow's understanding of evolutionary genomics and complement the fellow's
background in evolutionary ecology and behavioral ecology. Additionally, the
fellow is mentoring graduate and undergraduate students in using biological
collections, experimental design, hypothesis testing, and manuscript preparation
and publishing, as well as developing inquiry-based science modules in
collaboration with local middle schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.