* 1906379
* WoU-MMA: The White Dwarf Mass Distribution and the Gravitational Wave Foreground from Double White Dwarfs
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Warren Brown, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 399,588.00

White dwarf (WD) stars are extremely compact objects that are the remnants of
stars of similar mass to the Sun, which have exhausted their nuclear fuel, but
shine for billions of years from their residual heat. A research collaboration
between the University of Oklahoma and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
will study the population statistics of WDs, with an emphasis on extremely low-
mass (ELM) double WDs, orbiting each other with periods as short as a few
minutes. These studies are very important for astrophysics, since double or
binary WDs are expected to be major sources of gravitational waves (GW) detected
by future space-based GW observatories such as the planned LISA mission. They
are also expected to eventually merge, leading to a stellar explosion or
supernova (SN), of Type Ia, an important type of supernova that is used to
measure the expansion rate of the universe. The investigators will use data from
the Gaia space mission to identify candidate ELM WDs, and then use ground based
telescopes to confirm the candidates and determine their characteristics. They
will also study the entire population of WDs of all masses within about 300
light years of Earth. This project will provide research opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students, including members of under-represented
groups. In conjunction with their research, the principal investigator and his
students will provide interactive demonstrations, lectures, question and answer
panels, and stargazing events to scout groups, middle and high school students,
and K-12 students from Cheyenne-Arapaho and other tribes across Oklahoma,
through the Lunar Sooners outreach group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using parallaxes
from the Gaia mission, ELM white dwarfs can be readily identified, since they
are over-luminous compared to average mass WDs. These WDs are the signposts of
ultra-compact binary systems with periods as short as 12 minutes. Finding such
binaries is important for near-term population synthesis studies, for
characterizing the expected GW foreground in the mHz frequency range from double
WDs, and for significantly increasing the number of LISA verification sources.
Well-measured WD binaries will be among the best Electromagnetic plus GW
laboratories for understanding the formation of compact objects, dynamical
interactions and tides in binaries, and energetic phenomena like Type Ia SNe.
The Gaia 100 pc WD sample is essentially complete but contains an unexpected
bifurcation in the color/absolute magnitude sequence that is mostly explained by
the atmospheric composition. However, the distribution of hydrogen atmosphere
WDs requires a population of massive (around 0.8-1 solar mass) WDs, which may be
linked to merging WD binaries. This project will obtain an unbiased WD mass
distribution and constrain the frequency of massive WDs. This project advances
the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.