* 1906623
* I-Corps:  Vivid Microscopy LLC: Imaging Thiols to Understand Oxidative Stress
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Daniel Sem, Concordia University Wisconsin, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will help
disease researchers better understand how oxidative stress impacts a variety of
disease states. Specifically, our products will show how illnesses such as
cancer and Alzehimer's progress over time and, most importantly, how to more
effectively treat these conditions. Preliminary research indicates one of our
proposed products can differentiate the effectiveness of a proposed Alzheimer's
drug, conduct protein studies that image dithiols and quantify oxidative stress
through a determination of glutathione. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is focused on ascertaining the marketability of these products within
the biotech research market, ascertaining market size and gaining a thorough
understanding of the competitive landscape of the oxidative stress market.
Through this understanding, we will insure that our products fill a market need
and, if necessary, can pivot to better tailor our products to customer need. As
this project offers the opportunity to improve oxidative stress research and
could also be used to differentiate disease states, the company's potential
products offer significant commercial and societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.