* 1906854
* Designing and Testing Companion Robots to Support Informal, In-home STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Bilge Mutlu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 316,000.00

Future educational robots are emerging as social companions supporting learning.
By socially interacting with such a robot, learners can potentially reason and
talk about the things they are learning and receive help in seeing the relevance
of STEM in their daily lives. However, little is known about how to design
educational robots to work with youth at home over a long period of time. This
project will develop an informal science learning program, called STEMMates, in
collaboration with a local community center, for youth with little interest in
science. The program will partner learners with an in-home learning companion
robot, designed to read books with youth and provide science activities for them
at the community center, where youth will engage in exciting and personally
relevant science learning. As the learner reads books, the robot will make
comments about what is happening in the book to help connect the reading to the
science activities at the community center. The overarching goals of STEMMates
are to: (a) positively support youth's individual interest in science and future
science learning, (b) connect in-home learning experiences with out-of-school
community-based learning, (c) bridge the gap between formal and informal
engagement and learning in science, and (d) encourage the participation of youth
who are underrepresented and who have low interest in STEM learning. This
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, which seeks
to advance new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and
development of STEM learning opportunities for the public in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will work with youth and staff at
the community center, alongside experts in informal science learning, to design
the program and then test how learners respond to reading with the robot and
participating in the science activities and whether this program has a lasting
impact on their science interest. Social interactions with a robot may help
distribute cognitive load during learning activities to help youth reason about
STEM and also supplement learning by improving feelings of value and
belongingness in order to facilitate lasting interest development. Following a
mixed-methods research approach using qualitative and quantitative data-
collection techniques, the research team will investigate the following research
questions: (1) What social and interest-development supports and activities can
be utilized as socially situated interest scaffolds in an informal and in-home,
augmented reading and science activity program to promote individual interest
and learning in science for low interest learners? How can a social robot best
facilitate this program? (2) How do learners perceive and interact with the
robot in authentic, in-home, long-term situations, and how does this interaction
change over time? (3) Does working with a robot designed with socially situated
interest scaffolds increase individual interest in science when compared to a
pre-intervention baseline, and do these effects impact future (long-term)
interest and engagement in formal science learning? To answer these research
questions, researchers will implement the science learning program during an
11-week summer deployment and utilize an AB single-case research design.
Interview-based qualitative data and self-report surveys to examine the
learner?s perception of the robot and their evolving interest in science and
quantitative data on science learning using pre-/post-measure comparisons will
be collected. Log data of time-on-task, reading rate, book selection and reading
goal attainment will also be collected by the robot. The outcomes of this
project will lay the groundwork for future investigations of the design of
social robots for a diversity of learner populations and their use in different
informal learning settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.