* 1906998
* The Circuit: A Platform for Increasing Access to, Deepening and Researching patterns of Family and Adult Participation in Informal Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Joe Heimlich, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,747,288.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. The project will research and develop the
Circuit, a mobile phone and web-based application that will empower families and
the general public to discover the broad spectrum of informal Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) opportunities that exist in most
communities. These informal STEM resources include science and children's
museums, science and computer camps, maker spaces, afterschool programs, citizen
science and much more. There is currently no "one-stop" searching for these
resources. Instead, participants must conduct multiple, inefficient Internet
searches to find the sought for STEM resources. The Circuit will enable users to
efficiently search a rich informal STEM database, identifying resources by
location, geography, age levels, science discipline, type of program and other
factors. The Circuit builds on SciStarter, an existing online platform that
connects thousands of prospective and active citizen scientists to citizen
science projects. SciStarter has made possible the collection and organization
of several thousand citizen science projects that would otherwise be scattered
across the web. The Circuit will build on SciStarter's technical achievements in
the citizen science sector, while systematically encompassing the offerings of
established national networks. By integrating existing networks of informal STEM
resources, the app will afford the public with unrivaled access to informal STEM
opportunities, while collecting data that reveals patterns of engagement towards
understanding factors of influence between different types of STEM experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The app will provide researchers with new opportunities
for researching how families and adults participate in the ecosystem of informal
STEM resources in their communities. The Circuit will develop web tools to
aggregate and organize digital content from trusted, currently siloed, informal
STEM networks of content providers. These include science festivals, science and
children's museums, the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS), and Discover Magazine (3 million readers), the largest general interest
science publication. Each content partner will feed the app with information
directly or through their membership and encourage adoption of The Circuit
within their respective communities. The project will design digital tools,
including APIs (application program interfaces) to acquire and share digital
content, embeddable tools to record and analyze data about movement, engagement,
and persistence across domains, and social media tools and related APIs to
distribute, track, and analyze content, engagement and demographics. (An API is
a code that allows two software programs to communicate with each other.) The
project will conduct small-scale, proof-of-conduct studies, to test the
viability of the platform to support future, independent full-scale research. An
analytics dashboard will be designed and tested with partners, researchers, and
evaluators to ensure access to data on patterns of visits, clicks, referrals,
searches, "joins," bookmarks, shares, contributions, user-locations,
persistence, and more, within and across domains. Because each partner will feed
their analytics into the shared dashboard, this will provide unprecedented and
much-needed data to advance research in informal STEM learning. The Circuit will
allow the tracking of patterns of engagement across networks and programs.
Anonymized analytics of behavioral data from end users of The Circuit will
support new approaches to advance evidence-based understanding of connected
informal STEM learning by exhibiting engagement patterns across informal STEM
domains. Through volunteer participation by the public, the Circuit will explore
the geographic and demographic patterns of participants in the system, and
derive important design lessons for its own and future efforts to create curated
systems of connected learning across STEM education in informal
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.