* 1906897
* Polar Literacy: A model for youth engagement and learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Janice McDonnell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,077,688.00

Polar Literacy: A model for youth engagement and learning will foster public
engagement with polar science. The project targets middle-school aged
underserved youth and polar research scientists, with the goal to increase youth
interest in and understanding of Polar Regions, and to hone researchers' science
communication skills. The project will develop affordable and replicable ways of
bringing polar education to informal learning environments, extend our
understanding of how polar education initiatives can be delivered to youth with
maximum effect, and design a professional development model to improve the
capacity for Polar Region researchers to craft meaningful broader impact
activities. Polar Literacy will create and test a model which combines direct
participation by scientists in after-school settings, with the use of curated
polar research data sets and data visualization tools to create participatory
learning experiences for youth. Beyond the life of the project funding, many of
the project deliverables (including kits, videos, and other resources) will
continue to be used and disseminated online and in person through ongoing work
of project collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polar Literacy: A model for youth
engagement and learning will advance the understanding of informal learning
environments while leveraging the rich interdisciplinary resources from polar
investments made by the National Science Foundation (NSF). The project's key
audiences -- polar researchers, informal educators, and out-of-school time (OST)
youth in grades 4-7 (ages 9-13) -- will connect through both place-based and
internet-based experiences and work collaboratively to generate a flexible,
scalable, and transferable education model. The project will 1) design OST kits
and resource guides (focused on Polar Literacy Principles) and include "Concept
in a Minute" videos designed to highlight enduring ideas, 2) provide
professional development for informal educators, 3) synthesize a club model
through adaptation of successful facets of existing informal learning programs,
and 4) create Data Jam events for the OST Special Interest (SPIN) clubs and camp
programs by modifying an existing formal education model. A research design,
implemented at four nodes over three years, will answer three research questions
to evaluate the impact of professional development on informal educators, as
well as the impact of programs on youth, and the effectiveness of the model. In
addition to the project team and collaborators who are informal education
practitioners, an advisory board composed of experts in youth programming,
informal education, and evaluation will guide the project to ensure that it
advances the body of informal STEM learning research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polar Literacy is an Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) Innovations in Development project in response to the Dear Colleague
Letter: Support for Engaging Students and the Public in Polar Research (NSF
18-103). Polar Literacy is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, Mathematics) learning in informal environments. This includes
providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants. This project has co-funding support from the Antarctic
section of the Office of Polar Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.