* 1906829
* OAC Core: Small: Collaborative Research: Scalable distributed algorithms for tree structured astronomical data
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Thomas Quinn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2023
* USD 145,817.00

Spatial astronomical data is often extremely large and it is highly non-
uniformly distributed. Algorithms that deal with such data have to be
parallelized over large distributed memory supercomputers to deal with its size.
The non-uniformity in the spatial distribution can be extreme, with some regions
of space having million times more particles than other similar size regions.
This creates significant challenges for scalable and efficient performance, as
well as for the productive programming of such algorithms. Yet, the field of
computational astronomy increasingly needs such scalable algorithms in the
coming era. The raw computing capability unleashed by modern PetaFLOP/s and
ExaFLOP/s computers, respectively, executing up to quadrillions and quintillions
of calculations per second, is making it potentially feasible to get answers via
simulations to some fundamental questions in the field, including those of
galaxy formation and the properties of dark matter and dark energy. As the Large
Synoptic Survey Telescope maps out the entire visible sky every few nights, it
is expected to generate more than 10 terabytes per day, and this data needs to
be analyzed in a timely fashion to fulfill its scientific goals of discovering
hazardous asteroids, new minor planets, and exploding stars. This project
provides new techniques and tools for researchers to use for high-performance
simulations of non-uniform data. This enables previously untenable computer
simulations to be done by astrophysicists, unlocking new insights and answering
questions about the nature of the cosmos. The results are also used as case
studies and educational material in classes taught by the investigators.
Additionally, the project aim to involve women and undergraduate students in
performing this research, continuing their experience of having done so in the
past. This project thus aligns with the NSF's mission: to promote the progress
of science and to advance the national health, prosperity and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims at developing novel parallel
algorithms, data structures, and application demonstrations for computational
problems involving data organized into hierarchical trees. A canonical example
of such a domain is astronomical data, where particles representing clustered
mass (stars or galaxies) are spread over the space of a simulation box or survey
field in a highly non-uniform manner. Organizing them into trees, with multiple
alternative tree organizations possible, including k-d trees, octrees, space-
filling-curve based trees, etc., allows the efficient computation of various
quantities such as gravitational forces, densities (and therefore
hydrodynamics), two-point or three-point correlations, etc. The optimum choice
of tree structure and algorithm depends both on the problem and the parameters
of the parallel machine. The research methods used will include complexity
analysis and, more significantly, empirical comparisons over a range of possible
application scenarios including particle distributions and classes of traversals
and algorithms. This will include formulation of algorithms and their
implementations on parallel machines. The main outcomes of this project will be
research papers describing effective algorithms and comparison and evaluation of
particle decomposition techniques and tree types. This project is funded by the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering and the Division of Astronomical Sciences in
the Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.