* 1906874
* Teen Science Cafes for Advancing STEM in Rural Places
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Janice Mokros, Science Education Solutions Inc
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,974.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. In this project,
Science Cafe's have emerged over the years as a useful mechanism for exposure of
scientific information to the public. More recently, this forum has been
successfully used as a communication mechanism for teens. While this mechanism
is successful with urban and suburban youth, it has not been efficacious with
rural teens. Thus, this project is designed to ferret out the challenges faced
by Teen Science Cafe's(TSCs) in rural settings and find ways to surmount them.
The long-term goal is to engage a large number of teens who will enter adulthood
as citizens with a sophisticated understanding of the science process and who
will follow a myriad of pathways into the U.S. STEM workforce. The research will
focus on what works, for whom, and where with respect to the key components and
outcomes of teen science cafe's in rural areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the
broadest level, the project will strengthen infrastructure and build capacity by
producing a national model for bringing OST (out of school time) STEM to rural
communities. Over the two project years, approximately 600 unique participants
will participate in teen science cafe's that engage their curiosity in STEM,
provide leadership opportunities, and make STEM occupations more visible,
participatory and approachable for rural teems who often lack access to high
quality STEM programs in school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals of the
project for rural settings are: (1) To test the feasibility and effectiveness of
a national model of professional development centered on an in-person and
virtual community of practice for informal STEM educators leading teen science
cafe's. (2) Form research-practice partnerships involving the PIs and the
leaders of cafe's to: i) identify and document existing local conditions,
resources, and challenges and their significance for OST STEM education; ii)
work collaboratively with peers and the PIs to systematically test new
strategies for engaging rural teens in TSCs; (3) Cultivate a mindset among teens
that STEM IS EVERYWHERE. Rural teens are often isolated and the STEM careers in
their communities are largely invisible to them. To date, 19 geographically and
demographically diverse active teen cafe's sites have committed to the project.
The PIs will use a multifaceted approach to characterizing rurality, They will
use the established Index of Relative Rurality (IRR) which includes four spatial
variables (remoteness, overall population size, density, and proportion of
built-up land). The impact of the Cafe's series at each site will be determined
via multiple methods, including: (1) pre-post-surveys with teens, employing the
measure of STEM attitudes and engagement; (2) detailed blog postings by adult
leaders describing the challenges/successes of teen and (3) interviews with
leaders to uncover their perceptions of the reasons associated with success of
the strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.