* 1906469
* Mechanobiological Activation of Latent TGF-beta in Intrinsic Repair of Musculoskeletal Tissues
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Michael Albro, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2023
* USD 481,045.00

The health of the musculoskeletal connective tissues of our body (cartilage,
tendons, ligaments) is highly dependent on the ability of their cells to
continuously maintain or repair the tissue structure. Surprisingly, there is
still a limited understanding of why these tissues are able to survive so
remarkably well for many decades in young individuals as well as why the tissue
is more likely to degenerate in older individuals or those exposed to abnormal
joint activities (e.g., athletes, those with physically intensive occupations).
This project investigates the existence of an intriguing molecular mechanism
that may account for the ability of musculoskeletal tissues to protect
themselves, even when faced with the challenging mechanical environment of
intense physiologic joint activity. The project will examine the ability of
mechanical joint activity to activate, or turn on, a powerful signaling molecule
called transforming growth factor beta (TGF-b) that resides inside all
musculoskeletal tissues in a latent (inactive) form. This TGF-b activation, in
turn, signals cells to generate more tissue proteins, leading to a critical,
need-based repair response. This mechanism may explain the resilience of
musculoskeletal tissues in young individuals as well as the degeneration that
comes with aging or excessive activity. This project expands upon the PI?s track
record of promoting research training for under-represented students at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. Further, the research will be incorporated
into education outreach modules that promote the field of mechanobiology to
under-represented K-12 student groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TGF-b-mediated
mechanobiological repair mechanism will be examined in an in vitro model,
consisting of the long-term mechanical stimulation of explanted tissues of
bovine articular cartilage. Using this model, the project will: 1) measure the
activation rate of latent TGF-b in response to varying physiologically
appropriate mechanical loading regimens; and 2) assess the role of
mechanobiological TGF-b activation in preserving the long-term integrity of
articular cartilage. The in vitro model will then be expanded to utilize human
articular cartilage explants of varying age ranges to assess the potential
efficacy loss of this mechanism with aging. This work can greatly expand our
knowledge of the factors that lead to musculoskeletal degenerative disorders and
potentially advance the development of unique tissue preservation or repair
strategies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.