* 1906951
* Collaborative Research: Water in the Four Corners Region: Libraries and Exhibits Connecting and Engaging Communities with Their Water Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Keliann LaConte, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 12/31/2023
* USD 384,940.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This project will engage community members and youth in 13 rural, tribal, and
Hispanic communities in the Four Corners Region of the south western U.S. with
the science and cultural assets of water. Water is a significant and scarce
resource in this geographic area. The Four Corners Region experiences low annual
precipitation and high year-to-year fluctuations in water availability. Thus,
water is a topic of great interest to community members, whose lives are shaped
by water-related events such as drought, flood, and wildfires. Rural tribal, and
Hispanic communities are often underserved with respect to science programming;
their public libraries often function as the local science center. The project's
inter-disciplinary team will develop, deploy, research, and evaluate an
interactive traveling exhibit for small libraries, designed around regional
water topics and complemented by interactive programming and community
engagement events. Additionally, the team will build local capacity by fostering
a community of practice among the host librarians, including participation
through a support system--the STAR Library Network--to increase their science
programming.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project creates a traveling exhibit and
complementary programming around water topics. Through an exhibit co-design
model, communities will provide input in the exhibit development, identify water
topics that are critical to them, and engage the multi-generational audiences.
The exhibit merges the captivating attraction of water with the underlying
science content and community context, giving patrons the opportunity to explore
these topics through active learning stations, informational panels, citizen
science-based activities, and an interactive regional watershed model. Artistic
representations of water will be developed by community groups and incorporated
into the exhibit as a dynamic display element. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
goals are to:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Spark interest in and increase understanding of
water as a critical resource and cultural asset across rural, tribal, and
Hispanic communities in the Four Corners Region.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Increase
availability of and access to engaging programming for underserved rural,
tribal, and Hispanic communities focusing on the science and cultural aspects of
water in the Four Corners Region.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Build capacity for libraries to
implement water-focused science programs, and increase available science
learning and science communication resources tailored to these informal learning
settings.&lt;br/&gt;(4 ) Foster a Community of Practice (CoP) for participating
librarians to support the development of their programming and content
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;(5) Advance the body of research on informal learning
environments and their role in developing community members' science ecosystems
and science identities, particularly in library
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will rigorously assess the
extent to which program approaches and components stimulate patrons' interest in
science, increase science knowledge, and support building a personal science
identity. The model is based on the STEM Learning Ecosystems Framework. Robust
evaluation will guide the program development through a front-end needs
assessment and iterative revision cycles of implementation
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.