* 1906094
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Leveraging Natural Variation to Understand Desiccation Tolerance in the Resurrection Plant Myrothamnus flabellifolia
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Rose Marks, Marks, Rose Anna
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2023
* USD 285,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2019. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Rose Marks is "Leveraging Natural Variation to Understand
Desiccation Tolerance in the Resurrection Plant Myrothamnus flabellifolia". The
host institutions for the fellowship are Michigan State University and the
University of Cape Town (South Africa) and the sponsoring scientists are Drs.
Robert VanBuren and Jill Farrant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants are threatened by
global change, increasing variability in weather patterns, and associated
abiotic stress. Water shortage, in particular, is a primary cause of
agricultural loss. In order to improve food security, it is critical that
strategies and new technologies be developed to enhance water-stress tolerance
in crops. This research project is based on the premise that naturally stress
tolerant plants comprise a rich source of information that can be mined for crop
improvement and bioengineering efforts. The goal of the project is to
comprehensively characterize the genetic, physiological, and ecological
mechanisms of tolerance in the extremely drought tolerant resurrection plant M.
flabellifolia. Broader impacts with respect to training and mentoring include
developing an international mentorship program in which students from both
Michigan State University and the University of Cape Town (UCT) will collaborate
in research activities under the guidance of the Fellow. Outreach activities
include a plan to increase cultural awareness and engage local communities in
the societal benefits of cultivating M. flabellifolia for its secondary
compounds of use in medicinal and cosmetic applications. Training objectives
include acquiring expertise in plant physiology, biochemistry, genomics, ecology
and quantitative genetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Desiccation tolerance is a form
of drought tolerance that enables tissues to recover from extreme drying (i.e.,
below an absolute water content of -100 MPa). Filling knowledge gaps in our
understanding of desiccation tolerance is an important step towards preventing
drought induced losses and ensuring global food security. The overall goal of
this project is to provide new insight into the cellular, molecular and
physiological mechanisms that underpin desiccation tolerance. Specific aims
include: 1) establishing a desiccation tolerance diversity panel in the unique
and understudied resurrection plant Myrothamnus flabellifolia; 2) characterizing
phenotypic differences in desiccation tolerance among M. flabellifolia
populations occurring along an extreme water availability gradient; 3)
characterizing photosynthetic responses to desiccation and protective secondary
metabolites to provide insight into the cellular and molecular basis for
variability in desiccation tolerance; and 4) generating sequence resources for
M. flabellifolia through transcriptome and genome sequencing for use in
identifying target loci for variation in drought response via eQTL association
mapping. All sequence data generated during the project will be made available
in the NCBI Short Read Archive (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/) for
archiving. All germplasm generated and/or used for these studies will be
maintained and stored at UCT and made available upon request. Voucher specimens
will be submitted to the Bolus Herbarium (www.bolus.uct.ac.za/) (South Africa).
In addition, experimental results generated from this project will be deposited
at the Figshare data repository (https://digitalscience.figshare.com/) and
disseminated through journal publications and presentations at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.