* 1906123
* Representation Stability in Topology and Arithmetic Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Jennifer Wilson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2023
* USD 204,621.00

This research project concerns investigating stability phenomena in the
algebraic structures of several families of fundamental objects that arise in
topology, algebra, and number theory. Specifically, the research will focus on
four families of objects. The first are the Torelli groups associated to the
mapping class groups of surfaces, which are basic objects in the study of
surface topology, encoding certain symmetries of a surface. The second are the
configuration spaces of points in a manifold, which are topological spaces that
parameterize collections of "particles" in a given space - these configuration
spaces have long history in algebraic topology, as well as more recent
connections to physics and robotics. The third are the congruence subgroups of
general linear groups, which play a role in algebra and number theory. Finally,
the fourth family of objects are the special linear groups, which play an
essential role throughout mathematics, and are of particular interest in number
theory. The PI will study certain algebraic invariants of these objects, called
homology or cohomology groups. Although these (co)homology groups cannot
currently be computed directly for these families of objects, the PI will use
tools from category theory and commutative algebra to detect patterns in these
groups, and study their long-term behavior. Torelli groups, configuration
spaces, congruence subgroups, and special linear groups each have a rich
literature around their stability behavior. This project will broaden the scope
of this literature, often by strengthening the algebraic machinery we have to
establish and to interpret stability patterns in more general
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on recent work
completed jointly by the PI. In work with Miller and Patzt, the PI proved a
central stability result for degree-2 homology groups of the Torelli groups of
genus-g punctured surface, and the analogous Torelli groups of the automorphism
groups Aut(F_n) of the free groups, which the PI plans to extend to higher
homological degree. The strategy is to realize these homology groups as modules
over certain categories, denoted SI(k) and VIC(k), which encode both symplectic
group actions (or general linear group actions in the case of Aut(F_n)) as well
as additional algebraic structure on these groups. The key to extending these
results will be to establish finiteness results for free resolutions of modules
over SI(k) and VIC(k). ?Representation stability? results are known for the
n-point configuration spaces of a manifold as n grows, and in work with Miller,
the PI established ?secondary? stability results among the unstable homology
groups in the configuration spaces of a surface. This appears to be a first
result in a much broader and richer pattern of higher-order stability phenomena
in configuration spaces of manifolds, which the PI will pursue. The PI will also
investigate whether secondary stability patterns hold in the homology of the
congruence subgroups GL_n(R,I) as n grows. Finally, the PI will study the
algebraic structure of the Steinberg representations of the special linear
groups SL_n(O) of a number ring O. These Steinberg representations govern the
rational cohomology of SL_n(O) in degrees close to the virtual cohomological
dimension. The PI will study these Steinberg representations by analyzing the
connectivity of certain associated simplicial
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.