* 1906166
* Development of a High-Speed and Full-Disk Polarimeter for Solar Synoptic Observations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Deqing Ren, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 334,707.00

Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) from the Sun are key causes of space weather and
solar storms. Such storms can damage satellites, disrupt radio communications
and create blackouts of electricity power grids. Studying the origins of these
events requires astronomical observations of the Sun, and measurements of
polarization across the solar disk. Conventional ground-based astronomical
observations cannot reliably measure such polarizations because the atmosphere
of the Earth changes from time to time. This project will develop a novel high-
speed polarimetry system that effectively freezes the atmospheric perturbations.
Resulting polarization measurements will enable studying the solar magnetic
fields that govern CMEs. This solar polarimetry system will have a broad
scientific impact. Full polarization images at high-speed over the full solar
disk on an all-day basis are highly needed by the scientific community. They
will benefit society by enabling improved understanding of space weather.
California State University, Northridge is an eligible Research in Undergraduate
Institution (RUI) as well as a minority serving institution. The instrument
developed here will serve as a long-term platform to support the training and
research of minority and other students in their early scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar CMEs are often associated with pre-existing
prominences. The determination of the magnetic field in the solar chromosphere
before, during, and after a CME event will enable understanding the conditions
that trigger CMEs, and the magnetic field properties of the ejected material.
This polarimetry system will consist of a telescope with a diameter at least
235mm, a tunable Fabry-Perot interferometer, a high-speed polarimeter, and a
sCMOS camera. It will provide a large field of view that covers the entire solar
disk and it will enable all-day observations. This system will provide the full
polarization images in the H-alpha and He D3 lines to infer the chromospheric
magnetic field in CME precursors, prominences, or whole active
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.