* 1906286
* Collaborative Research: Streams of Data: Nurturing Data Literacy in Young Science Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Edward Robeck, American Geological Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2024
* USD 491,930.00

Streams of Data: Informing Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
Curriculum Design Through a Study of How Elementary Students Make Meaning of
Professionally Collected Real-World Data&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Data literacy is
essential for working with scientific data sets, but educators know very little
about how to prepare students for the issues involved in making appropriate
inferences from data. This need is compounded by the fact that studies that
exist have worked with data sets that students themselves collected, whereas the
many electronic data sets, proliferating in the public domain, pose different
challenges. This project will develop and study an approach to support fourth
grade students' data literacy with complex, large-scale, professionally
collected data sets. The work will focus on analytical thinking as a subset of
data literacy, specifically evaluating and interpreting data. The project will
teach students about working with geoscience data, which connect to observable,
familiar aspects of the natural world and align with Earth science curriculum
standards. An interdisciplinary team of educators, researchers, and scientists
from the Oceans of Data Institute at Educational Development Center and the
American Geological Institute will (1) conduct baseline research to understand
students' natural affinities for understanding inference from complex data and
phenomena; (2) develop and test scaffolding activities that leverage students'
intellectual assets and minimize barriers to analytical thinking with
professionally collected data; and (3) examine the degree to which the resulting
activities support students to do productive work with professionally collected
data. In developing an instructional approach, the project informs generally how
professionally collected, scientific data can be used to support elementary
students to develop data literacy skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesizing
that science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education
generally can benefit from the instructional use of complex, large, interactive,
and professionally-collected (CLIP) data sets (e.g., related to precipitation,
stream flow, and groundwater levels), this study will explore approaches to
integrating those data into fourth grade classroom instruction. The research is
based on a premise that students who engage with CLIP data early in their
classroom STEM experiences will develop skills and attitudes that promote
meaningful analyses of those data earlier than if that exposure is delayed until
secondary courses. The project will use a three-phase iterative design that will
unfold in three urban and suburban school districts in Virginia and Maryland.
Phase one will focus on creating a baseline of the reasoning students employ
when making inferences from data. It will involve 45 students from grades 3-5 in
targeted interviews, which will be recorded, transcribed and analyzed. Phases
two and three will focus on design and development in grade 4. Phase two will
develop and test activities through an iterative design plan that employs a
semi-clinical method with small groups of students. Phase three will implement
the activities that result from that process in six classrooms across three
districts with approximately 150 students. A scoring rubric that captures
student learning will be constructed in phase two and used to measure impacts of
the field testing in phase three. Observations and interviews will also be
conducted at field sites to understand what students learn about analytical
thinking from the activities. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.