* 1906060
* Processing-body dynamics and mRNA regulation in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jyan-Chyun Jang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,249,596.00

This project explores how a specialized cellular structure termed the P-body is
involved in gene regulation, elicited upon plant pathogen infection to provide a
means for hosts to launch a prominent layer of defense response. Cellular signal
transduction consists of a coordinated series of molecular events that is
pivotal for regulation of gene expression, and thus is essential for all
organisms to survive. Perception of pathogen attack elicits robust plant immune
responses at the cellular level, including rapid and profound alterations in the
expression of specific genes. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the
role of various RNA regulations in the immune response is currently unclear.
This project addresses such critical gaps by deciphering the role of the P-body
in messenger RNA regulation. This question will be addressed through an
integrated systems approach in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. These
activities will provide research training for two undergraduate students, three
PhD students, and two postdoctoral researchers, as well as outreach activities
such as an annual workshop. Besides advancing fundamental understanding of
cellular dynamics, signal transduction and gene regulation, new high-throughput
methods will be developed that have the potential to be applied in other topics
of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypotheses to be tested are formulated
based on recent preliminary results indicating that P-body assembly plays an
important role in plant immunity. Genetic, molecular, and biochemical approaches
in Arabidopsis will be employed, including a state-of-the-art method to identify
RNA elements bound by a central P-body component, the TZF1 tandem CCCH zinc
finger protein. The first set of experiments will test if P-body dynamics
functions as a highly regulated process in orchestrating gene expression at the
post-transcriptional level during plant biotic stress responses. By performing
time-course kinetic analyses, it is expected to reveal the mechanisms by which
P-body dynamics modulates mRNA fates in balancing host growth and stress
adaptation. The second set of experiments aims to elucidate the mechanism by
which TZF1 targets and regulates mRNA stability. Because the TZF gene family is
involved in a plethora of plant growth and stress responses, global
identification of TZF1 mRNA targets and cognate recognition motifs will help
establish predictive models for TZF family protein-mediated RNA regulation in
other plant species. Therefore, this project will reveal the mechanisms by which
P-body modulates mRNA regulation, and contribute to a general understanding of
stress signaling, particularly via intricate interfacing with post-
transcriptional and translational regulatory network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award was co-funded by the Cellular Dynamics and Function and Genetic Mechanisms
clusters of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.