* 1906323
* RUI: Knots in Three-Dimensional Manifolds: Quantum Topology, Hyperbolic Geometry, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Helen Wong, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 11/30/2023
* USD 229,315.00

This project is split into two different areas of research concerning a field of
mathematics called topology, which studies the properties of objects that remain
the same even when they are twisted or deformed continuously. One direction
relates to quantum physics, and the other to molecular biology. In 2016,
physicists won the Nobel Prize for applying topology to research in condensed
matter physics, and the underlying mathematical framework is called a
topological quantum field theory (TQFT). The first part of the project focuses
on topological constructions from TQFTs and conjectures about them. The PI aims
to further advance the basic understanding of the connections between the
mathematical and the theoretical physical sides of the subject. This work may be
relevant to practical applications, such as the theoretical foundations and
development of a topological quantum computer. The second part of the project is
about the topology of proteins, which are long and flexible enough to exhibit
knotting or linking. It is believed that such topological characteristics affect
a protein's functionality, which is governed by its three-dimensional placement.
However, little is known about how the proteins fold into a knotted state, and
this project analyzes theories of protein folding from a topological viewpoint.
In particular, knotted proteins are implicated in neurodegenerative disorders
like Parkinson's and are found in bacteria used for bioremediation; a better
understanding of the molecular knotting mechanism may lead to novel ways to
target topological characteristics which affect specific biological functions.
The award also supports undergraduate students participating in this
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research in quantum topology
centers around the Kauffman bracket skein algebra of a surface, especially its
representations. The skein algebra is related to quantum constructions, such as
the Jones polynomial and the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev topological quantum field
theory, as well as hyperbolic geometric constructions, particularly the
SL(2,C)-character variety. The research will explore this relationship, and to
exploit it for better understanding other invariants in geometric topology. With
similar aims, the project also investigates recent generalizations of the skein
algebra that includes arcs. In the second line of research, techniques from
topology will be used to analyze evidence from laboratory and computer
simulation experiments about knotted proteins, in order to develop new theories
for how proteins might fold into a knotted configuration. The theoretical
folding pathways can then be compared against widely available structural data
in order to identify the most likely folding pathways for specific families of
proteins. Thus, while providing valuable insights into folding pathways for all
knotted proteins, this research aims to simplify the analysis for molecular
biologists studying specific knotted proteins as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.