* 1906321
* Using Conversational Agents to Foster Preschool Children's Science Learning and Engagement from Interactive Science Videos
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Mark Warschauer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Science television shows are an important source of informal learning and
enrichment for preschool-aged children. However, one limitation of television
programming is that it is largely a one-way, non-interactive medium. Research
suggests that children learn best through active engagement with content, and
that parents can make TV watching more interactive by co-viewing and talking
with their children. However, many parents and other adults may lack the time or
experience and comfort with science language and content to provide critcial
just-in-time support for their children. This study seeks to take advantage of
recent advances in artificial intelligence that now allow children to enjoyably
interact with automated conversational agents. The research team will explore
whether such conversational agents, embedded as an on-screen character in a
science video, can meaningfully interact with children about the science content
of the show by simulating the benefits of co-viewing with an adult. If
successful, the project could lay the foundation for a new genre of science
shows, helping transform video watching into more interactive and engaging
learning experiences. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop interactive videos incorporating a conversational agent in
three 11-minute episodes of a future children's animated television program. The
videos will enable children to speak with the main character of the show as the
character solves everyday science mysteries, thus priming children to engage in
observation, prediction, pattern finding, and problem solving through scaffolded
conversation. This study will be carried out in two iterative cycles with the
goal of developing and testing the embedded conversational function for each
episode. In each cycle, the project team, which includes experts in children's
TV production, as well as educational and HCI researchers will develop the
storyboard and conversation prompts and follow-ups, create animated videos based
on the revised script, and create a mobile application of the interactive video
integrated with the conversational agent. Field testing with 10 children will be
conducted to iteratively improve the embedded conversational function. In the
pilot testing stage, a controlled study will be conducted with 30 children in
each group (N=120): 1) watching the episode with the embedded conversational
function; 2) watching the episode with a human partner carrying out the dialogue
in the script rather than the virtual character; 3) watching the episode with
pseudo-interaction, in which the animated character asks questions but does not
attempt to understand or personally respond to children's answers; and 4)
watching the episode with no dialogue. Data collected from the experiments will
be used to examine whether and in what ways use of a conversational agent
affects children's engagement, attention, communication strategies, perceptions,
and science learning, and whether these effects vary by children's age, gender,
socioeconomic status, language background, and oral language proficiency in
English. The project will provide a comprehensive evaluation of the feasibility
and potential of incorporating conversational agents into screen media to foster
young children's STEM learning and engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.