* 1906181
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Mammals in the water: the loss of mastication in marine carnivores
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Carlos Peredo, Peredo                  Carlos         M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Marine mammals
represent textbook examples of the fossil record documenting major physical
transformations driven by changing ecology through time. To facilitate their
transition from life on land to in the water, marine mammals undergo major
shifts in feeding strategies. Carnivorous marine mammals lack the specialized
molars adapted for chewing: a hallmark of land mammals. Instead, they have
reduced or absent teeth. Does the return to a marine environment select for a
reduction and loss of dentition in carnivorous mammals? Is chewing inefficient
or ineffective for underwater feeding? This project will study feeding examples
across the land to sea transition for carnivorous mammals to understand how
changes in environment drive changes in dentition. The fellow will work with the
University of Michigan Museum of Paleontology to showcase feeding diversity in
marine mammals. The fellow will mentor students from underrepresented groups and
produce bilingual educational materials for teaching the evolution of marine
feeding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mammals returning to the ocean undergo dramatic
morphological changes akin to scales to feathers in dinosaurs and fins to limbs
in tetrapods. This research addresses large-scale questions about selective
pressures on mammalian feeding systems and will identify the ecological drivers
behind the loss of mastication: a critical precursor to more specialized feeding
strategies (suction, piercing, and filter-feeding). This study will: perform
shape analyses of teeth to quantify the diversity of dental phenotypes and
identify instances of simplification (objective-1); conduct puncture tests to
measure the performance of specific dental morphologies (objective-2); and place
these results in an evolutionary context using time calibrated phylogenetic
analyses (objective-3). It will test the following hypotheses: (H1) cetaceans
and pinnipeds converge on overlapping dental phenotypes; (H2) both clades
independently simplify and reduce their dentition through time; (H3) each dental
phenotype is capable of effective mastication; (H4) the loss of mastication is
temporally linked to the reduction and/or simplification of teeth; and (H5) the
loss of mastication is an evolutionary adaptation for marine feeding. This
research will integrate fossil and modern data to link specific morphologies to
ecological performance, which is critical to understanding the evolution of
complex structures from simple elements. The fellow will mentor students from
underrepresented groups and produce bilingual educational materials for teaching
the evolution of marine feeding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.