* 1906246
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The evolution of gene expression in Sccharomyces cerevisiae experimental evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Mark Phillips, Phillips                Mark           A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2021
* USD 155,250.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Understanding
the genetics that determine how organisms adapt to a changing environment is a
challenging problem in evolutionary biology, but essential for predicting future
evolutionary change. The Fellow will use laboratory evolution experiments to
determine the long-term evolutionary response of yeast populations, reproducing
in different ways, when exposed to environmental stressors. To increase
participation from members of underrepresented groups in biology, the Fellow
will conduct workshops in collaboration with the Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) at Oregon State University to train
undergraduates from such groups in computational methods common in biological
data science.

Findings from laboratory evolution experiments suggest a fundamental difference
in the genetics of adaptation between populations of organisms that reproduce by
mitosis or budding versus those that involve meiosis. Adaptation in the former
is fueled by de novo beneficial mutation, while standing genetic variation
drives the process in the latter. Experimental study systems involving meiosis
are required to model evolutionary change in higher eukaryotic organisms using
this mode of reproduction. However, experiments that feature such systems are
limited by scale; carrying out powerful experiments is difficult with complex
eukaryotes. Thus, there is a need for large, highly-replicated experiments that
feature reproduction involving meiosis. In addition, despite strong evidence
that changes in gene regulation drive adaptation to selective pressures,
laboratory evolution experiments rarely feature gene expression assays. The
Fellow seeks to address these gaps with evolution experiments employing
Saccharomyces cerevisiae to address the following questions: (1) How repeatable
is the evolutionary response across a range of selective pressures? (2) How do
patterns of gene expression change across different stages of adaptation? And
(3) What are the relative contributions of changes in cis and trans regulation
in driving adaptation? The Fellow will recruit students from OSU's LSAMP program
to contribute to this research endeavor as a means of further promoting the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.