* 1906883
* I-Corps: Advanced Ultrasonic Imaging for Medical and Non-Destructive Testing Applications
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Jeroen Tromp, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a next-generation, high-resolution ultrasonic imaging technique
for medical and non-destructive testing applications. This technique will
improve on existing imaging technologies by enabling highly detailed physical
and spatial properties of the imaged material to be determined, beyond what is
currently capable from ultrasound, X-Rays or MRI. This will enhance the
capability of medical and non-destructive imaging technologies, for example, by
allowing more accurate identification and diagnoses of tumor tissues in medical
scans, or improving the identification of defects in manufactured parts.
Combined with the benefits of ultrasound, in particular, safety, speed,
portability, patient comfort, and cost, this technology has potential for broad
impact. Commercially, the technology will enable medical practitioners to make
diagnoses faster and with higher accuracy. This will allow earlier and more
precise identification of tumors, reducing the number of false positives and
follow-up procedures. This will ultimately increase diagnostic efficiency,
reduce costs and improve patient outcomes. In a non-destructive testing
application, this technology will enable imaging detail that was previously only
available with more expensive and time-consuming techniques such as
X-Rays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project combines techniques from the
fields of ultrasonic imaging and the geosciences to significantly improve
existing mm- to cm-scale imaging technologies. The technology adapts an advanced
geophysical imaging method known as full waveform inversion (FWI) for medical
and non-destructive testing purposes. Full waveform inversion is conventionally
applied for imaging the earth?s structure and to discover oil and gas
reservoirs. Instead of applying the technique at seismic scales (m to km), the
company applies it at the ultrasonic scale (mm to cm) to generate high-
resolution 3-dimensional images with embedded physical properties. Research is
focused on both software and hardware development. Software algorithms are being
developed which construct images from ultrasonic measurements within seconds to
minutes. This is enabled through the use of cutting-edge, highly efficient
algorithms and high-performance computing infrastructure. Research and
development of prototype hardware is also being undertaken, necessary for
generating high-quality ultrasonic data for input into the imaging algorithms.
To-date, rapid, high-resolution 2- and 3-dimensional image construction using
full waveform inversion techniques has been demonstrated on a range of
?synthetic? ultrasonic-scale objects. This demonstrates that images can be
quickly generated, containing a full range of material properties including
material density, stiffness and attenuation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.