* 1906215
* Workshop and Conference Travel: 2018 Winter Simulation Conference; Gothenburg, Sweden; December 9-12, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2020
* John Fowler, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2020
* USD 5,000.00

The objective of this award is to support the attendance of Ph.D. students at
the 2018 Ph.D. Colloquium and Winter Simulation Conference. The Winter
Simulation Conference is a leading international conference in the field of
simulation and is widely attended by researchers from all over the world. This
award will support the participation of graduate students who will become the
next generation of leaders in the simulation community. Participation in
international scientific discussion forums is an important mechanism in building
a mature workforce in scientific research, and this award will enable
interaction of emerging U.S. scholars with their counterparts and senior
researchers from Europe and elsewhere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Colloquium and
Conference will be held at the Swedish Exhibition and Congress Center in
Gothenburg, Sweden, from December 9-12, 2018. The Colloquium is organized by
four leading simulation researchers and provides attendees the opportunity to
present their research and to interact with senior researchers from both
academia and industry. Workshop organizers will include the broadest possible
group of highly qualified Ph.D. students for support and will particularly
identify candidates from underrepresented STEM groups and from non-Research 1
institutions. The workshop will be broadly promoted through major professional
societies and list serves, such as the Institute for Operations Research and the
Management Sciences (INFORMS), the IEFac.list, the Simulation Society Discussion
Board, and the Winter Simulation Conference mailing
list.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.