* 1906003
* Investigating coherence of electrons on helium  with cavity quantum electrodynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* David Schuster, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 04/30/2024
* USD 510,000.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Electrons have a unique interaction with liquid
helium. Like mythological Narcissus, they are attracted to their own image, but
they are prevented from entering the liquid. The competing forces, along with
the quantum fluctuations cause the electrons to levitate several nanometers
above the surface, where they form a pristine two-dimensional electron gas. The
electrons are manipulated using electrodes underneath the surface to control
their motion and eventually their spin. The electrons are promising candidates
as qubits for quantum information processors and the research team is also
investigating unique quantum many-body states they form known as Wigner
molecules. Despite being one of the first discovered two-dimensional electron
systems,there have been no detections or other studies of their spin properties.
The team is using recently developed single electron motion and spin resonance
techniques to perform these fundamental measurements. The project is developing
a unique hybrid quantum system, in which electrons on helium interact with high
finesse superconducting circuits, that can manipulate both single electrons and
microwave photons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Electrons on helium present unique opportunities to study
the dynamics individual electrons, their spins, and the excitations of
superfluid thin films. This research will explore the extreme mobility and long
coherence of this two-dimensional electron system using a novel cavity QED based
architecture. This allows the project to leverage the past decade worth of
advances in service of quantum information to study the fundamental excitations
of this system. Similarly, electrons on helium themselves may have properties
uniquely well-suited to quantum information and sensing applications. The motion
of an electron on helium is very analogous to that of a superconducting qubit,
so many of the same techniques can be used to interrogate them, which should
allow coherent manipulation of their motion for the first time. This would be a
unique type of cavity QED system that would allow one to gain insight into the
properties and interactions of this unique two-dimensional electron system. The
project is attempting to detect and achieve strong coupling to a single trapped
electron. In addition, the team will build Wigner molecules by adding or
removing individual electrons to a pool of helium. A single electron on helium
will be trapped and coupled to the superconducting cavity. Calculations predict
that this system will reach the strong coupling limit of cavity quantum
electrodynamics (QED) where the electron can interact coherently with single
photons. This is the first investigation of coherent properties of an isolated
electron on helium. The spin properties of a single trapped electron are also
being studied, and it appears possible that it too may reach the strong-coupling
limit, where the spin-photon coupling exceeds the all relevant decoherence
rates, and single photon storage and manipulation become possible. Measurements
of the spin coherence times will reveal information about the magnetic
environment as well as the electron-helium
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.