* 1906686
* Hidden No More:  Shedding Light on Science Stories in the Shadows
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jill Hamm, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,861,646.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. There is a dearth of prominent STEM role
models for underrepresented populations. For example, according to a 2017
survey, only 3.1% of physicists in the United States are Black, only 2.1% are
Hispanic, and only 0.5% are Native American. The project will help bridge these
gaps by developing exhibits that include simulations of historical scientific
experiments enacted by little-known scientists of color, virtual reality
encounters that immerse participants in the scientists' discovery process, and
other content that allows visitors to interact with the exhibits and explore the
exhibits' themes. The project will develop transportable, interactive exhibits
focusing on light: how we perceive light, sources of light from light bulbs to
stars, uses of real and artificial light in human endeavors, and past and
current STEM innovators whose work helps us understand, create, and harness
light now. The exhibits will be developed in three stages, each exploring a
characteristic of light (Color, Energy, or Time). Each theme will be explored
via multiple deliveries: short documentary and animated films, virtual reality
experiences, interactive "photobooths," and technology-based inquiry activities.
The exhibit components will be copied at seven additional sites, which will host
the exhibits for their audiences, and the project's digital assets will enable
other STEM learning organizations to duplicate the exhibits. The exhibits will
be designed to address common gaps in understanding, among adults as well as
younger learners, about light. What light really is and does, in scientific
terms, is one type of hidden story these exhibits will convey to general
audiences. Two other types of science stories the exhibits will tell: how
contemporary research related to light, particularly in astrophysics, is
unveiling the hidden stories of our universe; and hidden stories of STEM
innovators, past and present, women and men, from diverse backgrounds. These
stories will provide needed role models for the adolescent learners, helping
them learn complex STEM content while showing them how scientific research is
conducted and the diverse community of people who can contribute to STEM
innovations and discoveries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project deliverables will
be designed to present complex physics content through coherent, immersive, and
embodied learning experiences that have been demonstrated to promote engagement
and deeper learning. The project will research whether participants, through
interacting with these exhibits, can begin to integrate discrete ideas and make
connections with complex scientific content that would be difficult without
technology support. For example, students and other novices often lack the
expertise necessary to make distinctions between what is needed and what is
extra within scientific problems. The proposed study follows a Design-Based
Research (DBR) approach characterized by iterative cycles of data collection,
analysis, and reflection to inform the design of educational innovations and
advance educational theory. Project research includes conceiving, building, and
testing iterative phases, which will enable the project to capture the
complexity of learning and engagement in informal learning settings. Research
participants will complete a range of research activities, including focus group
interviews, observation, and pre-post assessment of science content knowledge
and dispositions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By showcasing such role models and
informing about related STEM content, this project will widen perspectives of
audiences in informal learning settings, particularly adolescents from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields. Research findings and methodologies will be
shared widely in the informal STEM learning community, building the field's
knowledge of effective ways to broaden participation in informal science
learning, and thus increase broaden participation in and preparation for the
STEM-based workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.