* 1906416
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Untangling the evolutionary and ecological mechanisms that shape gut microbiomes: Integrating behavior, microbes, and ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Lydia Greene, Greene, Lydia Kathryn
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The gut microbiome is the community of bacteria that lives in
an animal's gastrointestinal tracts. The microbiome helps shape the lives of
their hosts across days, seasons, lifetimes, and generations. Captive wildlife,
like those housed at zoos or research facilities, provide the opportunity to
explore how the gut microbiome is controlled; however, compared to laboratory
models, they remain untapped resources. The Biological Collections at the Duke
Lemur Center (DLC), including a living primate colony and a tissue bank, are
well suited to microbiome research. The fellow will use these biological
collections to test how diet, and the specific consumption of foliage, shape the
gut microbiome across leaf eaters, fruit eaters, and omnivores in primates.
Ultimately, the value of this project is twofold: (1) It will create knowledge
about what controls the gut microbiome in primates, with potential applied value
to human healthcare and wildlife conservation; and (2) Through diverse
sponsorship, the project will stimulate dialogue across scientific disciplines
and will lead to the development of resources for the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use Biological Collections to
test the hypothesis that, compared to other feeding strategies, folivory more
strongly drives host-microbiome coadaptation. In three studies, the fellow will
probe how foliage consumption differentially drives gut-microbiome dynamics
across folivorous, omnivorous, and frugivorous lemurs. Whereas the first study
uses banked samples to compare microbiota along the species' gastrointestinal
tracts, the second and third studies use the living colony, with study two
asking how free-choice foraging shapes feeding and microbial ecology across
seasonal scales, and study three using dietary manipulations to determine how
cellulose and tannins regulate communities across daily scales. In addition to
standard microbiome methods, during training residencies with sponsors Clayton
and Eley, the fellow will develop metrics of dietary reconstruction from fecal
samples via chloroplast sequencing, isotopic and wax-alkane analysis, and of
microbiome dynamics via anaerobic and experimental culturing. The project is
expected to yield research and review-style publications, and methodological
descriptions. The fellow will mentor undergraduates throughout and work with the
Duke Lemur Center's Education and Communication departments to create new
materials for school children, the general public, and the social-media
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.