* 1906144
* NEON Science Summit:  Initiating grassroots research communities through an 'unconference'; Summer/Fall; Boulder, Colorado
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2021
* Jennifer Balch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 01/31/2021
* USD 99,957.00

Funding is provided to the University of Colorado - Boulder for a workshop
intended to assemble users of NEON data in an effort to stimulate research
collaborations across NEON data themes and initiate the building of a 'NEON User
Community.' An actively engaged NEON user community will stimulate and
coordinate wider community interest around the research use and wider societal
benefits of the Observatory.

A workshop utilizing the 'unconference' model aims to have participants identify
near- and long-term collaborative opportunities to utilize NEON infrastructure
and data. Both NEON infrastructure and data will provide the context for the
generation of novel, exciting, collaborative research. The workshop will
contribute to the building of the community of NEON users. The participant
recruitment plan presented enhances the assembly of a diverse group of NEON
users by targeting different career stages, research foci, and types of academic
institutions, among other demographic traits. The organizers for this
'unconference' will expand participation beyond the 100 selected attendees by
encouraging remote attendance. Essentially, the workshop seeks to assemble
current users of NEON and provide the foundation for building the community of
future users.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.