* 1906556
* Addressing Societal Challenges through STEM (ASCs): A Research Synthesis
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Kristine Morrissey, Knology Ltd.
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 248,792.00

Informal STEM Learning (ISL) organizations have increasingly engaged in
innovative ways to present STEM knowledge within the context of societal
challenges. For almost every major societal issue -- from biodiversity
conservation to cybersecurity, from considering how robotics will change the
ways we live, to genetic engineering or to coastal resilience and food security
-- there is a science center, national park, natural history museum, a zoo, or
an aquarium hosting an exhibit or citizen science project, convening a dialogue
program, or planning a community initiative related to that topic. What have we
learned from these efforts? What do we know about how ISLs are engaging with and
addressing socio-scientific concerns? Where are the gaps in understanding about
what works and what doesn't? For example: Is STEM knowledge more approachable
when situated within a social question? Are socio-scientific concerns more
approachable when viewed through a STEM lens? Are there heuristics or guiding
principles that can maximize the impact of these efforts? With increasingly
sophisticated methodologies for conducting research syntheses, it is now
possible to mine disparate studies, explore relationships between variables, and
examine trends within and across groups of studies. Taking the opportunity to
aggregate what we know is critical for improving public audience experience and
institutional outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For purposes of this research,
societal challenge is defined as a social problem where: STEM knowledge and
scientific reasoning are necessary to understand and to respond; and there are
claims or warrants for ISL's to engage in the problem. Three bodies of peer and
field reviewed literature (peer-reviewed journals, graduate theses, and
evaluation reports of nationally-funded projects) provide the source for studies
to be included in the research synthesis. The team's approach contains several
cycles starting with a search by combinations of keywords (e.g. cybersecurity,
coastal resilience, social problems, social issues, science controversies,
public polls) and a review of the Table of Contents of approximately 30 journals
(such as Curator: The Museum Journal, Museums &amp; Social Issues, or Visitor
Studies) and archives (such as informalscience.org) that publish or archive ISL
research. Subsequent cycles will (1) search journals cited from initial items
retrieved until no new concepts or projects emerge; (2) review grants awarded
through NSF and IMLS; and (3) examine peer-reviewed articles related to projects
that may show up in the literature of other disciplines. Studies will be
classified using a scheme that includes metadata (date, source of publication
and keywords) and categories suggested by the research questions (e.g., intended
audience, STEM discipline(s), types of impact, intervention format, societal
issue). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next, studies will be assessed for inclusion in
the analysis by evaluating their relevance (sources and evidence of claims),
usefulness (contains adequate information for analysis purposes), and clarity of
methodology(ies) used. NVIVO software will be used to manage the analysis of the
literature. The coding system will draw on theoretical constructs (e.g., social
phenomenology, issues framing, rhetoric, social problems claims), the research
questions, and iterations of mapping and exploring the literature. Advisors with
expertise in socio-scientific research, public engagement with science, and
evaluation will review and inform the coding plan; an external panel will assist
in finalizing the coding plan. Descriptive and correlational analysis will be
conducted to identify patterns, themes, and trends and to examine relationships
between groups of data. The interpretation process will involve the PIs and the
advisors exploring implications and conclusions. Outputs and activities under
this award include the research synthesis report and several research briefs as
well as researcher-practitioner webinars to share the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The professional audiences for this research are: (a)
individuals working with ISL organizations, particularly practitioners who
engage public audiences through exhibits or education programs, and those who
set direction or policy; (b) researchers and evaluators; and (c) university
students and faculty associated with museum studies or STEM disciplines that
contain a public communications focus. ASC is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.