* 1906610
* What leads to better outcomes in informal STEM-based environmental education programs for youth?
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2024
* Marc Stern, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,897,909.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. This project will
examine the characteristics and outcomes of a large sample of environmental
education field trip programs for youth to elucidate program characteristics
that most powerfully influence 21st century learning outcomes. Environmental
education programs for youth, particularly day-long school trip programs, are
popular and reside at the intersection of formal and informal STEM education.
Such field trips provide opportunities for diverse audiences to participate in
shared learning experiences, but current understanding of what leads to success
in these programs is limited. This large-scale study will address this gap in
knowledge by investigating the linkages between program characteristics and
participant outcomes for at least 800 single-day environmental education field
trip programs for youth in grades 5-8, particularly programs for diverse and
underserved audiences. This study will result in the identification of evidence-
based practices that will inform future program design for a wide variety of
settings, including nature centers, national parks, zoos, museums, aquaria, and
other locations providing informal environmental education
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research in Service to Practice study is
guided by two research questions: 1) What program characteristics (context,
design, and delivery) most powerfully influence learner self-determination and
learner outcomes? And 2) Do the most influential program characteristics differ
across diverse and underserved audiences (e.g. African American,
Hispanic/Latino, economically disadvantaged) and contexts (e.g. rural versus
urban)? This project will examine a wide range of program-related factors,
including pedagogical approaches and contextual characteristics. A valid and
reliable protocol for observing 78 program characteristics hypothesized to
influence learner outcomes developed by a previous project will be used to
systematically sample and observe 500 single-day environmental education field
trip programs for youth in grades 5-8 distributed across at least 40 U.S. states
and territories. Programs for diverse and underserved youth will be emphasized,
and a diverse set of programs in terms of program type and context will be
sought. Data from this sample will be combined with those of an existing sample
of 334 programs provided by over 90 providers. The final combined sample of over
800 programs will provide sufficient statistical power to confidently identify
which program components are most consistently linked with learning outcomes.
This sample size will also enable stratification of the sample for examination
of these relationships within relevant subpopulations. Principal component
analyses will be used to reduce data in theoretically meaningful and
statistically valid ways, and multilevel structural equation modeling will be
employed to examine the influences of both participants' individual
characteristics and program and context characteristics on participant outcomes.
Since one research question focuses on whether program outcomes are the same
across different audiences, the project will include at least 200 programs for
each of three specific audiences to ensure sufficient statistical power for
confidence in the results: primarily African American, primarily
Hispanic/Latino, and primarily White.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.