* 1906344
* Collaborative Research: QRM: Microstructure Manifold Analysis Using Hierarchical Set of Morphological, Topological, and Process Descriptors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Jaroslaw Zola, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 428,837.00

The properties and performance of structural materials are dictated by their
structure on the microscopic level, referred to as the microstructure. Advanced
manufacturing processes seek to tune the microstructure to obtain materials with
desired properties. One key requirement to enable such manufacturing processes
is the ability to quantitatively describe the microstructures. This award
supports the development of mathematical tools to quantify the material
microstructure in terms of shape (i.e., morphology), geometry and connectedness
(i.e., topology), and property (i.e., performance) within a unified and
consistent framework. Such a quantitative approach to characterizing
microstructures is used to understand how different manufacturing pathways
affect the microstructure and its properties. Researched techniques for
efficient and adaptive exploration ensure that this processing-property
landscape is explored with a reduced number of experiments. Although this
project is geared towards laying the foundations of microstructure
quantification, the research has the potential to advance knowledge in several
application areas, such as organic electronics, porous electrodes for batteries
and fuel cells, and membranes. This research has the potential to accelerate the
design of new devices with superior properties by reducing the cost and time-to-
market for engineered mesostructure-sensitive materials. Therefore, this work
will contribute to enhancing the global competitiveness of the national
manufacturing sector. The education and workforce development aspects of the
project involve training of the next generation of globally competitive
engineers and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal
of this project is to lay the foundations for using a comprehensive suite of
descriptors with incremental dimensionality reduction techniques to adaptively
and efficiently build reliable processing-structure-property relationships. A
comprehensive suite of topological, morphological and geometric descriptors will
be used as markers to adaptively learn the microstructure manifold using modern
incremental manifold learning strategies. Process-structure-property
relationships can then be naturally parametrized and explored by using this
microstructure manifold. This award will provide educational modules about
computational and data-driven materials science. Diverse existing mechanisms at
the partner institutions will be leveraged to advance goals of minority and
women recruitment, undergraduate research, and K-12
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.