* 1906325
* Enabling Quantum Leap: Q-AMASE-i: Quantum Foundry at UCSB
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2025
* Stephen Wilson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 21,990,705.00

Nontechnical Abstract: This project establishes the Quantum Foundry at UC Santa
Barbara---a next generation foundry that develops materials and interfaces
hosting the coherent quantum states needed to power the coming age of quantum-
based electronics. Emerging technological frontiers in quantum computation,
quantum sensing, and other quantum information-based applications require moving
beyond conventional electronics, which address only a single classical state
(e.g. a bit), and to instead access multiple superimposed or entangled quantum
states (e.g. a quantum bit). Harnessing this multistate paradigm of quantum
information requires the development of new materials that are capable of both
hosting these complex quantum states and of protecting their information from
being lost via environmental decoherence. The Quantum Foundry addresses this
challenge through (1) the creation of tools for creating and measuring materials
possessing protected quantum coherent states and (2) through developing these
materials such that the decoherence of their controlled quantum states can be
avoided. Research conducted in the Foundry develops materials that host quantum
electronic states with natively protected coherence, further stabilizes these
protected states at interfaces, and also engineers the means of propagating
their quantum coherence into conventional information networks. These topics are
core interests of the Foundry's industrial partners, all of whom are intertwined
within all levels of the Foundry's operations to maximize its impact in the
growing quantum information technologies sector. Key to this is the Foundry's
program of training a diverse quantum workforce capable of driving innovation at
the frontiers of this new sector. In particular, a reimagined and
interdisciplinary program of graduate training in quantum information science
combined with quantum-based undergraduate research training and outreach
activities targeted at diverse communities is a focus of the Quantum Foundry's
mission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: This project establishes a
materials foundry for the coming age of quantum information-based electronics.
Through integrating a convergent array of interdisciplinary expertise, enabling
critical new tool development, and leveraging a vast network of materials
development infrastructure at UCSB and with network partners, the Quantum
Foundry at UC Santa Barbara aims to develop the materials required to form the
backbone of quantum information-based devices and applications (e.g., quantum-
based computing and sensing). Key to realizing this vision, the Foundry develops
both bulk crystalline and thin film materials that natively host quantum
electronic states with protected coherence (such as non-abelian anyon states),
functionalizes these and other entangled/superposition states at scalable
interfaces, and engineers the means of propagating their quantum coherence
across networks. Examples range from the development of new forms of topological
superconductors hosting topologically protected non-abelian states to developing
platforms for manipulating highly coherent, localized quantum states. The
Foundry innovates and harnesses new tools for growing pristine materials that
engender coherent quantum states as well as new instruments for characterizing
their coherence and entanglement. Interdisciplinary theoretical, computational,
and data science efforts further underpin and guide the Foundry's research, and
industrial partners are intertwined throughout the Foundry's operation.
Synergies with these industry partners are core to the Foundry's vision of
accelerating the development of the nation's quantum technologies economic
sector, and a key goal of the Foundry is the training of a quantum-capable
workforce. The Foundry's novel graduate training program in quantum information
science and its quantum-based undergraduate research training/outreach
activities are targeted at building a diverse, next generation workforce---one
capable of harnessing the scientific and commercial opportunities that arise as
quantum-based technologies develop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.