* 1906565
* Collaborative Research: Developing Leaders, Transforming Practice in K-5 Mathematics: An Examination of Models for Elementary Mathematics Specialists
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Patrice Woods, School District No.1j Multnomah County, Or
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,088,014.00

Minimal rigorous research has been conducted on the effect of various supports
for quality mathematics instruction and providing guidance on the development
and use of Elementary Mathematics Specialists (EMSs) on student achievement.
Portland Public Schools, Portland State University, and RMC Research Corporation
will study the Developing Leaders Transforming Practice (DLTP) intervention,
which aims to improve teachers' instructional practices, increase student
mathematics understanding and achievement. The project team will evaluate the
efficacy and use of EMSs by testing 4 implementation models that consider the
various ways EMSs are integrated into schools. DLTP builds on EMS research,
investigating EMSs both as elementary mathematics teachers and coaches by
articulating 4 models and examining their efficacy for both student and teacher
learning. This study has the potential to provide benefits both within and
beyond PPS as it informs the preparation and use of EMSs. Determining which
model is best in certain contexts provides a focus for the expansion of
mathematics support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DLTP enhances the research base by
examining the effect of teacher PD on student achievement through a rigorous
quasi-experimental design. The project goals will be met by addressing 4
research questions: 1) What is the effect of the intervention on teacher
leadership?; 2) What is the effect of the intervention on teachers' use of
research-based instructional practices?; 3) What is the effect of the
intervention on a school's ability to sustain ongoing professional learning for
teachers?; and 4) What is the effect of the intervention on student mathematics
achievement? Twelve elementary schools in PPS will select elementary teachers to
participate in the DLTP and adopt an implementation model that ranges from
direct to diffuse engagement with students: elementary mathematics teacher,
grade level coach, grade-level and building-level coach, or building-level
coach. The research team will conduct 4 major studies that include rigorous
quasi-experimental designs and a multimethod approach to address the research
questions: leadership study, instructional practices study, school study, and
student achievement study. Several tools will be created by the project - a
leadership rubric designed to measure changes in EMS mathematics leadership
because of the project and a 5-part teacher survey designed capture EMS
leadership skills, PCK, use of research-based practices, and school climate for
mathematics learning as well as implementation issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.