* 1906940
* Collaborative Research:   Making Space for Story-Based Tinkering to Scaffold Early Informal Engineering Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Catherine Haden, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 854,719.00

This project responds to calls to increase children's exposure and engagement in
STEM at an early age. With the rise of the maker-movement, the informal and
formal education sectors have witnessed a dramatic expansion of maker and
tinkering spaces, programs, and curricula. This has happened in part because of
the potential benefits of tinkering experiences to promote access and equity in
engineering education. To realize these benefits, it is necessary to continue to
make and iterate design and facilitation approaches that can deepen early
engagement in disciplinary practices of engineering and other STEM-relevant
skills. This project will investigate how stories can be integrated into
informal STEM learning experiences for young children and their families.
Stories can be especially effective because they bridge the knowledge and
experiences young children and their caregivers bring to tinkering as well as
the conversations and hands-on activities that can extend that knowledge. In
addition, a unique contribution of the project is to test the hypothesis that
stories can also facilitate spatial reasoning, by encouraging children to think
about the spatial properties of their emerging structures.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project uses design-based research methods to advance knowledge
and the evidence base for practices that engender story-based tinkering. Using
conjecture mapping, the team will specify their initial ideas and how it will be
evident that design/practices impact caregivers-child behaviors and learning
outcomes. The team will consider the demographic characteristics, linguistic
practices, and funds of knowledge of the participants to understand the design
practices (resources, activities) being implemented and how they potentially
facilitate learning. The outcome of each study/DBR cycle serves as inputs for
questions and hypotheses in the next. A culturally diverse group of 300+
children ages 5 to 8 years old and their parents at Chicago Children's Museum's
Tinkering Lab will participate in the study to examine the following key
questions: (1) What design and facilitation approaches engage young children and
their caregivers in creating their own engineering-rich tinkering stories? (2)
How can museum exhibit design (e.g., models, interactive displays) and tinkering
stories together engender spatial thinking, to further enrich early STEM
learning opportunities? and (3) Do the tinkering stories children and their
families tell support lasting STEM learning? As part of the overall iterative,
design-based approach, the team will also field test the story-based tinkering
approaches identified in the first cycles of DBR to be most
promising.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments. It will result in activities, exhibit components, and
training resources that invite visitors' stories into open-ended problem-solving
activities. It will advance understanding of mechanisms for encouraging
engineering learning and spatial thinking through direct experience interacting
with objects, and playful, scaffolded (guided) problem-solving
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.