* 1906146
* LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Thomas Hudson, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,075,000.00

Bridge to the Doctorate: Mississippi-LSAMP, Cohort 15&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Louis Stokes Mississippi Alliance for Minority Participation (LSMAMP) Bridge to
the Doctorate (BD) program is a program that is committed and determined to
aggressively answer the call for increasing the number of underrepresented
minority PhD recipients in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM). The continued success of our LSMAMP-BD program is based upon the premise
that the provision of adequate financial support for participants throughout
their MS degree matriculation and purposeful mentoring will increase the
likelihood that the BD Fellows will bridge to and complete doctoral studies.
Funding for Cohort Fifteen (15) will provide the necessary resources to support
an additional 12 BD Fellows to bridge to their STEM PhD program. The vision of
the LSMAMP-BD program is to train BD Fellows who go beyond just gathering
information and knowledge to applying that knowledge in innovative ways and
contributing to the diversity of culture and ideas necessary for making
innovative discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Louis Stokes Mississippi
Alliance for Minority Participation (LSMAMP), led by Jackson State University
(JSU), will support Cohort 15 of the Bridge to the Doctorate. The goal of the
LSMAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) program focuses on increasing the quality
and quantity of underrepresented minorities (URM) earning MS degrees in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM), and bridging to PhD programs to
pursue and earn PhDs in a STEM discipline. This goal is consistent with the
vision of NSF. These students ultimately enter the workforce and contribute to
the growth of the US economy. The LSMAMP-BD is privileged to make significant
contributions in assisting the NSF in its goals of creating an inclusive
workforce which is diverse in talent, skills, and in experience. This has been
accomplished through the creation and utilization of a comprehensive program
that develops a Cohort of BD Fellows to not only complete their MS degree
requirements, but also the PhD. Furthermore, through the continual use of our
"best practices" and "lessons learned," our BD program takes advantage of a two-
pronged approach that combines rigorous training in the laboratory with
compassionate and firm mentoring from research advisors and the BD Program's
Principal Investigator and Director. Also, mentoring from invited experts,
seminars, speaker series, journal club, and participation in scientific
conferences contribute to the effectiveness and graduation of our students.
Faculty who mentor our BD Fellows have external funding and they are actively
engaged in research activities that boosts our student's readiness for PhD
programs. Equally, our students are exposed to soft skills such as scientific
writing, public speaking, creativity, innovation, determination, patience,
confidence, focus, and adaptability. These qualities are more complex and
challenging to quantify and develop in a laboratory or an environment that may
not be inclusive. The LSMAMP-BD Program specializes in developing the "hard" and
"soft" skills of our BD Fellows and at the same time takes advantage of the
cohort concept of student engagement and development by creating a climate of
community for all participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.