* 1906523
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Gender-specific regulation of juvenile social behavior by oxytocin
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Katie Yoest, Yoest, Katie Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This project
aims to understand how gender differences in the brain contribute to gender
differences in behavior throughout development using rats as a model mammal.
Males and females exhibit gender-specific differences in the organization of
brain systems underlying social behavior, which has been hypothesized to
facilitate gender-specific behavioral responses in adulthood. However, many of
these biological differences are also apparent in juveniles, but the function of
these differences for the control of behavior is not well understood. Therefore,
it is important to determine not only how the brain systems underlying social
behaviors are different in juvenile males and females, but also how these
differences contribute to differences in how the brain regulates social
behaviors. This fellowship will facilitate the technical, professional, and
intellectual development of a fellow from a background underrepresented in the
neurosciences, while also enabling the fellow to develop a new mentorship and
training program at the host institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The neuropeptide
oxytocin regulates social behavior in all mammalian species studied thus far,
and its dysregulation results in impairments in social functioning. In adult
rats, there are gender differences in oxytocin receptor binding density in key
brain areas implicated in the regulation of social behavior, as well as oxytocin
release within these brain areas. Recent work has found that some of the gender
differences in oxytocin receptor binding density are already present in juvenile
rats, but the relevance of this difference for the regulation of social behavior
in juveniles is unclear. The fellow will address this discrepancy by testing
whether gender differences in oxytocin signaling promote differences in the
oxytocin regulation of social behavior during development. The fellow will test
this hypothesis by 1) characterizing how gender influences the activation of the
oxytocin system during juvenile social behavior and 2) determining the role of
oxytocin release and oxytocin receptors in regulating juvenile social behavior.
These projects will allow the fellow to receive technical and theoretical
training in systems level analysis of neural circuits underlying social
behavior, and ultimately prepare the fellow for an independent research career.
Additionally, the fellow will further develop mentoring and leadership skills
through a novel initiative to enhance diversity and inclusion in neuroscience
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.