* 1906473
* One Community, One Challenge: Pop-Up STEAM Studios
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Rebecca Brienen, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 298,233.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. The project will develop and research, as a
feasibility study, a series of art-inclusive, pop-up Science, Art, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEAM) makerspaces in a high-poverty, primarily
rural county in Oklahoma. A makerspace is a collaborative work space inside a
library, school or other community space for making, learning, exploring and
sharing that uses high tech to low tech tools. The makerspaces will be temporary
workshops that are developed through a community planning process that assesses
the needs and interests of citizen stakeholders. Scientists, artists and other
experts will work together with the community to design a series of thematic
pop-up makerspace sessions. The project builds a collaborative infrastructure
and capacity for small and rural communities by bringing together resource
providers and experts to identify and design science-oriented challenges. Long-
term benefits for participants include sustained focus on new approaches for
civic engagement through STEAM-driven making which could foster new role
identities pertaining to science and art. The project deliverables include: (1)
a theoretically informed model to build a community's capacity to collaborate
toward fostering civic engagement through science-oriented pop-up makerspaces,
(2) Pop-Up STEAM Studio makerspaces, (3) training for pop-up facilitators, and
(4) visual documentation panels and web-based digital stories to communicate
progress and process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research will enhance
knowledge-building of the process of developing a science-oriented community
challenge that embraces STEAM and making. A key contribution of the proposed
project will be the generation of insights into how community members establish
consensus around the joint goal of designing, documenting, and facilitating
integrated art and science making activities to address and communicate the
challenge. Research will focus on the roles participants take when engaging in
the making process through an identity-based model of motivated action. Analysis
of advisory board meeting artifacts and focus group data will allow the
researchers to identify processes of negotiation and consensus building at the
collective level and in relation to each issue to which the group attends.
Emergent themes (such as negotiation, shared learning, idea or project
revisions, diverse perspectives coming to consensus, etc.) will be examined
across individual and group units of analysis, from all data sources, and
through the congruent theoretical lenses of role identity theory and negotiated
learning pedagogy. The research outcomes should inform efforts to build
infrastructure and capacity of community resources by providing a model for
developing collaborative pop-up makerspaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.