* 1906651
* RAPID: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Mechanisms of seagrass community injury and resilience post Hurricane Florence: implications for increasingly stormy coasts
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Fredrick Fodrie, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 82,512.00

Seagrass meadows are conspicuous features of many estuarine and nearshore
environments. By some estimates, these meadows contribute an average of $20,000
per hectare per year in goods and services. These include nutrient cycling,
sediment stabilization, carbon burial, and provision of nursery habitat for
juvenile fishes, crabs, and shrimps. Alarmingly, seagrasses are threatened by
several environmental and human-driven stressors, and loss of seagrass habitat
remains a key concern for conservation and sustainable development programs.
Anticipated increases in storminess (frequency and intensity) and rainfall under
many climate change modeling scenarios make understanding hurricane impacts on
valuable coastal habitats such as seagrass meadows important on local, national,
and global scales. Indeed, seagrass meadows potentially serve as a 'canary in
the coal mine' regarding the effects of increased hurricane activity as they are
found at shallow depths and are affected by turbidity and salinity; seagrasses
are also vulnerable to burial or erosion due to large storms. Seagrasses (1)
include a suite of species with distinct growth and reproductive strategies; (2)
live in a range of meadow sizes and degrees of 'patchiness;' and (3) present
divergent seasonal cycles. This represents a tremendous opportunity to explore
the conditions and attributes that result in seagrass resilience or
vulnerability to hurricanes as a model for coastal ecosystem responses more
broadly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Florence made landfall along the NC
coast on September 14, 2018. Florence stalled approaching shore, and storm-
related winds/rains persisted for &gt;4 days (13th-16th) in southeastern NC.
Subsequently, record high sea-level stands (surge + tide) were observed across
the NC coastline. Furthermore, Florence became the second wettest US storm,
behind only Harvey in 2017, dumping 65 trillion L of rain over land that
depressed estuarine salinities for over a month. NC seagrasses are dominated by
three species: eelgrass, shoalgrass, and widgeon grass. Meadows exist as
polycultures or monocultures, and exhibit a diverse range of spatial
configurations. Meadows are also defined by strong seasonality: eelgrass shoots
senesce in summer due to heat stress, with sites transformed either into
shoalgrass-dominated meadows or mudflats. Subsequent to dieback, eelgrass
depends upon a combination of seedbank and surviving apical meristems for
regeneration each winter. Using key seagrass datasets collected by the research
team dating back decades across ~40 Florence-impacted meadows, several
fundamental ecological questions are being addressed: (1) how sexual (eelgrass:
seedbank) v. asexual (shoalgrass: vegetative growth and fragment colonization)
life histories promote susceptibility or resilience of seagrass to disturbance;
(2) how meadow landscape configuration and plant diversity modulate the effect
of storms on seedbank retention; (3) how meadow disturbance (intense physical v.
more chronic physiochemical drivers) affected community dynamics, with special
focus on plant productivity and the critical 'nursery role' of seagrass habitat;
and (4) how seasonality and species traits amplify or attenuate the effects of
intense disturbance on seagrasses. This research expands upon previous post-
hurricane studies by considering the interactive effects of hurricanes,
landscape configuration, and biodiversity on ecosystem responses. It also
leverages ongoing, NSF-supported work along the TX coast to compare-and-contrast
the responses of different seagrass phenology/growth strategies to storm
disturbance (e.g., turtlegrass in TX is a "leaf-on" species throughout the year
while eelgrass and shoalgrass in NC both exhibit strong seasonality in biomass).
Collectively, this work will result in more generalizable models of coastal
ecological resilience to storminess.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.