* 1906413
* The Nonorientable Ribbon Conjecture, and Gordian Unknotting Number
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Stanislav Jabuka, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2023
* USD 319,707.00

This project is jointly funded by the Topology program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;Knot theory - the
study of how strings in 3-dimensional space can be knotted and unknotted - is a
central tenet of low-dimensional topology, the study of spaces of dimension not
larger than 4. Knots are used both to construct 3- and 4-dimensional spaces, and
as a tool in their study. From its very inception over a century ago, surfaces
have played an indispensable role in the study of knots, but only recently has
this connection between the two broadened to include non-orientable surfaces.
This project explores several novel connections between knots and the non-
orientable surfaces they bound. While there has been a flurry of results in this
direction in the past few years, still relatively little is known about their
interplay, making this fertile ground for new research. A substantial portion of
this proposal was inspired by problems stemming form DNA biology. Naturally
occurring groups of enzymes in cells have the ability to either switch a
crossing in a DNA strand, or to resolve that crossing. This naturally prompts
the question of which knot types can become particularly simple after as few as
possible alteration of these two types. While this research is not framed in
terms of DNA biology, its results directly relate back to this question, and the
PI expects his research to have application in the study of DNA recombination.
Additionally, the research project will enhance visibility of mathematics in
Nevada, and at the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR) in particular. This is
especially relevant given the recently started Ph.D. program in mathematics at
UNR, a program very much in its infancy. The award includes funding for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research projects follow a wave
of recent results involving the use of non-orientable surfaces in the study of
knots. Some of this work had the potential of having been completed decades
earlier, but a preference of topologists to work with orientable surfaces (a
former preference of the PI as well) has left these stones unturned. This has
dramatically changed in the last decade, and non-orientable surfaces are being
recognized as powerful tools in low-dimensional topology.&lt;br/&gt;The research
project concerns&lt;br/&gt;(i) Non-orientable Ribbon Conjecture, which compares
embedded Moebius bands in the 4-ball with ribbon immersed M?bius bands in the
3-sphere.&lt;br/&gt;(ii) The Generalized Non-orientable Ribbon Conjecture which
does the same for nonorientable surfaces of higher first Betti
number.&lt;br/&gt;(iii) The notions of O-slicing number and O-concordance
unknotting number, and consequences for the study of how knot concordance
classes can change under O-moves on knot diagrams. &lt;br/&gt;(iv) Chiral
smoothings of knots, a phenomenon by which a knot can be rendered equal to its
own mirror image after a single crossing smoothing. &lt;br/&gt;The above
problems fall into two broad categories. The first category aims to extend
existing proofs of the (Orientable) Ribbon Conjecture for special families of
knots, to the non-orientable setting, and touches on generalized analogues of
both (Parts (i) and (ii)). The second category uses an entirely new approach to
studying how local operations on knot diagrams impact the concordance class. The
PI will study this problem for an infinite family of diagram moves,
distinguished by the property that it includes many other local moves (Part
(iii)).&lt;br/&gt;The tools used to study these problems contain aspects of
gauge theory (of the Donaldson and Heegaard-Floer varieties), classical knot
invariants, and explicit knot diagram modifications. Several of the research
projects have aspects suitable for undergraduate and graduate student
involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.