* 1906165
* Collaborative Research: Understanding How Stress Hormone Signaling Impacts Cellular Mechanotype
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Amy Rowat, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 04/30/2023
* USD 476,764.00

Fundamental processes of development and regulation within organisms rely on
cells sensing their environment and responding appropriately. In aging and
disease, the capacity of cells to sense and respond to this environment is often
impaired. Emerging findings show that compounds such as stress hormones, which
are released into the blood in response to a physical or psychological threats,
can impact the behavior of cells by altering their mechanical properties and
responses. These characteristics of a cell are known as their mechanical
phenotype - or mechanotype - and include cell stiffness and force generation.
The goal of this project is to understand the way in which cells translate the
presence of stress hormones into mechanotypic responses. The answers to these
questions will improve understanding of how cells maintain or adapt their
behavior and properties as their environments change. This is a key underlying
feature of normal tissue development and growth as well as disease progression.
Understanding these processes is important to advancing applications and
diagnostic opportunities related to wound healing and cancer progression. The
relationship of these physiological processes to stress, age, and disease will
also provide insight into health disparities that exist for various groups,
including minority communities. The project will also promote diversity in
science through an annual Mechanobiology Workshop to support the research
training of students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is driven by two research questions: (1) what is the mechanism of how
stress hormones regulate cell mechanotype; and (2) how does stress hormone
signally impact cell-matrix interactions? The research will test the hypothesis
that stress hormone signaling through Beta-adrenergic receptors (Beta-AR)
regulates epithelial cell mechanotype. By defining how epithelial cells
integrate signals from stress hormones to regulate their mechanotype, results
from this project will advance knowledge related to cellular homeostasis. In
addition, it will support the identification of points of leverage to intervene
in the loss of cellular homeostasis that is associated with psychological
stress, aging, and disease. The research is enabled by a high throughput
mechanotyping platform to measure cell deformability, micropillar assays to
quantify cellular traction stresses, as well as conventional tools in cell
biology (such as western blotting) to quantify levels of protein activation with
Beta-AR activation. Molecular-level changes within the cell cytoskeleton and at
the cell-matrix interface will be measured using advanced imaging methods. These
observations will be coupled with mechanistic computational models of cellular
force generation to dissect the role of specific molecules in driving cellular
mechanotypic response to stress hormones. By integrating experimental
observations with computational modeling, the ultimate goal of this project is
to predict how stress hormones induce changes in cellular mechanotype and the
consequent effects on cell migration and invasion in physiological and disease
contexts from wound healing to cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.