* 1906679
* Collaborative Research: Physics of and Climate Regulation by Convective Aggregation
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Marat Khairoutdinov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2024
* USD 365,309.00

Large aggregations of deep, rain-bearing convective clouds are a key element of
the weather in the tropics. The simultaneous occurrence of convective clouds
over a large region can sometimes be explained in terms of external factors,
such as continental heating or surface wind convergence driven by sea surface
temperature (SST) contrasts. But perhaps convection can also aggregate
spontaneously: not because external factors favor it, but because convection
itself creates favorable conditions for additional convection. Such self-
aggregation, in which convection begets convection, has been found in idealized
simulations of the tropical atmosphere by the PIs and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In these simulations self-aggregation is typically
temperature dependent, increasing with SSTs, and as convection aggregates skies
clear and dry in the non-convecting areas. The loss of energy to space by
longwave radiation from the clear-sky regions subsequently cools the SSTs, which
reduces aggregation and restores the sea surface to its original temperature.
This restorative feedback loop could exert a powerful influence on the
temperature of the tropics, acting to reduce both the variability of tropical
SSTs and the increase in SSTs due to increasing greenhouse gas
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The notion of self-aggregation as a
tropical thermostat is intriguing, but so far the effect has been demonstrated
and studied primarily in idealized models. Simplifications used in these models
include limited geographical domain, uniform SSTs, and periodic lateral
boundaries. More work is thus needed to determine if thermal regulation through
self-aggregation is a robust effect in the real world. A logical next step in
this direction is to look at self-aggregation in more sophisticated
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award the Principal Investigators (PIs)
examine the mechanisms of self-aggregation, and its potency for thermal
regulation, in a global cloud resolving model called the System for Atmospheric
Modeling. The model, developed by one of the PIs, can simulate the forms of
convective aggregation seen in satellite images, including hurricanes and the
large-scale Madden-Julian Oscillation. The model allows experiments in which
various mechanisms thought to be responsible for aggregation are suppressed by
direct intervention. For instance the importance of cloud longwave radiative
effects can be assessed by averaging the radiative flux between clear and cloudy
areas, thereby suppressing longwave radiation as a mechanism for aggregation.
The model also includes a sophisticated representation of cloud microphysics,
which enables tests of the sensitivity of aggregation to specific cloud
properties. One issue to be addressed is the sensitivity of aggregation to the
radiative properties of ice crystals near the tops of the
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of societal as well as scientific
interest given the large and populous portion of the earth that would be
affected by the self-aggregation thermostat. A better understanding of
convective aggregation could also be beneficial for predicting tropical weather,
and results of this work could inform the development of forecast models. One
area that could benefit is hurricane prediction, as hurricanes form from
tropical cloud clusters, and the prediction of hurricane genesis remains a
challenge. In addition, the project provides support and training for two
graduate students, thereby providing for the future workforce in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.