* 1906088
* Geometry, Topology, and Rank One Lattices
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Matthew Stover, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2022
* USD 206,277.00

Lattices in Lie groups are a wide-sweeping generalization of the integers inside
the real numbers. The deep connections between the integers and a broad range of
mathematical areas from geometry to number theory have direct analogues for
lattices in Lie groups, and the way in which lattices in Lie groups sit at the
interface of so many fields has made them of fundamental importance since the
late 19th century. The primary motivation for this project is to deepen our
understanding of these connections. There is a special class of lattices that
are called "arithmetic", where the connections to number theory are particularly
strong, and this an overarching goal of this project is to use techniques from
dynamics and geometry to understand when a lattice is arithmetic, and moreover
deepen our understanding of the geometric consequences of arithmeticity. The
project provides summer support for graduate students allowing them time for
research and collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project
aims to understand the geometry and topology of locally symmetric spaces,
particularly real and complex hyperbolic manifolds, inspired by the fundamental
problems in low-dimensional topology and geometric group theory that have
dominated the fields since the pivotal work of Thurston and Gromov. On the one
hand, it is of significant interest to learn the extent to which the Gromov-
Thurston program pushes into this more general setting. More importantly, the
questions studied in dimensions 2 and 3 for the last forty years are closely
related to classical problems about discrete subgroups of Lie groups, and real
and complex hyperbolic lattices are precisely the cases where many of the basic
questions remain open, e.g., Betti numbers and problems related to
(non)arithmeticity. Particular problems to be studied include geometric
characterizations of arithmeticity, analogues of the Margulis superrigidity
theorem in rank one, and understanding complex hyperbolic lattices using
techniques from algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.