* 1906846
* Youth Engaging in the Science of Resilience in Urban and Rural NC (YES-Resilience)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Kathleen Gray, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 07/31/2022
* USD 357,571.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. This project focuses
on environmental health literacy and will explore the extent to which diverse
rural and urban youth in an out-of-school STEM enrichment program exhibit gains
in environmental health literacy while engaged in learning and teaching others
about community resilience in the face of changing climates. Science centers and
museums provide unique opportunities for youth to learn about resilience,
because they bring community members together to examine the ways that current
science influences local decisions. In this project, teams of participating
youth will progress through four learning modules that explore the impacts of
changing climates on local communities, the local vulnerabilities and risks
associated with those changes, possible mitigation and adaptation strategies,
and building capacities for communities to become climate resilient. After
completion of these modules, participating youth will conduct a resilience-
focused action project. Participants will be encouraged to engage peers,
families, friends, and other community stakeholders in the design and
implementation of their projects, and they will gain experience in accessing
local climate and weather data, and in sharing their findings through relevant
web portals. Participants will also use various sensors and web-based tools to
collect their own data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is guided by three
research questions: 1) To what extent do youth develop knowledge, skills, and
self-efficacy for developing community resilience (taken together, environmental
health literacy in the context of resilience) through participation in museum-
led, resilience-focused programming? 2) What program features and settings
foster these science learning outcomes? And 3) How does environmental health
literacy differ among rural and urban youth, and what do any differences imply
for project replication? Over a two-year period, the project will proceed in six
stages: a) Materials Development during the first year, b) Recruitment and
selection of youth participants, c) Summer institute (six days), d) Workshops
and field experiences during the school year following the summer institute, e)
Locally relevant action projects, and f) End-of-program summit (one day). In
pursuing answers to the research questions, a variety of data sources will be
used, including transcripts from youth focus groups and educator interviews,
brief researcher reflections of each focus group and interview, and a survey of
resilience-related knowledge. Quantitative data sources will include a
demographic survey and responses to a self-efficacy instrument for adolescents.
The project will directly engage 32 youth, together with one parent or guardian
per youth. The study will explore the experiences of rural and urban youth of
high school age engaged in interactive, parallel programming to enable the
project team to compare and contrast changes in environmental health literacy
between rural and urban participants. It is anticipated that this research will
advance knowledge of how engagement of diverse youth in informal learning
environments influences understanding of resilience and development of
environmental health literacy, and it will provide insights into the role of
partnerships between research universities and informal science centers in
focusing on community resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.