* 1906619
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: The Genomic Basis for Dysregulation of Protein Abundance in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Joseph Gage, Gage, Joseph Lee
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2022
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2019. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Joseph Gage is "The Genomic Basis for Dysregulation of
Protein Abundance in Maize" The host institutions for the fellowship are Cornell
University and Washington University and the sponsoring scientists are Drs.
Edward S. Buckler and Richard Vierstra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA sequences get
translated into proteins, which are important components in determining an
organism's size, shape, and health. Small differences in DNA sequence can cause
large changes in how much of the resulting protein is made, but little is known
about how those changes in DNA sequence affect protein quantity. To learn more
about the relationship between DNA sequence and protein quantity, this research
will measure the abundance of thousands of different proteins produced by
twenty-seven diverse varieties of maize (corn). Genome sequences as well as gene
expression levels will be used to learn how differences in DNA sequence result
in differing amounts of protein. The data generated will be used to build
machine learning models that can predict protein abundance from DNA sequence
alone. The findings from this study will provide new insights into how complex
traits (like an organism's size, shape, or health) are controlled by differences
in DNA sequence spread throughout the genome. Broader impacts include mentoring
and training undergraduate and graduate students as well as participating in the
Skype-A-Scientist program (https://skypeascientist.com) which pairs scientists
in various STEM disciplines with classrooms of children for question and answer
sessions. Training objectives include obtaining expertise in bioinformatics,
molecular genetics, proteomics, transcriptomics, application of machine
learning, and functional genomics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are a crucial
determinant of phenotype. As the ultimate step in the central dogma of molecular
biology, their presence and abundance determine phenotypic state. To date, there
are no published studies of proteomic variability between genetically diverse
members of an economic important crop plant species. This project seeks to
develop a model of how rare and deleterious alleles cause dysregulation of
protein abundance by affecting translation, transport, and degradation via
changes to protein structure and function in maize. This research will break new
ground in maize functional genomics and proteomics by integrating pre-existing
genomic data with newly generated time-series transcriptomic data and proteomic
characterization of twenty-seven diverse maize inbred lines to generate a multi-
omic dataset that captures all three levels of the central dogma of molecular
biology: DNA, RNA, and protein. Since genomic variants can affect protein
abundance by dysregulation of either transcription, translation, or both,
transcript and protein abundance will be used together to assess specifically
how genetic variants impact translation on a genome-wide scale. Genetic variants
with influential effects on translation will be identified and characterized for
their effects on protein secondary structure, solvent accessibility, contact
between residues, and intrinsic disorder. These features will be used to
formulate an overarching model to describe the influence of rare and deleterious
variants on protein abundance. All proteomic and transcriptomic data generated
for the twenty-seven diverse maize inbred lines will be useful for other
projects and researchers, and for that reason, it is important that all data be
as accessible and organized as possible. Raw reads from 3? RNA sequencing will
be deposited on the NCBI-SRA (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra), and the raw
mass spectra from proteomic assays will be made available on the ProteomeXchange
database (http://www.proteomexchange.org/). Transcript and protein abundance
data will be made available through a DOI and hosted by CyVerse
(https://www.cyverse.org/data-store). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: gene
expression, dysregulation of protein accumulation, sequencing, proteomics,
modeling, maize&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.