* 1906266
* Sage-Days Workshop on Computational Arithmetic Dynamics 2019
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Benjamin Hutz, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 10/31/2020
* USD 22,500.00

This award supports participation in the Sage-Days Workshop on Computational
Arithmetic Dynamics held November 17-20, 2019 at Saint Louis University. The use
of computers in the sciences over the last several decades has expanded
enormously. With the increasing complexity of problems to be solved and
increasing capacity of hardware to solve these problems, it is essential that
students and researchers have cutting-edge computational tools available to
them. This workshop brings together researchers in dynamical systems to further
the development of open-source computational tools for use both in research and
applications. Arithmetic dynamics is a relatively new area of mathematics at the
intersection of number theory, dynamical systems, and arithmetic geometry. At
its most fundamental, it concerns the resolution of systems of equations that
arise from iterated systems. Its value to other disciplines lies in concrete
constructions and computational tools. Applications range from weather
prediction, to cellular modelling, to cryptography. Modern computational tools
have great potential in these applications. These tools will be implemented in
the open-source software Sage and made freely available to the public under the
GNU public license. In addition to the development of computational tools,
another main goal of the workshop is the training in the use of these
computational tools. Participants of this workshop will become proficient in the
current tools and be able to train colleagues and students in their use.
Finally, these tools will be used to improve the database of dynamical systems.
For ages, mathematicians have been compiling tables of computationally intensive
information for widespread use. These tools are currently capable of computing
an extensive set of properties that would be of use to the research community in
an organized searchable form. The database of dynamical systems performs this
service for the dynamical systems community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal of this
workshop is to improve the current set of computational tools for dynamical
systems included in the computer algebra system Sage. The tools allow one to
quickly and efficiently work with explicit examples to test and prove new
theories, to compute examples too complicated to be worked out by hand, and to
allow students to explicitly investigate conjectures and specific examples. With
the maturity of the current set of tools, we have reached the point where we can
compute many properties of dynamical systems. Consequently, the creation of a
database to organize the known examples is feasible. A comprehensive efficiently
searchable collection of examples will be of considerable use to the research
community. The current prototype of the database of dynamical systems will be
improved and expanded at this workshop. With the tools freely available, the
main barrier to their use is training/education. The organizers will actively
recruit women and other under-represented in mathematics groups to this
workshop, with a focus on graduate students, post-docs, and early career
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More information is available at the workshop web
page
http://mathstat.slu.edu/~hutzba/sage_days_2019.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.