* 1906075
* 2019-2021 LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) at the University of Illinois-Chicago (UIC)
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2019,08/31/2023
* William Walden, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and
quality of STEM graduate students from underrepresented populations, with
emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and completion. For the U.S. to remain globally
competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of all its citizens and
provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the
knowledge-based economy. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of
higher education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's
2018-2022 Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Illinois Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (ILSAMP) is led by Chicago State University, which is a
Predominantly Black University (PBU). The University of Illinois at Chicago
(UIC), a minority-serving institution, will host the 2019-2021 BD cohort of 12
historically underrepresented minority postbaccalaureate students pursuing
graduate degrees in STEM disciplines. UIC will offer a comprehensive program
that includes rigorous academic preparation and research training experiences as
well as mentorship and professional development activities. Since the strategies
implemented at UIC will result in the production of well-trained, highly-skilled
STEM professionals from underrepresented minority groups, the project
contributes significantly to increasing the diversity and representation in
academia and the STEM workforce, thereby ensuring the nation's global
competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 2006, the ILSAMP BD at UIC has
produced 29 STEM PhDs to this population of
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.