* 1906096
* Integrated quantum photonics using van der Waals materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Carlos Meriles, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2023
* USD 386,178.00

Technologies that rely on and exploit the quantum properties of light and matter
are touted as the next phase&lt;br/&gt;of the modern industrial revolution.
Light has become the preferred medium for information transfer
in&lt;br/&gt;quantum technologies due to its high speed and exceptional noise
properties, with single photons acting as&lt;br/&gt;the most basic building
blocks. However, the realization of robust, device-compatible, room-
temperature&lt;br/&gt;single photon sources that can be activated and controlled
on demand has been a major hurdle. Although&lt;br/&gt;there have been different
material systems that have shown single photon emission, they operate at
low&lt;br/&gt;temperature or at incompatible wavelengths, and are often hard to
integrate with conventional photonic&lt;br/&gt;materials or CMOS technology. To
address this challenge, this project aims to develop single
photon&lt;br/&gt;emitters based on cavity-coupled van der Waals (vdW) materials.
Specifically, the program will focus on&lt;br/&gt;hexagonal boron nitride, a
wide bandgap semiconductor that can host optically active point defects
with&lt;br/&gt;emission in the visible and near infra-red. Combining defect
engineering and "pick-and-place" techniques,&lt;br/&gt;the project will develop
a range of light-confining hybrid structures designed to enhance light
collection&lt;br/&gt;and light emission from single photon emitters as well as
increase the strength of light-matter interaction.&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal is to develop the key building blocks for realizing quantum photonic
devices based&lt;br/&gt;on vdW materials.&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The development of quantum photonic technologies that can
operate at elevated temperatures, are CMOS&lt;br/&gt;compatible, and can be
integrated with conventional photonics is highly desirable. This project
addresses&lt;br/&gt;precisely this need through the use of monolayer or few-
layer vdW materials integrated with silicon&lt;br/&gt;nitride photonic platforms
where we exploit the unique strengths of the two material systems.
vdW&lt;br/&gt;materials are a highly attractive platform for active components
in quantum photonics due their large&lt;br/&gt;light-mater interaction strength,
compatibility with a variety of substrates, and pick-and-place
fabrication&lt;br/&gt;techniques. In particular, hexagonal boron nitride has a
wide bandgap (6 eV), which allows for a broadly&lt;br/&gt;accessible spectral
range and mid gap defect states. Furthermore, owing to the few-layer vdW
structure,&lt;br/&gt;these systems show extreme susceptibility to strain and the
dielectric environment, which will be&lt;br/&gt;exploited to control defect
activation and integration with nanophotonic structures such as
microresonators&lt;br/&gt;and waveguides. Silicon nitride, already recognized as
an excellent material for passive&lt;br/&gt;photonic devices due to its low loss
and mature fabrication protocols will form the platform for
realizing&lt;br/&gt;the quantum photonic chips. Specific program goals include:
(i) Deterministic engineering of defect&lt;br/&gt;states in hBN for single
photon emission, and (ii) Integration of emitters into micro-resonators and
hybrid&lt;br/&gt;cavity systems for enhancing spontaneous emission and achieving
the strong coupling regime.&lt;br/&gt;The program will help train students from
diverse backgrounds in the emerging interdisciplinary field of&lt;br/&gt;quantum
optoelectronics. A highlight among the planned outreach activities is a hands-on
quantum&lt;br/&gt;technologies workshop for undergraduate students at City
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.