* 1906511
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Hydropower May Enhance Riverine Productivity Through Chemoautotrophic Pathways
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Benjamin Miller, Miller                  Benjamin       L
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 04/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The fellow will study how newly formed hydropower reservoirs in
Cambodia's Mekong watershed contribute carbon from methane to aquatic food webs.
Reservoirs are well known sources of the greenhouse gas methane to the
atmosphere, which is usually counted against hydropower. If this methane
produced carbon also supports fish at the top of the food webs after reservoirs
are created, these reservoirs can be said to enhance river productivity,
fishing, and economic prosperity. The fellow will analyze carbon in fish tissue
samples gathered from a tributary of the Mekong (the Sesan River) before and
after it was altered by having a dam built upon it. Hydropower is expanding on
large tropical rivers like the Mekong, so it is important to understand how its
ecological impacts may vary. The fellow will also replicate this study in
Washington's Snake River to provide a comparison to an aging hydropower
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work has shown that the majority of
microbial production in lake sediments may be anaerobic, such as methanogenesis.
Yet, estimates of Net Ecosystem Production (NEP) within aquatic ecosystems
ignore methanogenesis or chemoautotrophic primary production. Methane produced
here is highly depleted in one of two abundant stable carbon isotopes,
carbon-13, relative to other carbon sources. This depletion serves as a useful
tracer for methane as a carbon source to aquatic food webs. On reservoir
floodplains with dynamic water levels and steep oxygen and redox gradients, this
methane may be oxidized by members of the microbial community known as
methanotrophs. Because aerobic oxidation does not affect carbon ratios, the
isotopic signature of methanogenesis is conserved as it is transferred from
methanotrophs to zooplankton and fish in higher trophic levels. The fellow will
carry out mass spectrometry on historical fish tissue samples from the Cambodian
Ministry of Agriculture, the Smithsonian Institution, and the Harvard Museum of
Comparative Zoology. The fellow will also measure in-situ rates of
photosynthesis and coupled methane production and oxidation upstream of both the
Sesan and Snake River dams to a) determine geographic variability in primary
production at the base of reservoir food webs and b) more accurately account for
oxidative processes in estimates of NEP. All research and resulting publications
will include Cambodians, building scientific expertise in a new
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.