* 1906761
* Communicating STEM via Natural History Media
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Lisa Samford, Jackson Wild
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 06/30/2020
* USD 74,303.00

This conference grant will support professional development at Jackson WILD.
Jackson WILD (formerly the Jackson Hole Wildlife Film Festival) is the premier
industry conference for science and natural history documentary filmmakers and
distributors, bringing the world's top factual storytellers together with
inspiring STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) professionals at
a biennial industry conference and juried film festival. This project supports a
robust thematic strand of professional development within the conference focused
on strategies for making the science of science communication more accessible to
an industry that has significant influence over the accuracy, quality and
quantity of STEM stories reaching mainstream audiences through popular media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference grant strategies are scaffolded upon the
results of Jackson WILD's previous two conference awards which have employed
multiple interventions aimed at 1) understanding how science communication
expertise is perceived and gained by media content creators, 2) identifying the
demographics and professional development needs of both emerging and seasoned
STEM storytellers, and 3) finding pathways to enhance science communication
expertise for STEM professionals seeing to increase their reach to public
audiences. The current conference grant will build upon lessons learned and
offer thematic professional development programming advancing science
communication literacy and best practices among media professionals and STEM
communicators. The 2019 Jackson WILD industry conference will also further
expand the cross-industry STEM media fellows program, which offers professional
development and cohort-building opportunities to emerging professionals in both
STEM and media fields. The driving theory of change is that access to research-
informed professional development and increased science communication fluency
among content creators and STEM communicators results in products (i.e.
documentary programs, podcasts, social media content, etc.) that are in better
alignment with evidence-based best practices for communicating STEM topics to
lay audiences. Therefore, the resulting media products will be more effective in
engaging and educating those audiences, resulting in increased STEM literacy and
informal STEM learning. To extend the reach and impact of the conference, the
program content will be available on line via streaming videos and podcasts on
various channels. Investing in professional development for science media
professionals will strength the ecosystem of quality STEM media and help support
public engagement in STEM more broadly. This project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understanding of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.