* 1906674
* Experimental Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Sally Seidel, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2024
* USD 434,500.00

This award will provide support to a group working on the ATLAS experiment at
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle physics laboratory in
Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC machine and ATLAS, a large particle detector
facility, were built as basic science tools using funds from NSF and other
agencies around the world. One of their primary objectives was to find the Higgs
Boson, the last particle in the historically successful "Standard Model" (SM)
that accounts for so much of the existence of, and forces between, known
particles forming the matter in the universe. This effort has been successful.
The next step in the experiments is to look for evidence for physics Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM) that might, for instance, account for the presence of the
mysterious "Dark Matter" that makes up so much of the mass of the universe. The
LHC is currently in the midst of Run 2, at almost twice the energy explored
earlier and with significantly increased event samples. It is possible that
evidence for BSM physics could emerge at this higher energy and with the higher
event statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytically, the New Mexico group is
searching for BSM physics using the ATLAS detector. These studies include a
definitive ATLAS measurement of the branching ratio of the rare decay of the
neutral Bs meson into two muons. This measurement is interesting because the
early data from LHC yielded a value in tension with predictions of the Standard
Model, and any significant deviations are a harbinger of new BSM physics. In the
upcoming data run which begins in 2021, the group is working on software
infrastructure to probe for hints of lepton flavor anomaly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the New Mexico group leads a study of the
ATLAS Pixel tracking detector that characterizes the performance capabilities of
this detector through the end of the next run and yields guidelines for Pixel
operations in this era. The pixel detector is critical to the studies of
particles with short lifetimes such as the neutral Bs mesons of interest to the
group, as well as for the broader ATLAS program of discovery
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the New Mexico group's
research activities include advances in machine learning. The development of
such analytical tools is intrinsic to the New Mexico data analyses, and the
group's junior members are becoming authoritative in this domain and will be
able to train others. Machine learning has applications in virtual assistants,
medical diagnosis, DNA classification, and other research domains where weak
signals must be sensitively separated from extensive background. The group's
research serves as a springboard for QuarkNet projects that they sponsor,
including LHC masterclasses, laboratory research for teachers, and technical
tours of New Mexico scientific facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.