* 1906753
* Co-robotic Games for Low Resource Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jessica Hammer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,872,054.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. Robots and robotics
excite and challenge youths and adults. Unfortunately, the cost of purchasing
robots or building useful robots is prohibitive for many low resource
individuals and groups. This project will relieve this expense and provide an
opportunity for resource limited individuals to experience the thrilling aspects
of robotics by building a computer game that simulates robotic action. This
project uses co-robotics wherein the participating player programs an avatar to
assist in a symbiotic manner to achieve the goals of the game and participant.
The game will provide access to the ideas and concepts such as programing,
computational thinking and role assumption. The overarching goals are (1) to
engage low-resource learners in STEM education through robotics in out-of-school
spaces, and (2) to update the field of robotics-base STEM education to integrate
the co-robotics paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to gain
knowledge on how co-robotics can be used in the informal education sector to
facilitate the integration of computational science with STEM topics and to
expand the educational use of co-robotics. Because the concept of co-robotics is
new, a designed-based research approach will be used to build theoretical
knowledge and knowledge of effective interventions for helping participants
learn programing and computational thinking. Data will be collected from several
sources including surveys, self-reports, in game surveys, pre and post-tests.
These data collection efforts will address the following areas: Technology
reliability, Resolution of cognitive tension around co-play, Accelerate
discovery and initial engagement, Foster role-taking and interdependence with
co-robots, Investigate social learning, and Validate measures using item
response theory analysis. The DBR study questions are:&lt;br/&gt;1.What design
principles support the development of P3Gs that can effectively attract initial
engagement in a free-choice OST space that offers large numbers of competing
options? 2.What design principles support a P3G gameplay loop that enables
learning of complex skills, computational thinking and co-robotics norms, and
building of individual and career interest over the course of repeated
engagement?&lt;br/&gt;3.What design principles support P3Gs in attaining a high
rate of re-engagement within low-resource OST settings? 4.What kinds of positive
impact can P3Gs have on their proximal and distal environment? In addition, the
project will research these questions about design: 1.What technical and game
design features are needed to accommodate technological interruption? 2.What
design elements or principles mitigate competition for cognitive resources
between real-time play and understanding the co-robotic's behavior in relation
to the code the player wrote for it? 3.What design elements are effective at
getting learners in OST settings to notice and start playing the game? 4.What
designs are effective at encouraging learners to engage with challenging
content, particularly the transition from manual play to co-play? 5.What design
elements help players develop a stake in the role the game offers? 6.What social
behaviors emerge organically around a P3G prototype that is not designed to
evoke specific social interactions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.