* 1906512
* Critical Thinking and People-Place Relationships in Citizen Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Julia Parrish, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,605.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot and feasibility project will explore whether
participation in informal science initiatives like citizen science, which is a
form of Public Participation in Scientific Research, can foster or enhance
participant attachment to the natural places participants investigate via these
programs. The project also examines if participant attachment to place
influences the development or application of critical thinking skills among
adult learners. Critical thinking skills and the factors that enhance critical
thinking skills are important areas of inquiry within the informal STEM learning
community. Existing scholarship suggests that three components may be linked:
(1) feelings of connection to specific places, (2) intentional exploration and
investigation of those places (in this case via citizen science), and (3)
understanding of complex socio-ecological systems, which is predicated on
critical thinking skills ability. However, the degree to which these aspects are
related to each other, the scale at which they occur (local to global), and the
specific dimensions of place connection or informal science experiences
implicated is not known. Working with the Coastal Observation and Seabird Survey
Team (COASST) citizen science program, this project advances collaboration among
experts from disparate fields to examine if and how citizen science contributes
to increases in connection to place and higher-order critical thinking skills
among participants and the potential links between those hypothesized outcomes.
The ultimate goal of the project is to inform design of Public Participation in
Scientific Research programming that optimizes participant learning, interest,
and retention; produces societal outcomes like critical thinking in support of
science literacy; and creates high quality data of the scale and grain needed to
address questions and issues across the basic-applied science
continuum.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the degree to which
Public Participation in Scientific Research, specifically citizen science, may
foster the presence or intensity of place attachment felt by participants for
the sites and settings investigated through these programs and to what extent
place attachment may be linked to higher order critical thinking skills among
adult learners. A three-pronged mixed-methods research strategy will include:
(1) a re-analysis of existing survey and interview data for markers of three-
dimensional (personal, social, natural) place attachment as well as critical
thinking skills and dispositions; (2) an assessment survey to test for the
presence and intensity of place attachment and critical thinking skills; and (3)
in-depth interviews to better understand the qualitative nature and development
of place attachment and critical thinking skills in a citizen science context.
The survey and interview sample will be drawn from participants in the COASST
citizen science program and will be stratified into four groups as a function of
time engaged in the program, including new, novice, and long-term participants.
An independent external advisory board and a committee of visitors comprised of
experts in informal science, education, and sense of place will critique and
help guide this work. Results are expected to reveal important factors that
impact the learning and behavioral outcomes of informal STEM initiatives by
probing questions about the essential experiences, exposures, and COASST program
components that facilitate deeper critical thinking skills and place attachment.
Synthesizing theoretical frameworks from the fields of geography, science
education, and educational psychology while testing a unique methodological
approach to best measure critical thinking skills and place attachment in an
informal citizen science setting will enhance knowledge-building among research
and practitioner communities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In a globalized and
increasingly technologically complex world, the ability of citizens to
interrogate and interpret scientific evidence, views, and values is critical.
That is, scientific literacy is essential for the maintenance of robust and
healthy economic, social, and environmental systems in the twenty-first century.
Informal science learning fills an important gap in national educational efforts
to cultivate a scientifically literate populace as research suggests that formal
science training is not always capable of fostering the type of higher order
critical thinking skills that undergird such scientific competency. This project
aims to strengthen infrastructure and build capacity among informal science
practitioners by clarifying whether specific aspects and forms of Public
Participation in Scientific Research, especially those relating to people-place
connections, are implicated in the development and/or application of critical
thinking skills in STEM settings. This effort may expand opportunities to
strengthen informal science learning program outcomes, including the cultivation
of numerous 21st century skills like information literacy and social skills like
conflict management. Through a greater understanding of the individual
components that shape informal learning experiences and outcomes, this project
also has the potential to support the broadening of participation in STEM fields
by providing the groundwork for further research on whether or not
underrepresented or traditionally marginalized groups of people experience
and/or relate differently to both the "places" most common in citizen science
and the practice of informal science programming
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.