* 1906383
* Enabling Quantum Leap: Q-AMASE-i: MonArk Quantum Foundry: Rapidly Incubating Translational Advances in QISE with a 2D-Quantum Materials Pipeline (2D-QMaP)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2027
* Yves Idzerda, Montana State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 22,222,678.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes the MonArk Quantum
Foundry that is jointly operated by Montana State University and the University
of Arkansas to accelerate the development of layered two-dimensional (2D)
materials and devices for applications in quantum sensing, communication, and
computing. Numbering in the thousands, 2D materials offer an expansive library
of potential systems for next-generation quantum information science
technologies. The exploration of these materials presents significant
opportunities to grow the quantum industry in the US, but the vast parameter
space presents several formidable challenges that slow the pace of scientific
discovery and translating discoveries into quantum technologies. The MonArk
Quantum Foundry directly addresses these challenges by (1) the development of
materials synthesis and fabrication tools tailored to rapidly assemble prototype
quantum devices made from two-dimensional materials, (2) the seamless
integration of these tools with next-generation quantum-relevant
characterization instrumentation, (3) making this newly developed infrastructure
openly accessible to academic, government, and industrial research groups, and
(4) providing open-source inspired infrastructure to accelerate the exchange of
samples, ideas, technical knowledge, and pedagogical resources to quantum
researchers and educators across the US. In addition to impacting the broader
community, the MonArk Quantum Foundry accelerates collaborative research
priorities of teams from Montana State University and the University of Arkansas
to leverage two-dimensional quantum materials for generating and manipulating
quantum states of light, innovating new qubit architectures, and exploring
quantum magnetic phenomena in two-dimensions. Industrial partnerships and close
synergy between theoretical and experimental research are deeply integrated at
all levels of Foundry activities. The workforce development, graduate and
undergraduate curriculum development, and recruiting activities focus on
creating a diverse, quantum-literate workforce in the heartland of the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes
a quantum materials foundry that tackles critical translational scientific
challenges in the research area of two-dimensional (2D) quantum materials and
devices. Two “2D Quantum Materials Pipelines” will be developed and hosted at
the Foundry sites at Montana State University and the University Arkansas that
integrate robotic automation of the most cumbersome and time-consuming processes
of 2D quantum research with cutting-edge quantum characterization
instrumentation developed in close collaboration with industrial partners for
maximally effective quantum research. The 2D Quantum Materials Pipelines
leverage technological innovations to enable researchers to rapidly progress
from the conception of a new 2D system to a quantum device to be tested and
characterized, accelerating all aspects of translational science in this field.
The capabilities of the 2D Quantum Materials Pipelines as well as the acquired
technical knowledge and scientific discoveries are made available to researchers
through collaborations and open-source resources that expand the reach of the
Foundry activities and infrastructure across the US. The in-house research
activities of the Foundry converge experimental and theoretical expertise, new
concepts from big data and machine learning, and industrial guidance. The 2D
Quantum Materials Pipelines enable exploration of novel quantum systems and
phenomena such as 2D quantum magnetism and ferroelectricity and development of
quantum technologies such as single-photon emitters, entangled photon-pair
sources, and novel qubits. Education and outreach activities include websites,
webinars, short courses, public engagements, in-person laboratory training for
middle/high school/undergraduate/graduate students, and continued professional
development for technical workers from industry. The Foundry develops a quantum-
literate workforce by integrated research and learning and builds leadership in
the quantum sciences by advancing early-career faculty into leadership
positions, the impact of which will endure for
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Condensed Matter
Physics Program, Division of Materials Research, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.