* 1906711
* I-Corps:  Hollow Metal Nanoparticles: Improving the Sensitivity of Lateral Flow Assays
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,10/31/2021
* Jin Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable new
and improved lateral flow assays (LFAs) through the development of hollow metal
nanoparticles as highly sensitive color labels. LFAs are commonly used in
environmental monitoring, food safety testing, and point-of-care clinical
diagnostics (the most common example is the home pregnancy test). The company?s
core technology will improve the performance of the active component in LFA
devices, translating to faster and more accurate diagnoses, more timely
treatment regimens, and decreased health care costs for patients and providers
worldwide. These advantages should prove especially important in resource-
constrained settings where access to established laboratories equipped with
expensive instrumentation is cost- or time-prohibitive. Thus, the improvement
and expansion of rapid, affordable, LFA point-of-care diagnostic platforms
represent a critical need and will have broad impacts in public health on a
global scale. Moreover, with the growing adoption of nanotechnology throughout
industry, there is rapidly increasing demand for intentionally designed
nanostructures in a wide range of applications ranging from chemical catalysis
to optoelectronics. Securing a foothold in the LFA industry will establish the
infrastructure necessary to diversify the company?s product distribution into
other industries that could also benefit from the advantages of hollow metal
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will explore commercial
opportunities for hollow metal nanoparticles. Hollow nanoparticles have
substantial advantages over their solid counterparts, including lower mass per
particle for reduced material costs, higher surface-area-to-volume ratio for
increased loading, and enhanced plasmonic performance. The company?s primary
technology is the highly uniform synthesis of hollow metal nanoparticles with
predetermined dimensions, surface morphology, optical response, and metal
composition. Currently, most conventional LFAs use 30-40 nm solid gold
particles, which suffer from low capture rate and low visual contrast. In order
to improve the sensitivity of these devices, we have developed more advanced
nanostructures which will be captured more effectively and provide greater
contrast. Implementing robust customer discovery will enable us to determine the
extent of product customization that would be most useful to this target
industry. Successfully making this determination and subsequently
commercializing the company?s technology would enable LFAs with greater
sensitivity, opening the door for platform expansion to previously undetectable
diseases and toxins. Moreover, through the company?s immersion into customer
discovery and business model canvas principles, we will become experts in the
Lean LaunchPad methodology and can then apply this methodology to future target
customer segments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.