* 1906497
* GOALI: Controlled Coating via Charged Droplet Impact and Deposition on Dielectric and Conducting Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Farzad Mashayek, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 02/28/2023
* USD 428,672.00

Many products used by consumers and industry are coated with layers of materials
to prevent corrosion or to provide specialized surface properties. A common way
to apply a coating is to spray a liquid onto the surface. The effectiveness and
resilience of the coating often depends on intricate details of how the liquid
drops that impact the surface bounce, splash, and spread over the surface to
form the coating. Despite decades of research and practice, the fundamentals of
coating processes, especially on products and machines with complex shapes, are
not fully understood. This GOALI project is a joint effort between the
University of Illinois - Chicago (UIC) and the Spraying Systems Company to
conduct experiments and develop numerical simulations that will determine
whether coating processes can be improved by applying an electric field to
control details of drop dynamics as the drops impact the surface. The results of
fundamental studies conducted at UIC will be used to develop spraying protocols
that will be tested at Spraying Systems under industrially relevant conditions.
The research team at UIC and representatives from Spraying Systems will also
conduct a series of outreach activities to engage students at all academic
levels, especially those from underrepresented groups, in the research and
related demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this GOALI project is
to investigate drop dynamics in the presence of an electric field to manipulate
spray coating processes. The project will focus on droplet impact, deposition,
and spreading on substrates attached to electrodes that generate an electric
field. Experiments will be conducted to analyze droplet impact and spreading on
dielectric and conducting surfaces to evaluate the droplet's shape and spreading
difference. The influence of the morphology of the surface on droplet processes
will be evaluated. Phase-field modeling of droplet impact onto dielectric and
conducting surfaces will be carried out, using ab initio density function theory
calculations to obtain surface binding energies. The results will be used to
develops spraying protocols that will be tested in practice at Spraying
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.