* 1906490
* Exploring the Relationship Between Continuous Improvement Culture and Afterschool STEM Program Quality
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jared Boyce, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,998,872.00

The role of afterschool programs in the science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) learning ecosystem has grown over the past two decades, which
has led to increasing efforts to support and improve program quality. These
efforts include developing STEM programs and curricula, creating standards for
facilitating informal STEM learning experiences, building networks of support,
and developing tools for assessment and evaluation. However, such efforts may
have limited impact in terms of ongoing quality improvement. STEM curricula vary
in disciplinary focus, quality and may not apply to local contexts and needs.
Many afterschool programs resort to using simple STEM kits or online activities
rather than rigorous curricula with support for educators. The project will
study how the California Department of Education's (CDE) efforts to change
organizational culture to support continuous quality improvement (CQI) have
affected the offerings and quality of afterschool STEM in the state's more than
4,500 publicly funded afterschool sites. The EPISTEMIC project will contribute
new research findings on how CQI can increase access to higher quality STEM
learning opportunities for underserved youth. Even more important, the project
will provide new insights on how organizational culture affects participation in
and implementation of afterschool CQI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use
an organizational theory framework and a mixed methods approach to conduct three
research activities: (1) Describe the organizational context through interviews,
participant observations, and artifact analysis to map and describe the overall
support system as a context for understanding organizational culture change; (2)
Describe change over time in organizational culture, CQI processes, and STEM
program offerings and quality through surveys/interviews of afterschool youth,
staff, directors, and grantee representatives; and (3) Generate explanations
about the relationships between organizational culture, CQI, and STEM quality in
different contexts through in depth case studies. Bringing organizational
culture, CQI, and STEM offerings and quality into shared focus is the most
important intellectual contribution of this work. Organizational theory's
sensemaking concept will guide analyses to describe, exemplify, and generate
theoretical explanations for patterns in organizational culture, CQI, and STEM
program changes, with attention to relevant contextual
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuous quality improvement provides tools for
afterschool STEM staff to identify needs and ways to improve. The EPISTEMIC
study will contribute recommendations on the systemic, organizational, and
cultural aspects of improvement strategies relevant to policymakers, funders,
support providers, and afterschool organizations in California, as well as other
state or nongovernmental support systems around the country. The study will also
produce CQI guidelines for reflecting on and incorporating changes to
organizational culture as part of CQI for afterschool staff and site directors.
These will be helpful for practitioners around the country. The study's focus on
three organizational contexts -- school district, national afterschool, and
local afterschool -- will extend the relevance of the findings and
recommendations, which will be disseminated through forums, workshops, and
articles in practice and policy-oriented publications. The study will also
benefit the research community by providing a framework and methods for studying
organizational culture and CQI. The findings on the relationships between
organizational culture, CQI, and STEM offerings and outcomes will provide a
foundation for further research on how these relate to STEM learning outcomes
for youth. EPISTEMIC is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.