* 1906079
* Acquisition of an isotope-ratio-monitoring mass spectrometer at the University of Massachusetts Amherst
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Isla Castaneda, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2022
* USD 312,110.00

This award funds a replacement for a 17-year old stable isotope mass
spectrometer at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Faculty members,
postdoctoral scholars, and graduate and undergraduate students from the Five
Colleges Geology Consortium (Amherst College, Hampshire College, Mount Holyoke
College, Smith College and UMass Amherst) will use this instrument to
investigate diverse questions relating to Eart's history and environmental
change. Two primary isotopes that will be measured are oxygen and deuterium,
which are used to trace processes occurring within the water cycle. Measuring
oxygen or deuterium isotopes in geological archives, such as speleothems or
ocean sediments, provides a way of examining what Earth's water cycle was like
during times in the past when atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2; an important
greenhouse gas) levels were similar to today. By using isotopes to study the
water cycle in the past, we gain important information on what future conditions
on Earth will be like. The researchers will offer a short course on isotopes,
which will be open to faculty, postdoctoral scholars, graduate students and
undergraduates from nearby community colleges and state colleges, to reach new
users and communicate scientific results to a wider audience; all participants
will gain hands-on experience measuring isotopes with the new mass
spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award allows for the purchase a
ThermoElectron Delta V, equipped with a dual inlet, an IsoLink II, a Trace GC,
and Conflow IV. Three major research projects will be enabled by the new
instrumentation: (1). The mid-Pliocene warm period (mPWP), from ~3.3 to 3.0 Ma,
is a current priority of the international research community because it is the
most recent interval in Earth's history with higher carbon dioxide (CO2)
concentrations than the pre-industrial Holocene. Carbon and hydrogen (deuterium)
isotopes of leaf waxes preserved in marine and lacustrine sediments from key
sites in the Arctic (Siberia) and tropics (Africa, Australia) provide
information regarding past hydroclimate variability and vegetation response to
past warm periods, including the mPWP and Pleistocene interglacials, with direct
relevance to projections of future climate. (2). The production of CO2 in upland
soil environments profoundly shapes the fluxes of carbon from terrestrial
streams to the ocean-atmosphere system. This occurs through both its modulation
of (a) groundwater pCO2 and subsequent evasion rates to the atmosphere in stream
headwaters, and (b) proton supplies to chemically weather bedrock and transport
alkalinity. The quantitative description of these connections between soil
respiration and stream carbon fluxes will help constrain terrestrial carbon
budgets and provide frameworks for predicting the response of these fluxes to
climate change in the future and through Earth history. (3). 80% of Madagascar's
population lives in poverty and is almost entirely dependent on local,
subsistence agriculture to survive. Understanding past rainfall variability may
provide insight to how rainfall might vary in a warming world. Studies of
changes in tropical hydrology in Madagascar from speleothem isotopes will
provide important new data from the Southern Hemisphere tropics and thereby help
establish the timing of changes in the Indian Monsoon in the Southern versus
Northern Hemispheres on orbital and millennial timescales. They will also help
determine what drives interannual rainfall variability. The researchers will
offer an intensive short course during the winter session in January 2020 "An
Introduction to Carbon, Oxygen and Hydrogen Stable Isotopes: Application to
Earth and Environmental Sciences", which will be open to students (undergraduate
and graduate), postdoctoral scholars and faculty from nearby state and community
colleges. Students will learn about isotopic analysis of waters, carbonates,
plant leaf waxes, CO2 and dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC). The workshop, and
research opportunities available at UMass, will be advertised in part by
delivering short presentations to relevant classes at nearby community colleges.
Through these activities, the team hopes to attract a new and diverse group of
users to the UMass Stable Isotope Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.