* 1906388
* SHF:Small:RUI: Semantic Complexity of Advanced Data Types
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Patricia Johann, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2024
* USD 510,823.00

Testing of programs has dominated the last 50 years of software development, but
the next 50 will see an increased demand for provably correct software. This is
partly because modern applications are increasingly safety critical, partly
because testing is by its very nature only a partial correctness guarantee, and
partly because programming language technology is now at the stage where it is
feasible to formally verify critical programs. Language-based verification uses
a programming language's type system to help guarantee program correctness: the
more program properties a type system can express, the more the compiler can
automatically verify. Advanced data types such as Generalized Algebraic Data
Types (GADTs) help close the so-called "semantic gap" between what programmers
know about programs involving them and what a type system can express about
those programs. The key observation underlying this project is that GADTs and
other advanced data types are underspecified by their syntax, which often leads
to them being used in unjustified ways that undermine their promise for
verification. The project's novelty is a fully semantic response to this
observation, embodied by the entirely novel notion of the functorial completion
of a data type. This notion of functorial completion leads directly to the
project's overall impact, which is to change the way programmers understand, and
thus program with, GADTs and other advanced data types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project shows that the way that even ordinary GADTs are currently understood is
not formally justifiable and leads to unsafe programming practices, with the
obvious consequences for verification, security, and reliability of software
systems. It gives a grammar that generates a very general class of GADTs and
other advanced data types, and uses the new notion of the functorial completion
of a data type to give the data types generated by this grammar the same kind of
semantics that has long been the cornerstone of the theory of standard algebraic
data types. This ensures that data types generated by the grammar can be used
with semantic and computational confidence. Furthermore it allows the data types
to be classified according to semantic complexity--a novel notion introduced in
this project--that helps programmers better understand a data type's semantic
and computational properties. Finally, the project gives a framework for
constructing parametric models for polymorphic languages supporting the advanced
data types generated by the grammar. This framework is principled, conceptually
simple, uniform, comprehensive, and predictive. It is constructed specifically
to validate the semantics of the GADTs and other advanced data types generated
by the grammar, and the constructs that are derived in a standard way from such
semantics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.