* 1906532
* CAREER: Stochastic Multiple Time-Scale Co-Optimized Resource Planning of Future Power Systems with Renewable Generation, Demand Response, and Energy Storage
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2019,08/31/2019
* Lei Wu, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 89,938.00

This PI will develop co-optimized generation, transmission, and DR planning
solutions to cope with the impacts of short-term variability and uncertainty of
renewable generation (RG) and demand response (DR) as well as hourly
chronological operation details of energy storage (ES) and generators. The
approach is to (1) propose a stochastic multiple time-scale co-optimized
planning model that explicitly integrates short-term variability and uncertainty
as well as hourly chronological operation into long-term planning; (2) develop
efficient solution methodologies and implement on high performance parallel
computing facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The interaction
among variability, uncertainty, and constraints from long-term planning and
hourly chronological operation will be quantified for enhancing security and
sustainability of power systems with significant RG, DR, and ES. This research
can be used to evaluate effective load carrying capability (ELCC) of variable
energy sources, and to study policies on portfolios of energy production and
storage techniques. This study is of practical importance since RG, DR, and ES
are being implemented worldwide and their distinctive contributions to energy
security and sustainability need to be well understood.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project has profound impacts on the
sound deployment of RG, DR, ES, and smart grid. For example, it allows better
treatment of investment options which require transmission and generation
together, in order to exploit favorable sites for wind or solar. The research
and educational findings would help educate engineers to meet challenges of the
secure and sustainable electricity infrastructure. The project will increase
public awareness and understanding of the complexity of power system planning,
and appeal to researchers and educators with interests in power systems-based
research and education.