* 1906366
* RAPID: Informal Learning about Urban Ecology through Community-Engaged Research as a Pathway to Persistence for Disaster-Impacted Students
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Madhusudan Katti, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 01/31/2021
* USD 199,721.00

North Carolina State University will work with 50 undergraduate students
affected by Hurricane Florence and Tropical Storm Michael to collect time-
sensitive data about the storms' damage on urban forests. This community-engaged
research project will involve students affected by the storms in personally
meaningful, relevant learning tasks. Engaging in issues relevant to disasters
can help students who have experienced losses from a disaster to develop
increased resilience and persistence. These learning opportunities may also
increase students' understanding of how science can help their communities and
perceptions of themselves as scientists.

The project aims to provide an urban ecological research experience to disaster-
impacted students and to measure the impact of this experience on students'
persistence, resilience, and scientific identity. This project has two major
goals: 1) To promote science learning, resilience, and persistence among
students from communities affected by the recent storms; 2) To collect vital,
time-sensitive data on impacts of the hurricane on urban forests to inform
future urban ecosystem management in Eastern North Carolina and beyond. As part
of this project, students will complete pre- and post-test measures of their
science identity, their academic persistence, and their resilience, as well as
an assessment of forestry knowledge and responses. They will also complete a
daily journal reporting changes in their interest in science and identity as a
scientist, to capture progressive changes across the learning experience. The
project will use photographic analysis to rapidly assess the extent of damage to
trees and the storms' impacts on urban infrastructure including: 1) aerial
photographs and remotely sensed images for before-after comparisons on
city-/region-wide scales; 2) 360-degree photos taken from the ground to analyze
the three-dimensional structure of the urban forest and effects of hurricane
damage; 3) images and reports from social media postings; 4) longer-term
comparative analyses using available historical images. As a culminating
activity, students will develop and curate a documentary exhibit, and present
findings at libraries, museums, and K-12 schools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.