* 1906899
* Conference: Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Imagination in Informal STEM Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Christine Reich, Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2022
* USD 249,994.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This project will consider how research on imaginative thinking, and
perspectives on the role of imagination in STEM practice and STEM education, can
be systematically applied to support STEM learning in museum contexts. Common
conceptions of science as non-imaginative are persistent, but scholarship across
disciplines suggests critical roles for imagination, both in the practice of
STEM and in shaping learners' perceptions of themselves as part of STEM.
Further, evidence from the fields of neuroscience, psychology, child development
and education suggests ways that imagination can be fostered and improved, and
that these understandings could be applied to the design of museum experiences
in order to improve STEM outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of this
project, led by the Museum of Science, Boston, both synthesize and generate
knowledge at the intersections of imagination, STEM, and education practice in
ways that are actionable for museum professionals. Activities include: a
literature review, a document review, and a survey of ISE professionals; an in-
person convening of STEM professionals (researchers, practitioners, educators
and others); and the development and dissemination of products designed to
inform future project development. The goals of the project are to: 1) prompt
conversations about imaginative thinking across the Informal Science Education
(ISE) field, and between ISE and other fields; 2) identify priority areas for
research and development that can advance the field's understandings at the
intersections of imagination, STEM, and learning; and 3) catalyze future
research and development efforts that can advance the field. The intent is for
the integration scholarship on imagination, STEM, and learning within museums'
research and development efforts to lead to projects that describe, test, and
refine theoretical frameworks and concrete strategies for supporting imaginative
thinking among public audiences through exhibitions, programs, and other
designed experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.