* 1906617
* Gordon Research Conference - Physical Science of Cancer; Galveston, Texas; February 10-15, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Claudia Fischbach, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 12/31/2019
* USD 10,030.00

This award provides support for the conference travel and registration fees of
seven individuals from underrepresented groups to attend the 2019 Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) on the Physical Science of Cancer to be held in
Galveston, Texas, from February 10-15, 2019. The meeting will bring together
engineers, physicists, chemists, and mathematicians along with global experts in
cancer biology/oncology to explore the latest advances and next
challenges/opportunities for physical science and engineering to advance
knowledge related to cancer. The conference will provide significant
opportunities for professional development and networking for trainees and young
investigators as well as a forum for the discussion and dissemination of the
latest scientific advances. Cancer biomechanics and mechanobiology is a
relatively new field, and conferences focused on this important area of research
are novel.

The conference will include national and international leaders in the physical
properties of cancer as well as up and coming researchers. The presented
research will include biomechanics and mechanobiology, imaging, and
computational methods related to cancer cell characterization, tumor
development, and metastatic processes. The funds from this award will be used to
support four invited speakers and three speakers based on submitted abstracts to
allow them to participate in this GRC. All invited speakers that will be
supported through this award are early or mid-career women. The selection of the
additional three speakers for support will focus on individuals from
underrepresented groups, including those with disabilities and with appointments
at universities that are not classified as R1:doctoral universities - highest
research activity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.