* 1906487
* Geometry of Mapping Class Groups and Surface Bundles
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Matthew Durham, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 210,786.00

Surfaces are two dimensional spaces which play a fundamental role in many areas
of mathematics, especially in topology, geometry, and dynamics. Surfaces can be
flat, like a piece of paper, or curved, like the outside of a ball, a donut, or
a saddle, and the various shapes they can take often strongly constrain the
shapes of the higher dimensional manifolds in which they inevitably occur. An
outstanding and ubiquitous example of this phenomenon is a surface bundle,
which, like a donut, is a higher dimensional manifold which can be sliced so
that the cross-sections are surfaces. Unlike a donut, however, as one moves
through most surface bundles, the surface cross-sections can twist and deform in
complicated ways. This twisting is encoded in the geometry of the mapping class
group, which, among other things, is the collection of all symmetries of the
space of shapes that a surface can take.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of
this research program is to develop new tools for deepening our understanding of
the geometry of the mapping class group and its connection to surface bundles,
including by analyzing the geometry of important classes of 4-dimensional
bundles coming from dynamics. In more detail, this project will investigate the
coarse geometry of the mapping class group, Teichmuller space, and surface
bundles over surfaces using the tools of geometric group theory. A unifying
aspect of the various parts of the project is the hierarchical nature of these
objects and the hyperbolicity of the curve complex. The PI will employ ideas
from CAT(0) cubical geometry to study the local coarse geometry of the mapping
class group. Using related ideas, the PI will investigate whether the mapping
class group satisfies certain conjectures from K-theory. In another direction,
the PI will study surface bundles over Teichmuller curves with the aim of
developing a new theory of geometrical finiteness for surface bundles. Finally,
the PI will study various algorithmic problems in the mapping class group, some
of which have applications to surface bundles and symplectic
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.