* 1906751
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The role of mitochondrial respiratory chain composition in facultative sexual reproduction
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Ryan Weaver, Weaver                  Ryan           J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This research
aims to increase understanding of the role of mitochondria (the organelle
responsible for a majority of the cell's energy) in mediating animal's stress
responses to changing environments and mode of reproduction. Some animals
reproduce by making clones of themselves while others reproduce by mating with
other individuals. The conditions under which an animal switches from making
clones of itself to mating as a form of reproduction has been linked to
environmental stress. Excessive environmental stress can damage an animal's
cells and DNA. In an evolutionary context, mating is a means to repair DNA
damage as well as to create new genes that will allow for adaptation to the
environment. This work will study how the mitochondria are involved in this
process. In addition to the work proposed to study mitochondria, the fellow has
developed the Science Training and Education Program: Increasing The
participation of Under-represented Populations (STEP IT UP) to promote and
provide equitable access to a career in biological science. STEP IT UP focuses
on first generation and racial minority students who may be denied research
opportunities because of their grades or test scores alone. The fellow will
recruit students through STEP IT UP to increase representation of
underrepresented groups in biology.

This project will investigate mitochondrial characteristics of the sea-starlet
anemone, Nematostella vectensis, which is facultatively mating organism and has
AOX. The mitochondrial respiratory chain is typically depicted as having two
entry points and one exit for electrons. However, many facultative animals have
a second exit, called the alternative oxidase (AOX). This work proposes that AOX
protects cells from free radical damage during environmental stress and that
through this protection, AOX allows for the clonal mode of reproduction under a
wider breadth of environmental conditions. AOX maintains mitochondrial function
under cellular stress conditions while keeping free radicals below levels that
cause damage to DNA. Chemical inhibition of AOX and genetic knockout lineages
will be created to test how environmental stress, free radicals, and AOX
interact to determine mode of reproduction. The fellow will conduct stress
experiments using lineages with and without AOX, then measure the point at which
gametogenesis occurs. If AOX plays a role in mediating the switch to a mating
form of reproduction, AOX knockout lineages should produce more free radicals
and switch reproduction mode at a lower stress threshold than wild type
lineages. AOX may play a role in other evolutionary processes such as DNA
mutation rates, local adaptation, and speciation. STEP IT UP participants from
under-represented groups in Texas will receive training in bioinformatics,
molecular biology, and evolutionary biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.