* 1906795
* Collaborative Research: Technology Education for Women in Transition
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Baek-Young Choi, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2023
* USD 383,987.00

This project in the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program's
Innovations in Development track aims to broaden participation in STEM education
among underserved populations through innovative and inclusive approaches to
technology education. The project is designed to enhance knowledge and comfort
with technology and develop computational thinking among women who were formerly
incarcerated and are now seeking to reenter the workforce or adjust to their
lives outside the criminal justice system ("women in transition") in the
Midwest. While women have become the fastest growing segment of the incarcerated
population, prison education and reentry programs are not well prepared to
respond to this influx. Women in transition are rarely exposed to STEM education
and they are generally isolated from the digital world while in prison.
Consequently, they face post-incarceration challenges in accessing and using
rapidly changing digital technologies. Against this backdrop, this three-year
technology education project will aim to help women in transition in Kansas and
Missouri develop STEM skills relevant to job applications and post-incarceration
adjustments. The project may serve as a template for building evidence-based
workforce preparation efforts in informal settings, and the concurrent online
peer networking and app development may also facilitate adaptation for and
scaling to other regions and other similarly digitally disadvantaged
populations. This project is funded by the AISL program, which seeks to advance
new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project design is informed by the
research team's past experiences offering technology education to women in
transition and other underserved populations in the Midwest. The design includes
three interrelated aspects: (1) technology education, (2) web/mobile app
development, and (3) original empirical research. The research team will offer
hybrid (online and offline) technology training programs to 300 women in
transition in Kansas and Missouri. Learners will attend weekly face-to-face
technology classes at different levels (introductory, intermediate, and
advanced) at public libraries. A member-only online site and an accompanying
mobile application for online tutorials and virtual meet-ups will enhance
exposure to different types of technologies. Starting with interest-based
technology topics including online resume building, information verification,
and identity protection, the team will introduce women to deeper STEM topics
including elementary coding skills and computational thinking. Empirical
research will examine how different modalities of offering technology education
are associated with learning outcomes for women participating in the program and
the association of increasing knowledge and skills in digital technologies with
self-efficacy, perceived social support, employment, and reduced
recidivism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.