* 1906073
* RAPID: Examining Seafloor Dynamics offshore Bogue Banks, North Carolina, Related to Hurricane Florence
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2018,12/31/2020
* John Walsh, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 12/31/2020
* USD 64,704.00

Many communities along the East and Gulf Coasts of the United States are
experiencing moderate to severe erosion. Decadal shoreline erosion rates
determined by the North Carolina Division of Coastal Management indicate that
less than 65 percent of the North Carolina shoreline is eroding. Chronic long-
term erosion and episodic impacts from storms have encouraged most coastal
communities in this state to conduct beach nourishments using local off shore
sand sources. One concern is present limited knowledge of how offshore sand
shoals (potential borrow areas for replenishment of coastal dunes and beaches)
are evolving in response to storm conditions and dredging activity. In
September, 2018, Hurricane Florence severely impacted southern North Carolina
and northern South Carolina, causing coastal erosion and flooding. As a result,
significant erosion mitigation efforts are anticipated due to these impacts.
This project will collect seafloor measurements from an offshore sand shoal
which can be used to evaluate hurricane-driven changes. Broader impacts of the
work include student training and information that can be used by coastal land
managers and policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Florence made
landfall as a Category 1 storm near Wilmington, North Carolina on the morning of
September 14, 2018 but, just prior to making landfall, the storm was a powerful
Category 2 hurricane, down from Category 4 status days prior. Hurricane-force
winds were experienced over a large region, and these yielded significant storm
surges as well as powerful waves along the central East Coast. Subaerial and
subaqueous geomorphic changes likely resulted due to sediment movement resulting
from forceful wave and tidal activity. This research is a rapid response to
collect seafloor mapping data (i.e., multibeam bathymetry) over a portion of a
previously surveyed area near Wilmington, North Carolina, known as the Morehead
City Ocean Dredged Material Disposal Site. Work will involve the collection and
interpretation of sub-bottom (CHIRP seismic) profiles, Samples of surface
sediments will also be collected and analyzed for grain-size to determine clast
size and sand transport parameters. These data will inform the nature of shelf
sediment transport associated with Hurricane Florence and provide essential
ground-truthing for interpretations of sediment transport and redistribution
during a strong storm event. Surveys and sampling will take place along the
inner continental shelf, within 16 kilometers of the North Carolina shore and
water depths generally less than 20 meters. This is the region where offshore
sand borrow sites used for beach nourishment are often located. It is also a
coastal area that has been relatively understudied due to its shallow and
energetic nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.