* 1906465
* OPUS: CRS: Through the looking glass: host-parasite coevolution and genetic recombination
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Curtis Lively, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 251,024.00

As we look around us, species with both males and females are the general rule.
Yet, the persistence of males and females along with reproduction that involves
genetic recombination, is a classic problem in biology. The problem stems from
the basic fact that males do not give birth. Thus, an all-female lineage that
reproduces by simply replicating the adult female (cloning) would be expected to
produce twice as many offspring as a population with both males and females.
This mode of reproduction should lead to the very rapid spread of the clonal
form in populations. But, in spite of this reproductive advantage, clonal
reproduction is rare. This paradox dates back to Charles Darwin, and dozens of
hypotheses for the advantages of genetic recombination have been put forward.
One of the leading hypotheses is the Red Queen, which posits that recombining
offspring are favored, on average, because genetically diverse offspring would
be more likely to escape rapidly evolving parasites. The goal of this project is
to synthesize more than thirty years of work on the Red Queen hypothesis. The
synthesis would be published as a book targeting advanced undergraduates and
graduate students in biology, would be of interest to the general public. The
project also involves the training of secondary school teachers and the
continued development of card games to teach high school and college students
about evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model organism for this work is a New
Zealand freshwater snail (Potamopyrgus antipodarum) in which females that
produced recombined offspring and those that only produce clonal offspring
coexist. The book would synthesize long-term field observations along with
shorter term experiments designed to determine the cost and benefits of
producing genetically variable, cross-fertilized offspring. The book would also
synthesize theoretical studies of the Red Queen hypothesis; and it would cover
some of the key concepts in evolutionary biology, such as hard versus soft
selection, frequency-dependent selection, bet-hedging, mutation accumulation,
stable equilibria versus oscillatory dynamics, and mate choice. The book would
also lay out the fundamentals regarding the ecology and genetics of infectious
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.