* 1906688
* Exhibit appraisal and diverse populations: Pilot research about intersectional and science identities in science exhibits
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Christine Reich, Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,989.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of settings. This project will
explore how understanding visitors' experiences with science museum exhibits may
contribute to increasing engagement among diverse audiences. Museums have made
great strides in understanding how exhibit design can support underrepresented
audiences, but often tend to focus on individual demographic groups such as
females, certain racial and ethnic minorities, and people with disabilities.
This project will explore relationships between visitors' demographic and
science identities to assess the affordances of using science identity as an
intersectional proxy that could help the field move beyond its reliance on
demographics. Building on prior National Science-funded work about museum
engagement, the project applies appraisal theory--a psychological model about
how people make conscious and subconscious assessments of situations that
manifest in emotions--to the informal learning context. To date, museums have
tended to focus on cognitive and behavioral aspects of engagement. Appraisal
theory can add emotional processes to the conceptual understanding of
engagement, and can be applied to help exhibit professionals develop a design
framework that upholds complex identities. Such a framework could have
implications for inclusive design of learning experiences in museums, schools,
and other educational contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pilot and Feasibility
Study will address methodological and theoretical questions about the
feasibility of a research approach that considers the relationships among: 1)
exhibit design features; 2) multiple identity factors including science
identity, demographics, and self-defined personal identity; 3) visitor
appraisals; and 4) engagement with exhibits. Led by researchers at the Museum of
Science, Boston and EdTogether, a non-profit research and development
organization for inclusive design, the project will begin with a pre-piloting
phase during which researchers will work with youth and professional advisors
from local community organizations to test a suite of data collection approaches
including self-report in the form of questionnaires and interviews; observations
of visitor engagement; and biometric data collection including galvanic skin
response and eye tracking. Building from this pre-piloting phase, the team will
conduct four mini-studies that will iteratively refine measures towards enhanced
validity and parsimony while gathering data to test the investigators'
hypothesized model of design, identity, appraisal, and engagement. The evidence
from testing this model through the four mini-studies will lay the foundation
for larger-scale research that intends to explore causal relationships among
intersectional identities, science identities, appraisal, and visitor
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.