* 1906802
* Meaningful Math: News Media for Increasing Adult Statistical Literacy
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jena Barchas-Lichtenstein, Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications Association
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 06/30/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Familiarity with statistical and data literacy is
important in many areas of modern life, but there is little research on how
adults continue to build mathematical literacy beyond formal schooling. Mass
media science news stories contain much data, assuming that adults will
understand the content.This 4-year project will first map the landscape of adult
statistical literacy in the US, particularly as it relates to news consumption.
The second phase will build on results from the first phase through a
longitudinal study. In the third phase, the project will develop a range of
experiments to manipulate mathematical explainers embedded in STEM news stories
and test techniques with adult audiences, with the goal of identifying the
attributes and affordances that best improve confidence and competence in the
underlying math principles and their meaning to news stories. in addition to the
research, project components include 12 broadcast video and social media pieces
each year that will form the basis for testing with audiences, a one-day
symposium for professional science journalists, and a written best practice
guide that summarizes key findings and implications for practitioners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical research questions are: How do mathematical
competence and confidence differ among different segments of the adult
population? How can STEM journalists improve adult mathematical competence and
confidence through their reporting techniques? Phase 1 of the research will be a
landscape review of mathematical content in the news including a baseline study
of adult statistical literacy. Phase 2 will be a longitudinal study with news
audiences recruited to participate in a panel study. Phase 3 will be iterative
testing of the digital content based on the findings from Phases 1 and 2 and
will use both focus groups and online testing. External evaluation will be
conducted by TERC including an evaluation of the symposium for professional
journalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are
twofold: the science videos created will be broadcast and made available free to
a national audience including those in rural areas; and the training of science
journalists has the potential for multiple, long term impact by increasing their
ability to communicate statistics meaningfully to their
readers/viewers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.