* 1906332
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Mysticetes and baleen as bioindicators of microplastics in marine food webs
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Matthew Savoca, Savoca, Matthew S
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. It is unknown to what degree baleen whales ingest microplastic,
how ingestion occurs, and if there are any health effects. This research seeks
answers to these questions. In whales, baleen acts as a sieve and retains prey
during filter-feeding. The first objective uses a laboratory experiment to test
baleen's effectiveness in trapping microplastics suspended in water. The fellow
will also use baleen specimens to study pollutants derived from ingested
plastic. In a live whale, baleen remains intact for two years to two decades,
dependent on species, before it wears out and is replaced by growing outwards
from the gum line. This process, which is similar to that of human fingernails
or tree rings, allows baleen to serve as a record of variation in a whale's
internal (body processes) and external (e.g., pollutants) conditions at the time
that portion of the baleen grew. The second objective will establish methods to
use baleen to track contaminant exposure over time. In addition, the fellow will
mentor high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, fostering these young
scholars' first research experiences and aiding the fellow's professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Baleen is a keratinized filtering structure
unique to mysticete whales. Despite its iconic status, baleen remains enigmatic
and understudied. For this work, baleen will be acquired from freshly deceased
specimens that strand in California, and from collections stored at the
Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History. The first aim of the fellow's
research is to test baleen's efficacy in retaining microplastics suspended in
the water column using a laminar flow tank at the Hopkins Marine Station of
Stanford University. In this experiment, the fellow will use baleen from species
with divergent feeding styles and baleen morphologies to elucidate which
mysticetes are more likely to ingest microplastics directly from the water
column, and also how microplastic particle size and buoyancy influences their
capture. For the fellow's second objective, baleen specimens will be analyzed
using high resolution gas chromatography-mass spectrometry for contaminants that
are indicative of synthetic material ingestion (e.g., phthalate plasticizers,
chlorinated and brominated flame-retardants). Using the same analytical methods,
the fellow will leverage the accreting property of baleen to create multi-year
intraindividual chronologies that will clarify microplastic exposure in
unprecedented geographic and phenological resolution. Taken together, these
studies will provide a critical assessment of baleen whales as bellwethers for
microplastic pollution and will release the untapped potential of baleen
collections to assess overall marine ecosystem health. Furthermore, the fellow
will develop outreach materials with the California Ocean Alliance, mentor
undergraduates through Stanford's Vice Provost for Undergraduate Education
(VPUE) program, and assist high school students in their Youth Engagement
through Science (YES!) internship at the Smithsonian
Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.