* 1906132
* Smart Prosthetic Sockets: Improved Prosthesis Comfort and Performance Through Adaptive Fluidic Flexible Matrix Composite Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Michael Madigan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2023
* USD 401,675.00

The fit of a lower limb prosthesis (e.g. an artificial leg) degrades over the
course of a day due to unavoidable volume loss of the residual (remaining part
of) the limb. This can lead to discomfort, pain, skin irritation, blisters, and
eventually soft tissue injuries on the residual limb. The associated pain and
injury caused by poor socket fit can become debilitating and impair quality of
life. The goal of this project is to develop a better understanding of the
causes of volume loss, evaluate volume loss in current state-of-the-art
prostheses, and develop a smart prosthetic socket that can accommodate for
volume loss of the residual limb. The ability to accommodate for volume loss
will eliminate the pain and injury due to poor socket fit and help users
maintain a high quality of life. The results of this research will have
significant societal impact as more than 1.6 million people in the US are living
without a limb, and service members of the Vietnam War and Operation Iraqi
Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom conflicts make up a significant portion
of that population. The most common prosthetic device problems for these
veterans and service members are that the devices are painful to wear and create
skin problems, which leads to at least 22% total device abandonment. The planned
educational efforts through high school, undergraduate research, as well as
mentorship, will have a broad impact on the students by providing them with the
unique and valuable experience of applying analysis tools taught in the
classroom to a "real-world" problem. Additionally, numerous physical principles
and classroom examples can be illustrated directly from the research for
educational benefit in undergraduate courses taught by the investigators. The
education and outreach plan will provide a broad impact on students' learning
through K-12 outreach programs in collaboration with the Center for the
Enhancement of Engineering Diversity and Services for Students with Special
Disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individuals with transfemoral or transtibial
(above the knee or below the knee) amputations experience daily changes in the
volume of residual limbs while wearing prosthetic limbs. The volume changes lead
to poor fitting of the residual limb in the prosthetic socket, and consequently
to various levels of discomfort, pain, skin irritation and tissue damage. This
project is focused on studying the underlying reasons for volume change in the
residual limbs, measuring the resulting limb deformations in the socket, and
developing a smart prosthetic socket employing fluidic flexible matrix composite
(f2mc) technology that can accommodate for volume loss of the residual limb. The
Research Plan is organized under three tasks. The FIRST Task is to develop new,
robust measurement techniques for measuring residual limb volume loss and limb
deformation during use. The residual limb measurement system will be an
integration of digital image correlation for measuring limb deformation,
structured light laser scanning for measuring volume change, and piezoresistive
pressure sensors for measuring interfacial pressures. The SECOND Task is to
achieve a greater understanding of the relationship between facets of socket
performance using the measurement system developed under the first task in
assessing socket performance in subjects with unilateral transfemoral
amputation. Four facets of socket performance will be evaluated before and after
volume change of the residual limb: 1) dimensions and volume of the residual
limb when not wearing the socket, 2) limb deformation when wearing the socket,
3) interfacial pressure between the socket and the residual limb when wearing
the socket, and 4) subjective assessments of socket performance provided by both
subjects and prosthetists. These measurements will provide a greater
understanding of the correlation between residual limb volume loss, interfacial
socket pressure, and comfort score and help clarify the mechanisms that lead to
volume change, and residual limb discomfort or pain, and allow predictive
relationships between these four facets of performance to be explored. The THIRD
Task is to develop and evaluate customized f2mc smart prosthetic sockets with
human subjects. The smart sockets are based upon a novel technology, developed
by the investigators, that can be used as an actuator with unique and highly-
customizable shapes, sizes, and mechanical properties and that have low power
requirements. Key components of the f2mc "wafers" are multiple layers of
oriented, high performance carbon fibers surrounding a flexible tube, an elastic
casting to hold the tubing/fibers in a desired shape/configuration, and an
internal working fluid, such as air or water in the tubing. The f2mc technology
is actuated by pressurizing the internal working fluid, which will lead to wafer
thickening. The wafers can achieve more than 300% increase in volume when
pressurized, exhibit stiffness ratios as high as 56 using simple valve control
and be fabricated into a variety of shapes and configurations that can be
tailored specifically for the user and thus uniquely accommodate for volume loss
of the residual limb and improve socket comfort. Socket performance will be
evaluated via benchtop testing and in human subjects with unilateral
transfemoral amputation. After the smart sockets are customized and optimized
for the amputees, the socket's performance will be compared to the subject's
current socket suspension method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.