* 1906097
* Conference and Grantee's Meeting: Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks; Arlington, Virginia; February 4-5, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Naoru Koizumi, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

This award supports a conference that convenes researchers, educators, and
representatives from a variety of government sectors to discuss challenges and
explore opportunities for collaboration in disrupting illicit supply networks.
Networks that illegally traffic in everything from people and drugs to human
organs and nuclear material pose significant threats to U.S. health, prosperity
and security. Unencumbered by national boundaries, they funnel illicit profits
to criminal organizations, and fuel transnational and terrorist organizations.
In FY2018, the National Science Foundation issued a Dear Colleague Letter (NSF
18-059) that solicited proposals for innovative, convergent approaches to
understanding and mitigating the effects of illicit supply networks. Nine new
EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) awards were made,
representing 29 investigators from diverse fields, including operations
research, the social sciences, computer science and materials science focused on
advancing the scientific understanding of how such illicit supply networks
function and how to disrupt them. This conference brings together these and
other interested researchers, along with NSF program directors and
representatives from many different governmental agencies and federally-
sponsored Centers of Excellence, to nurture this emerging research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will bring together domain
experts and quantitative researchers to explore new analytical approaches and
engineering methods to disrupt and disable illicit supply networks. Day 1 of the
conference includes keynotes and grantee lightening talks, as well as concurrent
sessions on specific illicit supply network domains (human/organ/arms
trafficking; narcotics/drugs/counterfeit products trafficking, financial fraud).
Day 2 of the conference will include a keynote speaker, facilitated breakout
sessions and discussion on topics related to this research area. These
discussions will include representatives from a host of other government
agencies whose missions involve various aspects of interdicting illicit supply
networks but in the US and internationally. The conference also provides
opportunities for student involvement. It will provide a unique forum to commune
a variety of stakeholders to encourage research on this important societal
topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.