* 1906446
* Anderson Accleration
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Carl Kelley, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 158,693.00

Nonlinear equations are ubiquitous in science and engineering. This project is
directed at understanding and improving methods for computing their solutions.
Anderson acceleration is an important computational method for chemistry and
physics applications. The main focus of this project is analysis of that
algorithm in the context of those applications. The principal investigator
deploys results of that analysis in applications such as solar power, where the
design of more efficient photosensitive molecules uses Anderson acceleration to
compute energy, nuclear engineering, where the coupling between several
different physics simulations leads to difficult nonlinear equations, and large-
scale simulations of novel materials, where the computation of material energy
states taxes even the largest supercomputers. A graduate student is engaged in
the research of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses unresolved algorithmic questions in numerical analysis theory and
implementation, focusing on algorithms for nonlinear equations, which are
ubiquitous in science and engineering codes. The research on Anderson
acceleration continues the principal investigator's study of a class of
Jacobian-free solvers, which are very important when Jacobians or Jacobian-
vector products are unavailable. Anderson acceleration is widely used in
electronic structure computations and in multi-physics simulations when one or
more of the physics simulators is a "black-box" code. The investigator studies
variations of the algorithm that have proved effective in practice, but for
which no theory is available, to understand its better-than-predicted
performance on some applications. He also examines the dependence of matrix-free
methods for eigenvalue computations on discretizations of an underlying problem
in a function space. A third line of study is the effects of errors in function,
Jacobian, and Jacobian-vector product evaluations on nonlinear solver methods.
The focus of this part of the project is semismooth nonlinear equations and
continuation methods. A graduate student is engaged in the research of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.