* 1906913
* Researching a Strengths-Based Approach to Engineering Education Using Design Squad LatinX
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Mary Haggerty, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,673,942.00

As a part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of setting. This three-year research and implementation
project empowers middle school LatinX youth to employ their own assets and funds
of knowledge to solve community problems through engineering. Only 7% of adults
in the STEM job cluster are of Hispanic/Latino origin. There is a continuing
need for filling engineering jobs in our current and future economy. This
project will significantly broaden participation of LatinX youth in engineering
activities at a critical point as they make career decisions. Design Squad
Global LatinX expands on a tested model previously funded by NSF and shown to be
successful. It will enable LatinX youth to view themselves as designers and
engineers and to build from their strengths to expand their skills and
participation in science and engineering. The project goals are to: 1) develop
an innovative inclusive approach to informal engineering education for LatinX
students that can broaden their engineering participation and that of other
underrepresented groups, (2) to galvanize collaborations across diverse local,
national, and international stakeholders to create a STEM learning ecosystem and
(3) to advance knowledge about a STEM pedagogy that bridges personal-cultural
identity and experience with engineering knowledge and skills. Project
deliverables include a conceptual framework for a strength-based approach to
engineering education for LatinX youth, a program model that is asset based, a
collection of educational resources including a club guide for how to scaffold
culturally responsive engineering challenge activities, an online training
course for club leaders, and a mentoring strategy for university engineering
students working with middle school youth. Project partners include the global
education organization, iEARN, the Society of Women Engineers, and various
University engineering programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research study will
employ an experimental study design to evaluate the impact on youth
participating in the Design Squad LatinX programs. The key research questions
are (1) Does participation increase students' positive perceptions of themselves
and understanding of engineering and global perspectives? (2) To what extent do
changes in understanding engineering vary by community (site) and by student
characteristics (age, gender, ethnicity)? (3) Do educators and club leaders
increase their positive perceptions of youths' funds of knowledge and their own
understanding of engineering? and (4) Do university mentors increase their
ability to lead informal engineering/STEM education with middle school youth? A
sample from 72 local Design Squad LatinX clubs with an enrollment of 10-15
students will be drawn with half randomly assigned to the participant condition
and half to the control condition. Methods used include pre and post surveys,
implementation logs for checks on program implementation, site visits to carry
out observations, focus groups with students and interviews with adult leaders.
Data will be analyzed by estimating hierarchical linear models with
observations. In addition, in-situ ethnographically-oriented observations as
well as interviews at two sites will be used to develop qualitative case
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.