* 1906262
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Mitochondrial genome architecture as a driver of speciation in parasitic lice
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Andrew Sweet, Sweet                   Andrew         D
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This award supports an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, Research
Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research and training of
the fellow that will utilize biological collections in innovative ways. Most
animals have mitochondrial DNA on a single chromosome. However, some species of
parasitic lice have their mitochondrial DNA separated onto multiple chromosomes.
It is not known how or why such a rare condition is maintained in lice. The
fellow seeks to address this knowledge gap by testing whether differences in
mitochondrial genome architecture (that is, single vs. multiple chromosomes) are
linked to natural selection and speciation, the processes largely responsible
for generating biodiversity. To this end, the fellow will rely on museum
collections to compare DNA sequences and body measurements of lice species that
have multiple mitochondrial chromosomes to those that have a single chromosome.
This work will help answer a particularly puzzling question in biology while
simultaneously showing a mechanism that generates biodiversity. The project will
also include educational components that promote biodiversity among general
audiences at both local and national scales.

The fellow will use multiple lines of evidence obtained from museum specimens to
specifically address whether fragmented mitochondrial chromosomes act as a
buffer to speciation via mito-nuclear incompatibility. First, the fellow will
compare phylogenetic diversity, mutation rates, and genomic selection in two
groups of avian lice that are known to have different mitochondrial
architectures: wing (fragmented chromosomes) and body (single chromosomes) lice
from doves. Lower mutation rates but higher diversification, divergence, and
selection in body lice would suggest that single mitochondrial chromosomes
promote speciation. Second, the fellow will test mutation rates and levels of
selection in cryptic species of lice. Cryptic species have indistinguishable
morphological differences but are highly divergent genetically. If pairs of
cryptic body louse species have inseparable morphology with high genetic
divergence and signatures of positive selection, whereas cryptic wing louse
species do not, this would again indicate that single chromosomes promote
speciation. The fellow will receive extensive training in morphology-based
inquiry and genome evolution. This project will also include a component for
training Purdue University undergraduate students in molecular/bioinformatic
methods. Additionally, results from the work will be incorporated into lesson
plans, outreach displays, and educational publications focused on evolution and
biodiversity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.