* 1906154
* LSAMP BD: University of South Carolina-Columbia, LS SCAMP
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Michael Matthews, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on PhD matriculation
and completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2018-2022
Strategic Plan, namely to "foster the growth of a more capable and diverse
research workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the
Nation." The vision of this grant is to provide a national model to produce
underrepresented scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance site for this LSAMP BD Activity is
the University of South Carolina (USC), Columbia, one of the 14 college and
universities included in the Louis Stokes South Carolina Alliance for Minority
Participation (LS SCAMP). The goal of this project is to create the first BD
program at the USC and to establish an evidence-based and sustainable program of
recruitment, mentoring, and support of underrepresented minority (URM) students
into and through STEM doctoral programs. In addition to providing substantial
financial support to enable students to focus full time on graduate-level course
work and research, the project, designed to advance BD students toward
completion of doctoral level studies, will provide a bridge program for
matriculating students and activities focused on communication, universal
research skills, and acculturation to the research community. The programs are
leveraged by extensive existing resources at the USC and are designed to
facilitate the obtainment of doctoral degrees in five years. The BD program will
create a community of URM scholars encompassing both sciences and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.