* 1906130
* LSAMP BD: University Of Puerto Rico -Mayaguez, Puerto Rico Louis Stokes Alliance For Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Eduardo Nicolau, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,058,802.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the&lt;br/&gt;Doctorate (BD) Activity
is to increase the number and competitiveness of STEM graduate students from
historically underrepresented minority populations, with emphasis on STEM
doctoral matriculation and completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2020-2022 Puerto
Rico LSAMP BD (PR-LSAMP-BD) program will recruit twelve (12) alumni from the
Territory and LSAMP institutions nationwide for STEM postbaccalaureate studies
at the University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez (UPR). UPR's BD program will provide
multidisciplinary training in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines at the graduate level to enable a seamless transition from
the STEM baccalaureate degree to STEM doctoral studies. Students will receive
intense STEM mentoring through participation in faculty mentored research in
disciplines such as biological sciences, math and physical sciences,computer
science, environmental sciences, engineering and geological sciences. Activities
also include STEM professional development activities such as national and
international research and conference attendance. In addition, UPR's BD program
will implement activities that develop mentoring and team-building skills. The
Role Model Seminar series will bring the BD Fellows into contact with successful
nationally and internationally recognized researchers thereby creating a
mentoring environment that further equips the Fellows. A BD Council has been
established to strengthen advisement, counseling and mentorship to the
participants as well as address continued sustainability of the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student support in the form of stipends and cost of
education are provided for two years for each student. The institution commits
to assisting the students financially through completion of the STEM doctoral
program. Evaluative activities will assess outcomes of students' accomplishments
relating to retention, degree completion, and career progress. Social
psychological outcomes related to career goals and expectations related to STEM
identity development will also be assessed. Outcomes will be disseminated
broadly through the institution's website, scholarly journals, and presentations
at STEM professional conferences. These efforts will increase the diversity of
STEM academic leadership and contribute to the growing literature on broadening
participation in STEM at the graduate and post-graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will continue to coordinate its
activities with other NSF-funded projects that are managed by the Resource
Center for Science and Engineering (RCSE) and by pertinent UPR graduate
programs. The activities implemented will increase the number of Puerto Rican
STEM&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students who apply and are admitted to STEM PhD
programs, and increase the number of these students who obtain STEM doctoral
degrees. Since 2003, fifty-four BD fellows have earned STEM doctoral degrees and
154 students have participated in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.