* 1906720
* Investigating Measurement of STEM Engagement and Advocacy in Older Adults.
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Lee Fleming, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 12/31/2022
* USD 298,098.00

While prior research has explored the reasons adults seek learning
opportunities, little is known about the factors that moderate older adults'
desire to participate in particular learning experiences. This study will
contribute to understanding strategies that engage older adults in STEM learning
in informal settings. The specific informal STEM Learning (ISL) experience to be
studied here involves the innovative use of a carefully structured
multigenerational team engineering design challenge that incorporates the
engineering design process, recognized as integrative approach to STEM. The
project will develop and pilot new tools to measure the impacts of the ISL
experience on older adults. The work will ultimately generate new knowledge that
supports general measurement practices through the rigorous, systematic
development of measures of older adult learning.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During
the 18-month pilot study, the team will: (a) develop and test methods for
measuring engagement in informal STEM learning and STEM advocacy in adults 50+
years of age; and (b) explore factors that lead to the engagement of this
population in ISL and that moderate the outcome of enhanced STEM advocacy. For
research purposes, engagement is being defined as focus, participation, and
persistence on a task. STEM advocacy is defined as a stance toward personal
actions that supports or promotes a cause or policy. The study design includes
use of an intergenerational team engineering design challenge involving 48 older
adults as the focal ISL activity of the research. Findings from this pilot study
will inform a future large-scale study of ISL environments, including specific
instructional practices and resulting outcomes, for older adult learning.
Defining the construct of STEM advocacy and examining its validity as a
potentially measurable outcome will better position the field to design and
evaluate more effective older adult learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Project results will be disseminated widely through the literature on
ISL, adult education and research tool development, as well as existing
practitioner networks. The project's connection with networks of lifelong
learning institutes creates additional infrastructure opportunities for ISL
experiences, including the broader use of intergenerational learning methods and
informal STEM design challenges. This Pilot &amp; Feasibility study is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.