* 1906726
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research (BiodivERsA): De-icing of Arctic Coasts: Critical or new opportunities for marine biodiversity and Ecosystem Services?
* GEO,RISE
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Brenda Konar, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 02/28/2023
* USD 133,857.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends on biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. Coupled natural-human systems; improved scenarios of
biodiversity; and ecosystem services that integrate the outputs of both direct
and indirect drivers such as land use change, invasive alien species,
overexploitation, environmental change, pollution, and models of impacts of
these drivers on biodiversity and ecosystem service are needed to overcome these
challenges. This type of holistic approach provides a methodological state-of-
the art that results in more accurate quantitative assessments and environmental
co-benefits of biodiversity and ecosystem services. This research builds on such
methodology to examine the impact of sea ice loss in the Arctic on ecosystems
and ecosystem services in Arctic coastal regions because these nearshore waters
are among some of the most productive in the world. Goals of the US part of the
project are to examine biodiversity and food web changes resulting from present
and future changes in seasonal ice-covered and ice-free Arctic coasts. Field
data will be augmented by high-resolution multispectral satellite imagery.
Collaborators from other countries will be supported by their associated
national funding agencies. Results of the study will be applied to evaluate
habitat loss; the impact increased coastal erosion and sediment loads have on
changes in nearshore bottom habitats and biodiversity; and the cascading effects
of these processes on food webs. Broader impacts of the work include
international collaboration with Norway, Poland, Canada, and Denmark. The
project will build bridges between countries and communities with interests in
the Arctic; engage stakeholders ranging from local communities to national
environmental protection agencies, including indigenous peoples; and develop a
far-reaching and rich, public, data resource on Arctic systems impacted by sea
ice loss that will be available to natural and social scientists across
countries and disciplines. The project also sets a framework for sustainable
socio-ecological management of Arctic coasts that could be important for the
planning, construction, and sustainability of new infrastructure in the
development of mineral, oil, gas, and other resources; the siting of potential
new shipping lanes; and assessing/predicting changes in fisheries. Additional
impacts of the project include the integration of science and education and
training a postdoctoral scholar to become one of the next generation of
international scholars. The project also supports a researcher from a gender
underrepresented in the sciences at an institution in an EPSCoR state (i.e.,
Alaska).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports US researchers participating
in a project competitively selected by a coalition of 26 funding agencies from
23 countries through the Belmont Forum call for proposals on "Scenarios of
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The call was a multilateral initiative
designed to support research projects that contribute to the development of
scenarios, models, and decision-support tools for understanding and solving
critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the competition was to improve
and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance research relevance and its
acceptance as well as to address gaps in methods for modelling impact drivers
and policy interventions. It was also to develop and communicate levels of
uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data accessibility, and fill
gaps in knowledge. Funds support U.S. participants in a large international
consortium of Danish, Polish, Canadian, US, and Norwegian scientists who seek to
dramatically improve understanding of how the biodiversity of organisms in
Arctic nearshore environments are impacted by the loss of sea ice. Participants
in this effort from other countries are funded through their associated national
funding organizations. Activities of the US scientists include providing food
web and other physical measurements required to evaluate the consequences of sea
ice loss on biodiversity as northern Arctic coastlines change from seasonal ice-
covered to ice-free coasts. Target species include primary marine producers such
as macroalgae, microphytobenthos, phytoplankton, and ice algae. Species will be
analyzed for diversity and food-web connectivity to primary producers in both
pelagic and benthic realms. Measurements of the physical and chemical
characteristics of habitats will complement and provide context for the
biological measures. International collaborators will use remote sensing with
high-resolution multi-spectral satellite imagery to generalize results from
local sites to be applicable the wider, geographical, pan-Arctic scale. Remotely
sensed optical data of chlorophyll a (Chl a); total suspended sediment; colored
dissolved organic matter (CDOM); and, where applicable, nearshore vegetation
will be used to provide insights into the dynamic, spatial, and temporal
variability of key food-web environmental parameters of Arctic coasts under
different icing conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.