* 1906864
* Exploring the effectiveness of using humor for communicating about science
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Michael Cacciatore, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 06/30/2024
* USD 754,239.00

Increasingly, scientists and their institutions are engaging with lay audiences
via media. The emergence of social media has allowed scientists to engage with
publics in novel ways. Social networking sites have fundamentally changed the
modern media environment and, subsequently, media consumption habits. When asked
where they primarily go to learn more about scientific issues, more than half of
Americans point to the Internet. These online spaces offer many opportunities
for scientists to play active roles in communicating and engaging directly with
various publics. Additionally, the proposed research activities were inspired by
a recent report by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
that included a challenge to science communication researchers to determine
better approaches for communicating science through social media platforms.
Humor has been recommended as a method that scientists could use in
communicating with publics; however, there is little empirical evidence that its
use is effective. The researchers will explore the effectiveness of using humor
for communicating about artificial intelligence, climate science and
microbiomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions are: How do lay
audiences respond to messages about scientific issues on social media that use
humor? What are scientists' views toward using humor in constructing social
media messages? Can collaborations between science communication scholars and
practitioners facilitate more effective practices? The research is grounded in
the theory of planned behavior and framing as a theory of media effects. A
public survey will collect and analyze data on Twitter messages with and without
humor, the number of likes and re-tweets of each message, and their scientific
content. Survey participants will be randomly assigned to one of twenty-four
experimental conditions. The survey sample, matching recent U.S. Census Bureau
data, will be obtained from opt-in panels provided by Qualtrics, an online
market research company. The second component of the research will quantify the
attitudes of scientists toward using humor to communicate with publics on social
media. Data will be collected from a random sample of scientists and graduate
students at R1 universities nationwide. Data will be analyzed using descriptive
statistics and regression modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project are twofold: findings from the research will be shared with science
communication scholars and trainers advancing knowledge and practice; and an
infographic (visual representation of findings) will be distributed to
practitioners who participate in research-practice partnerships. It will provide
a set of easily-referenced, evidence-based guidelines about the types of humor
to which audiences respond positively on social media. This project is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning Program which funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.