* 1906254
* Collaborative Research:  Food Sovereignty and Self-Governance--Inuit Role in Managing Arctic Marine Resources
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Dalee Dorough, Inuit Circumpolar Conference
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 10/31/2022
* USD 69,220.00

Inuit possess a distinct and sophisticated knowledge of the Artic ecosystem
which is crucial to its balance and sustainability. As first inhabitants,
stewards, and traditional users intimately tied to the Arctic environment, the
discrete status, rights, and interests of Inuit as Indigenous Peoples are
affirmed in a number of legally binding treaties, as well as other international
human rights instruments and domestic laws. Inuit authorities, organizations,
and communities are central to the establishment and maintenance of effective
mechanisms for safeguarding this ecologically and culturally unique
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Food Sovereignty and Self-Governance Project
aims to advance understanding of Inuit self-governance of marine resources
deemed crucial for Inuit food security. This includes exploring how Inuit co-
management systems support food sovereignty objectives - outcomes that are
essential for supporting human rights of Inuit communities. This project will
examine the role Inuit communities in Alaska and Canada play in managing these
resources as co-equal partners with their counterparts in federal, state, and
local government agencies. The results derived from the research will prove
valuable to other Arctic federal governments collaborating with Indigenous
communities to achieve objectives related to the environmental, social, and
ecological well-being of the Arctic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's overarching goals are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Synthesize the
existing legal frameworks providing for Inuit self-governance by evaluating
applicable legal authorities in the United States (U.S.) and
Canada;&lt;br/&gt;2) Determine how existing Inuit self-governance approaches
operate in practice by examining four co-management case studies as examples of
approaches to food sovereignty. This will provide a comprehensive understanding
of the social, political, and institutional parameters affecting implementation
of key legal frameworks;&lt;br/&gt;3) Understand whether and how Inuit self-
governance systems support food sovereignty by comparing food sovereignty
objectives against both these legal frameworks and observation of the
implementation of those systems in practice; and&lt;br/&gt;4) Disseminate
Project findings to Inuit, state/territorial, national, and international
leaders with the goal of supporting and driving improvements to systems
providing for collaborative management of Arctic marine resources in the face of
rapid ecological change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project Team will take a two-
tiered analytical approach to address these goals: (1) doctrinal legal research
that evaluates legal and institutional frameworks; and &lt;br/&gt;(2) socio-
legal analysis through case-studies. The legal research will examine relevant
laws, regulations, and policies at all levels of government, building a
framework essential to understanding how Arctic collaborative governance
functions in theory. The case studies will take the next step - moving from how
these governance systems should work to how they operate in practice - and,
ultimately, how they could be improved in a manner which optimizes outcomes for
food sovereignty, human rights, and resource sustainability. Case studies
conducted in partnership with those participating in co-management regimes, will
focus on Walrus and Salmon in Alaska and Char and Beluga in the Inuvialuit
Settlement Region of Canada. Current partners of this project
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) The Eskimo Walrus Commission&lt;br/&gt;(2) The
Fisheries Joint Management Committee&lt;br/&gt;(3) The Inuvialuit Game
Council&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organizations advising this project include both
the Association of Village Council Presidents and the Inuit Circumpolar Council
Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project researchers conducting the case study
analysis will follow a "co-production of knowledge" approach, in which no one
person's information and knowledge is assigned greater inherent value than
another's. Researchers with utilize Indigenous Knowledge and social science
methodologies. The project will intimately engage with Inuit who play a role in
natural resources management in the U.S. and Canadian Arctic under each case
study, through focus groups, semi-directive interviews and discussions'all
guided by input provided by an expert Advisory Committee.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project will advance the state of knowledge on how
Inuit self-governance approaches support Inuit food sovereignty objectives and
resource sustainability. With a combined focus on the United States and Canada,
the Project will enable comparative analysis of legal and institutional
structures, practices, and perceptions to facilitate critical evaluation of
Inuit self-governance over marine resources as embodied in co-management
regimes. This research will also be useful for other Arctic nations that are
working with Indigenous peoples to achieve the environmental, social, and
ecological well-being of the Arctic.