* 1906636
* Innovative approaches to Informal Education in Artificial Intelligence
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Harold Abelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 06/30/2022
* USD 750,000.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Despite the ubiquity of Artificial Intelligence (AI), public understanding of
how it works and is used is limited This project will research, design, and
develop innovative approaches focusing on Artificial Intelligence (AI) for
under-represented youth ages 14-24. Program components include live social media
chats with AI leaders, app development, journalistic investigations of ethical
issues in machine learning, and review of AI-based consumer products. Youth
Radio is a non-profit media and tech organizations that provides youth with
skills in STEM, journalism, arts, and communications. They engage 250 youth
annually through free after-school classes and work shifts. Participants are 90%
youth of color and 80% low income. Project partners include the MIT Media Lab
which developed App Inventor which allows novice users to build fully functional
apps. Staff from Google will serve as a project advisor on the curriculum. The
project has exceptional national reach through the dissemination of its media
and apps through national outlets such as NPR and Teen Vogue as well as various
platforms including online, on-air, as well as presentations, publications, and
training tools. The project broadens participation by engaging these low income
youth of color in developing skills critical to the workforce of the future. It
will help prepare an upcoming generation of Artificial Intelligence creators,
users, and consumers who understand the technology and embrace and encourage its
potential.It will give them the necessary knowledge and opportunities for
careers in an AI-driven future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is grounded
in sociocultural learning theory and practice and is interdisciplinary by
design. The theoretical framework holds that Computational Thinking plus
Critical Pedagogy leads to Critical Computational Literacy. Also, Digital Age
Civics plus Participatory Culture leads to Civic Imagination helping youth build
a better world through technology. The driving research questions include: What
do underrepresented youth understand about AI and its role in society? What are
the ethical dilemmas posed by AI from their vantage point? What are the features
of an engaging ethics-centered pedagogy with AI? What impact do the AI products
developed by the youth have on the target audience? The research design will use
ethnographic techniques and design research to study and analyze youth learning.
Data sources will include baseline surveys, audio recordings and transcriptions
from learning sessions with the participants, research analytic memos, focus
group interviews, student-generating artifacts of learning and finished
products, etc. The design-based approach will enable systematic, evidence-based
iteration on the initiative's activities, pedagogical approach and products. An
independent summative evaluation will provide complementary data and perspective
to triangulate with the research findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.