* 1907715
* SHF: Small: PrivAid: Differentially-Private Analytics for Android Apps
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Atanas Rountev, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,928.00

Mobile apps often use analytics infrastructures to gather data on
app&lt;br/&gt;performance and user behaviors. There are significant privacy
concerns&lt;br/&gt;about the collection and use of such data. Legislative
efforts and&lt;br/&gt;societal demands are calling for increased transparency
and&lt;br/&gt;well-defined compromises between the utility of data gathering and
the&lt;br/&gt;corresponding loss of privacy. This project will improve the
privacy&lt;br/&gt;of mobile app analytics by employing differential privacy,
which&lt;br/&gt;provides a rigorous theory and a powerful algorithmic framework
for&lt;br/&gt;privacy-preserving analysis. Integration of research&lt;br/&gt;and
education will develop the expertise of developers of mobile apps&lt;br/&gt;and
data analyses. Recruitment of underrepresented students
will&lt;br/&gt;contribute to increased diversity in computing. The project
will&lt;br/&gt;advance the important area of user privacy, in an environment
with&lt;br/&gt;rapidly-increasing societal and legislative demands for
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will develop rigorous and
quantifiable privacy&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms in mobile-app analytics by leveraging
the theory of local&lt;br/&gt;differential privacy (LDP). The first contribution
of the project will&lt;br/&gt;be the design and implementation of PrivAid, a
conceptual approach and&lt;br/&gt;related software tools for deploying LDP
analyses in widely-used&lt;br/&gt;infrastructures for mobile-app analytics.
Based on this foundation,&lt;br/&gt;several algorithms targeting important
software analyses will be&lt;br/&gt;developed using novel techniques for
randomization and sampling: (1)&lt;br/&gt;edge/path profiling in control-flow
graphs; (2) analyses of heavy&lt;br/&gt;hitters for event profiling and graph
profiling; (3) profiling under&lt;br/&gt;continuous observation. The public
release of PrivAid, software&lt;br/&gt;analyses, and experimental subjects will
enable the development and&lt;br/&gt;evaluation of future LDP software
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.