* 1907550
* I-Corps Teams:  Invisible Light Field Messaging
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Kristin Dana, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is significant
in the area of light field messaging. The goal of this technology is invisible
communication to a machine, and not subliminal communication to users who may
observe the image. Information is embedded within images on a display so that
the messages are machine-readable but invisible to humans. The electronic
display, such as a billboard or kiosk, retains its purpose to convey visual
information such as maps, advertisements and schedules. Simultaneously, the
display conveys a time-varying message to a camera-equipped computational
system, such as a smartphone or robot. The near-term target application is
interactive televisions, computer displays, and electronic billboards using
existing cameras on smartphones. With light field messaging, a phone-based
mobile app could: retrieve product information from a television ad, obtain
nearby traffic conditions from a roadside billboard, or obtain walking
directions within a large airport from a kiosk. This approach is expected to
provide significant new avenues of interactive marketing and media.
Additionally, the technology will provide novels methods of indoor localization,
where GPS is not precise. Light field messaging for sending navigation cues to
robotic systems and self-driving cars is a promising future application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project uses an innovative deep learning
architecture to embed a new message in each frame of video. The goal of this
technology is invisible communication to a machine, and not subliminal
communication to users who may observe the image. The approach is comprised of
software-based algorithms with two main components: 1) Embedding method that
embeds/codes hidden messages into photos and videos together and 2) Recovery
method on the camera side that retrieves the message. Application software will
run on display systems for embedding and on smartphones or other camera systems
for obtaining messages from embedded imagery on electronic displays. Unlike
older methods such as digital steganography, this approach uses modern neural
networks to learn a robust coding method that overcomes the distortion of the
light field transmission channel. This messaging paradigm also improves on prior
QR-codes because the code does not distract from the visible image and the code
is dynamic, allowing significantly more information to be transmitted. The
message is fully contained within a single frame of video so that issues of time
synchronization are avoided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.