* 1907785
* CIF: Small: Efficient Relaying and Scheduling for Half-Duplex Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Soheil Mohajer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,999.00

Wireless technology is currently experiencing a transformative revolution fueled
mainly by the staggering amount of data traffic and massive number of critical
services (e.g., healthcare and education) offered over the wireless medium. A
central role in this wireless revolution is played by relaying technologies,
whereby data is transferred from a sender to a receiver by having information
hop through a pool of relays (i.e., intermediate nodes). Relaying is foreseen to
be a key component for enabling the evolving 5G architecture, and supporting
next generation Internet of Things networks. This project seeks to develop a
comprehensive analysis of several theoretical and practical aspects of wireless
relay networks. The research and its outcomes will be integrated into education,
and will promote undergraduate and graduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on half-duplex mode of operation at the relays whereby each
relay uses different time slots/frequency bands for transmission and reception.
The proposed research seeks to derive theoretical foundations that shed light on
how to operate these relay networks in a provably (information-theoretic) close-
to-optimal, yet simple way, and to develop low-complexity algorithms for
efficiently achieving the theoretical limits. Special emphasis will be put on
devising solutions to schedule the relays for reception/transmission in a simple
and efficient way. This will require that several challenges be overcome,
including achieving high performance in computationally-constrained networks,
and providing robustness against channel variations. Our ultimate goal is to
identify solutions that can be implemented in a distributive fashion across the
relay nodes, and that require a minimum communication overhead for exchanging
the channel state information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.