* 1907315
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Managing tradeoffs between commercial fisheries and resource subsidy ecosystem services in a rapidly changing world
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Christopher Cheek, Cheek, Christopher Allen
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Ecosystem
management in a changing world is essential for maintaining ecosystem resources
that are economically or environmentally beneficial to humans. However, when
management focuses on maximizing a single resource, tradeoffs can occur that
reduce other resources unintentionally. Predicting how ecosystem resources will
respond to management actions and climatic change is especially important in
heavily managed systems such as commercial fisheries of Pacific salmon. In
addition to the economic benefits of salmon fisheries, salmon transport large
quantities of nutrients and food resources from the ocean to freshwater
ecosystems during their spawning migrations. The eggs and salmon carcasses
provided by the migrations are essential for sustaining resident trout and brown
bear populations in Alaska. Both species provide sport and subsistence fishing
and hunting opportunities that are culturally and economically valuable to local
communities. Commercial salmon fisheries primarily harvest fish in the ocean
prior to entering freshwater habitats, thereby reducing the quantity of
resources that are transported to freshwater ecosystems. The competing resources
create a tradeoff between the harvest in salmon fisheries and the nutrient flux
that supports resident trout and brown bear populations. To maximize both
ecosystem resources, it is important to understand how each respond to changes
in climate and fisheries management practices. This research will provide a new
understanding of how fisheries management and increased temperature impact the
quantity of resources transported by salmon and identify the best management
practices to minimize tradeoffs and maximize benefits for a diverse group of
stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will use long-term datasets from
Bristol Bay, AK combined with simulation modeling techniques to identify
fisheries management practices that maximize ecosystem services. The specific
research objectives are: 1) construct a bioenergetic model to evaluate the
impact of increased stream temperatures and commercial harvest scenarios on
resident stream fish growth; 2) develop a population model that evaluates the
effect life-history changes in sockeye salmon on resource subsidies provided to
freshwater habitats; and 3) test stocking and harvest scenarios that maximize
both resource subsidies and commercial returns. The fellow will support broader
participation in fisheries science by participating in and organizing the Native
Peoples Fisheries Section of American Fisheries Society and by establishing a
fisheries training and internship program for Native youth. The fellow will
receive training in simulation modeling, teaching, and working with under-
represented groups that will advance their career in aquatic
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.