* 1907815
* Professional Development for Teaching and Learning about Energy and Equity in high School Physics
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Lane Seeley, Seattle Pacific University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,336,657.00

This project will research and develop instructional materials and conduct
professional development for teachers to help students understand energy flow,
an important scientific concept with economic and social implications. This
energy learning is the foundation for informed decision-making about sustainable
and just use of energy resources. Energy issues are not only issues of science
and technology, but must be integrated with civics, history, economics,
sociology, psychology, and politics to understand and solve modern energy
problems. Placing the scientific concept of energy in this social context
presents an opportunity to advance science education as equitable and culturally
responsive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a model for secondary
science teacher professional development that integrates science concepts with
equity education. This model promotes a key epistemological issue: that science
concepts are not culture-free or socially neutral ideas, but rather are concepts
created and sustained by people in specific times and places for the purposes of
(1) addressing specific social needs and (2) empowering people or groups of
people. The two major components of the project are (1) the professional
development experience, including both an intensive in-person summer workshop
and an online professional learning community, and (2)an energy and equity
portal, including an instructional materials library, an action research
exchange, and a community forum for teacher discussions. The portal will provide
technical resources to support the PLC, including support for sharing
instructional materials and reporting on action research. The research plan
includes exploratory, development and application phases. The researchers will
identify teacher learning in the first iteration of PD, collect and analyze the
instructional artifacts to inform how teacher engage with, participate in, and
build an understanding energy as a historically and politically situated science
concept. A team of scholar-videographers will observe, taking real-time field
notes and making daily memos. The research team will use the instructional
artifacts, video recordings, field notes, and memos as a basis for analysis
through the next academic year. The result will be a nationally significant
community of teacher-leaders and library of research-tested instructional
materials that are responsive to students' scientific ideas, relevant to socio-
political concerns about energy sustainability, respectful of students'
cultures, and open to all students no matter their cultural background. Teachers
participating in the project will learn to explain how scientific concepts of
energy reflect culturally specific values, analyze socio-politically relevant
energy scenarios, learn the historic and present-day inequities in the energy
industry and in science participation, and be supported in preparing instruction
for secondary students that is culturally responsive and relevant to their
students' communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools
(RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.