* 1907626
* I-Corps:  Flexible and Bendable Electronic and Photonic Device Platform
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Jae-Hyun Ryou, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
significantly reduce the manufacturing cost of semiconductor devices for
electronic, photonic, and energy applications. For example, the proposed
innovation will bring 40% total cost reduction in light-emitting diodes (LED)
chip/die manufacturing, which will provide a faster route for the energy-
efficient LEDs to become a dominant lighting source. The innovation will also
offer a new device platform for electric power conversion and switching in
electric vehicles and smart-grid systems, which means significant benefits in
energy saving and greenhouse-gas emission reduction. Hence, the proposed
innovation will facilitate the rapid development of next-generation green device
technology that can readily be applied to the real-world systems. Furthermore,
the flexible material platforms will enable not only mechanically flexible
devices for the applications of portable, wearable, and implantable systems, but
also new devices with additional functionality for more versatile applications
beyond just flexible devices. The new transformative technologies stemming from
this project will help U.S. semiconductor manufacturers cope with global
challenges and win in the competitive international markets. Therefore, the new
platform will contribute to consolidating the U.S. position as a technology and
market leader by strategically strengthening the innovation ecosystem of the
semiconductor technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project proposes a
promising replacement for single-crystalline wafer substrates of semiconductor
devices by offering a new mechanically-flexible low-cost substrate. The
objective of the project is to deliver commercially available low-cost, high-
crystalline-quality, and flexible tape substrates to be employed as a new
platform of photonic and electronic semiconductor devices. To accomplish the
objective, the team will develop a new substrate consisting of flexible metal
tape and a single-crystalline gallium nitride (GaN) semiconductor thin film by
an invented direct deposition technique. This method also enables the roll-to-
roll and large-scale continuous production of high-quality semiconductor
materials. The developed GaN/metal tape will to serve as the substrate for the
fabrication of LEDs, as an initial target of the innovative technology, and
other semiconductor devices. The result will be flexible inorganic LEDs with
high efficiency and application versatility at a fraction of the cost of current
solid-state lighting sources. The new product, while it is a potentially
disruptive technology, has not been deployed in the device market with various
products and applications. Therefore, understanding of business development will
be critical. The team will perform customer survey and business model
development via investigation of value proposition and customer
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.