* 1907122
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The function of vocal learning ability in African elephants
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Michael Pardo, Pardo, Michael A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 10/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. A key
attribute of human language is vocal learning, or the ability to learn to
produce new sounds, which is only found in a limited number of other species.
Understanding the few cases in which vocal learning has evolved could therefore
shed light on the evolutionary origins of language. One possible function of
vocal learning is that it allows animals to make their calls sound more like
those of their social group members, which serves as a sign of group membership.
Another possible function is to allow animals to learn unique sounds to address
specific individuals, similar to the way in which humans use names. The Fellow
will test both of these hypotheses in African elephants, in which vocal learning
is known to occur but is poorly understood. Understanding why elephants have
developed vocal learning could provide insight into the conditions that led to
the evolution of this unusual but important ability in human ancestors. This
project will also provide mentorship and outreach programs for students from
underrepresented groups, and will contribute to the Fellow's professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test the hypothesis that elephants learn
vocal signatures of group identity, the Fellow will determine if the calls of
group members are more similar than the calls of members of different groups
independent of relatedness. To determine if elephants recognize close and
distant associates at the individual or group level, the Fellow will play back
two overlapping calls from the same caller, which should only violate the
subjects' expectations if they recognize the caller at the individual level. To
test the hypothesis that elephants vocally label conspecifics, the Fellow will
determine whether the acoustic structure of a contact call varies according to
the intended recipient of the call, and whether individuals are more likely to
respond to playbacks of a call that was originally directed towards them,
independent of the identity of the caller. The Fellow will hone quantitative
skills in acoustic analysis and statistics, and will gain career-enhancing
experience in conservation biology through collaboration with other members of
the sponsoring lab. The Fellow will also mentor undergraduates conducting
acoustic ecology research, and teach workshops at local Hispanic-serving
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.