* 1907824
* SHF: Small: Development and Manufacturing Integrated DNA Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Dmitry Kolpashchikov, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 360,749.00

Electronic computers have dramatically increased the efficiency of information
processing and enabled automation of industrial processes. Such computers,
however, have limitations when applied to address biomedical tasks including
medical diagnostics and therapy. To recognize and process biological inputs,
such as DNA, proteins, and small biomolecules, electronic computers require
chemical-sensor intermediates that convert a chemical input into an electronic
output. Computers are hard to insert into a human body as they are made of non-
biocompatible and non-biodegradable materials. Biomedical applications of
computational technologies would get another dimension if computers are made
from a biocompatible material. Such computers could operate in a point-of-care
diagnostic test by recognizing and autonomously analyzing complex combinations
of biochemical disease markers, which would facilitate medical diagnostics,
making them more accurate and affordable. In addition, such computers would help
building molecular robots -- nanometer-scale devices that can sense biological
markers inside human body to diagnose a disorder and promptly address it, which
would help doctors fight such devastating diseases as cancer and viral
infections, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA has attracted growing
attention as a material for constructing molecular computational devices. Its
parallel data-processing capabilities and predictability of Watson-Crick base
pairing poses a fascinating opportunity for building computer and molecular
robots from DNA. Moreover, biocompatibility of such devices, as well as
previously developed approaches for gene therapy, would enable their
applications in diagnostics and treatment of cancer, infectious and genetic
diseases. The long-term goal of this project is to construct a molecular-scale
processor based on DNA logic gates and apply it to address biomedical
challenges. In this project, PI proposes to address the following technological
challenges in a quest to the develop a first DNA computer: (i) create
multilayered integrated circuits (DNA nanochips); and (ii) stabilize DNA
nanochips by covalent cross-link. In addition, the PI will develop DNA nanochips
to solve a practically significant biomedical problem: recognition of cancer
markers, which is expected to stimulate interest in DNA computation. The
proposed developments will be showcased by creating a user-friendly construction
kit for building integrated DNA circuits, which can be used in educational and
outreach projects. The practical utility of the kits will be tested in
laboratory settings in collaboration with high-school students from a local
Orlando high school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.