* 1907657
* Mapping Dark Matter on Large and Small Scales with the Cosmic Microwave Background
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Neelima Sehgal, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 02/28/2023
* USD 347,148.00

The light of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) carries a wealth of untapped
information including how the Universe was created and the properties of the
elusive neutrino particles. A new generation of CMB experiments are coming
online, due in part to a significant investment in experimental infrastructure.
However, there is a critical need to complement this with a significant
investment in the analysis of the current and upcoming data. This award will
allow the necessary data analysis to measure the masses of the neutrino
particles with Advanced ACTPol (AdvACT) data. This award will also allow the
development of analysis to detect gravitational waves from the early Universe,
using Simons Observatory (SO) data,to understand how the Universe was created.
The broader impacts of this proposal are that the PI will bring the excitement
of cosmological research to young female undergraduates, elementary-school
students, and the public. The PI will do this by: 1) mentoring and instructing
women undergraduates through the Stony Brook Women in Science and Engineering
(WISE) Honors program, by 2) being a ``visiting classroom astronomer'' in local
elementary schools as part of the Project ASTRO program, and by 3) giving public
talks several times per year on a variety of topics such as Dark Matter, Dark
Energy, the Early Universe, Gravitational Waves, and the Cosmic Neutrino
Background. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research objective of this proposal
is to measure how much gravitational lensing has bent the CMB light as this
light has travelled to us, using AdvACT data, in order to measure the masses of
the neutrino particles. The second research objective is to co-develop the
B-mode delensing analysis to detect primordial gravitational waves, as well as
oversee all CMB lensing analyses for SO needed for key SO science goals. The
proposed research is potentially transformational because it could result in a
detection of the sum of the neutrino masses with AdvACT data. In addition, this
research could enable a detection of primordial gravitational waves with SO
data, shedding critical light on how our Universe
began.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.