* 1907494
* SHF: Small: System-Level Design of Attack-Resistant Safety-Critical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Marilyn Wolf, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2020
* USD 343,061.00

This project takes a design automation approach to the protection of
safety/security-critical cyber-physical (CPS) and Internet-of-Things (IoT)
systems against attacks originating from the Internet or from other
inappropriate use. CPS and IoT systems connect sophisticated computer networks
to physical world objects and machines. This combination poses new concerns over
information security and physical safety than are posed by traditional
information technology (IT) systems. This project will develop methodologies,
algorithms, and tools for the design of safety-critical systems, including both
multiprocessor systems-on-chips (MPSoCs) and networked control systems. Threats
may come from information security vulnerabilities as well as safety-related
faults. The methodologies and tools developed by this project will enable system
designers to harden their designs against known attacks. These methods can also
be used after system deployment to redesign system components to reduce their
vulnerability to emergent threats. The project would also help develop new
curriculum and train US workforce in the important area of information security
and would be inclusive of the women, minority, and underrepresented groups in
this endeavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new methodology for
attack-aware design for safety-critical cyber-physical and Internet-of-Things
(IoT) systems. A formal, multilayer model is used to describe the system. New
design-time re-synthesis methods analyze the system for potential attacks and
modify the system to mitigate the attacks. The methodology considers both
functional attacks and timing-oriented quality-of-service attacks. Mitigations
may be applied at multiple levels: middleware, operating system, and hardware.
Attack mitigation is posed as an optimization problem. A set of mitigations is
selected based on cost and on the number of mitigations applied for each valid
computation. The methodology is applicable to networked systems at multiple
scales, including both multiprocessor systems-on-chips used in smartphones and
networked control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.