* 1907242
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Monarchs, milkweed and microbes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Rondy Malik, Malik, Rondy
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Fellow is
being mentored by two sponsoring scientists, James D. Bever and Joy K. Ward at
the University of Kansas. The research presented by the Fellow has the potential
to broaden our understanding of soil microbes, as a counterbalance to
atmospheric CO2 enrichment, especially in prairie ecosystems. In these habitats,
monarch butterflies depend on milkweed for carbon-based chemical extracts that
protect them from predators and may also have implications for cancer therapy.
However, little is known as to how these carbon-based chemical extracts, termed
cardenolides, may be altered in response to increase in CO2 influx. These
changes may have consequences on monarch survival and food-web structure.
Understanding how soil microbes may help mitigate outcomes of atmospheric CO2
enrichment, could provide insight into ecosystem sustainability. The experiments
being executed by the Fellow also allow for training of undergraduates,
including TRIO McNair Scholars at the University of Kansas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under growth-chamber conditions, atmospheric CO2 will be
manipulated for a broad range of native milkweed species, native AM-fungal
species and a microbial control. Response variables, including milkweed chemical
extracts, will be measured using high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC).
Examination of multi-trophic responses, including native milkweed quality,
native monarch larval performance, and native AM-fungal colonization rates; will
reveal how CO2 enrichment may impact plant-microbe-insect interactions. This
project also affords an interdisciplinary approach for mentees seeking
experience in environmental microbiology, global change biology or chemical
ecology. Additionally, the Fellow can inspire mentees of similar origin,
including first-generation Americans (Haitian-American), community college
students, as well as minorities from the inner-city (Mattapan, Boston). Through
the opportunities afforded by the National Science Foundation, the Fellow will
broaden participation and our understanding of microbes in global change
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.