* 1907658
* CIF: Small: Distributed Machine Learning in the Age of Fast Data Streams
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Waheed Bajwa, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 09/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Recent technological advances have resulted in the emergence of many
decentralized/distributed systems comprising interconnected components that
communicate among themselves over wireless links and the internet backbone for
coordination and decision making. Examples of such systems include sensor
networks, Internet-of-Things (IoT) systems, multiagent systems, high-performance
computing clusters, and federated computing systems. One defining
characteristics of many of these distributed systems is the continuous gathering
of new data samples by the individual system components (e.g., motes, robots,
IoT devices, cell towers, GPU nodes, etc.). Several use cases of these systems,
which range from smart agriculture and smart homes to smart grids and smart
transportation, are being envisioned that extract actionable information in real
time from the incoming distributed "data streams" through adoption of
sophisticated machine learning techniques. But the world's growing appetite for
data coupled with the price and capacity projections for sensing, storage,
computation, and bandwidth point to a near future in which (affordable)
bandwidth capacity will start lagging behind the rate at which distributed
systems gather new data samples. Such a future does not bode well for
distributed systems that are expected to rely on machine learning advances for
effective decision making. As such, it is crucial to develop distributed
learning strategies that accommodate high volumes of data while operating over
(relatively) low-throughput communication links. This project addresses this
challenge and delivers a comprehensive set of analytical and algorithmic
frameworks for communications-aware and optimization-based distributed machine
learning from (possibly corrupted) data arriving in the form of (extremely) fast
streams at multiple interconnected entities. In doing so, the project directly
benefits the national economy through advances in the state-of-the-art in
distributed systems, which will lead to reduction in both energy costs and
wastage, increase in industrial efficiency, better containment of environmental
disasters, efficient monitoring of nation's infrastructure, etc. Further, this
project will also help address the shortage of talent in the critical areas of
machine learning and data science by training two graduate and several
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project develops and analyzes
an algorithmic framework for real-time, in-network machine learning that
acknowledges and accounts for the mismatch between the communications rate and
the rate of distributed data streams in many emerging applications, where
continuous data gathering is cheap and communications is over infrastructure-
free device-to-device and/or machine-to-machine links. The investigator
formalizes this setting as a distributed stochastic approximation problem, in
which the optimum machine learning model is iteratively trained using the random
data streaming into individual devices and machines. The research then focuses
on the design and analysis of collaborative strategies that operate in the
regime of (extremely) fast streaming rates. These strategies account for the
topology of the network, the severity of the mismatch between communications and
data streaming rates, and the convexity and structure of the learning problem.
Further, they account for the challenges of real-world networks and data
gathering, including intermittent communications links, heterogeneous data
modalities, correlated data streams, and corrupt or missing data. The result is
a comprehensive set of techniques and analysis that provide fast, reliable
learning and a thorough understanding of network learning
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.