* 1907553
* RI:Small:Collaborative Research:Influence Games: A Game-theoretic Approach to Strategic Behavior in Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Luis Ortiz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 228,919.00

The world is becoming increasingly interconnected. While not all connections
have the same level of importance or even the same meaning, these connections
nevertheless play a crucial role in one's behavioral and lifestyle choices. This
is particularly striking in strategic scenarios where individual choices are
interdependent on each other. This research seeks to model how networked
individuals influence each other in their decision making and what collective
outcomes may arise from such a system of influence. It seeks to advance our
scientific knowledge of strategic behavior in networks by making the models more
realistic, allowing for changes over time, and considering the underlying
context. These advances are important in part because of their potential impact
in a wide range of domains including public health policy, smart power grid, and
financial systems. In addition, the project will contribute to the educational
enrichment of undergraduate students, including underrepresented and first-
generation students. It will bring together two distinct groups of students,
namely undergraduate liberal arts students and graduate computer science
students, under a symbiotic collaboration plan. The research results will be
broadly disseminated through a website and will also be integrated into
undergraduate- and graduate-level education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates several important open directions in the computational game-
theoretic study of influence in networks. It will address a variety of
fundamental research problems, including the challenge of identifying "most
influential" individuals in a network. In particular, the research has three
major parts: (1) The challenge of complexity: design game-theoretic models of
influence in networks to allow (a) flexibility in behavioral choices (from
multiple, non-binary discrete choices to a continuum of behavioral choices) and
(b) non-linear influences without any restriction on polarities
(positive/negative). (2) The reality of dynamics: model dynamic evolution of
influence networks. (3) The power of context: model the contextual environment
of strategic behavior. In these three thrusts, the project significantly departs
from the well-studied approaches to influence maximization as well as the
traditional centrality measures in social network analysis. It seeks to design
network-aware algorithms, including provable approximation algorithms and
practical heuristics, for computing stable outcomes and identifying most
influential individuals in a network relative to a desirable outcome.
Ultimately, the research seeks to provide computational tools for policy
analysts to perform minimal targeted interventions in a social network for
achieving a desirable social outcome. To that end, the project will use real-
world behavioral data. It will employ, adapt, or extend existing machine
learning algorithms to learn context-aware models without imposing any
restriction on the structure of the networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.