* 1907381
* CNS Core: Small: Ultra-Efficient Neural Network and LSTM Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Neural networks (NNs) have begun to have widespread impact on various important
applications, such as image recognition, speech recognition, and machine
translation. The spurt of interest in machine learning and artificial
intelligence in this decade can be traced back to the increase in accuracy that
NNs have enabled. Yet, how to come up with the best NN architecture has remained
an open problem. Hence, it is attracting a lot of attention from the academia
and industry. This work will address this problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NN
synthesis has largely been limited to big-data applications and the NN models
are typically expected to run in the cloud. However, there is recent interest
from the industry to have edge-level (e.g., in smartphone or smartwatch) NN
models. The current edge-level NNs sacrifice accuracy (by 4-5%) for energy and
latency efficiency. NNs are also often not competitive with other models for
medium-data and small-data applications. Finally, sequence-to-sequence modeling
(e.g., for language translation) also needs to be made much more accurate, fast,
and compact enough for edge devices. All these problems will be tackled in this
work through new NN synthesis techniques and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has the potential to enable transformative advances in overcoming the
deficiencies of current NN synthesis methodologies. Due to the explosion in
machine learning applications, this research has the promise to provide a
significant boost to U.S. companies and economy. Thus, it will involve
significant industrial engagements. Several underrepresented (minority/female)
will be involved in the research. The research outcomes will be included in two
undergraduate courses on Machine Learning and Embedded Computing. Broad
dissemination to the academic and industrial communities will be achieved
through published papers, posters, and seminars. Additionally, various tools and
models will be distributed online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The list of
publications/students and tools/data with appropriate documentation will be made
available at https://www.princeton.edu/~jha/. Free use of data and artifacts
will be permitted for research and educational purposes. The data will be
available online for at least five years following the completion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.