* 1907667
* Atmospheric Dynamics with Phase Changes and Extreme Rainfall Events
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Samuel Stechmann, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,999.00

Water vapor in the atmosphere plays a critical role in extreme weather events. A
pressing challenge for the world scientific community, and the topic of this
award, is to better understand the dynamical role of water and its influence on
atmospheric energetics. A better understanding would help shape future social
and economic policy decisions. In particular, more accurate prediction of
extreme rainfall events has the potential to save human lives, as well as to
better mitigate hundreds of billions of dollars in disaster losses. In addition
to advancing scientific and mathematical understanding, the proposed activities
also support the training of junior researchers with interdisciplinary
expertise. To position these new researchers for future success, mentoring will
be provided by the PIs to develop the knowledge, skills and experience necessary
for integrating mathematics with the atmospheric sciences. For example, modern
weather prediction relies on incorporation of physical insight and observational
data into numerical algorithms to solve the mathematical description of
atmospheric dynamics in terms of equations. Furthermore, beyond weather
predictions themselves are the users of weather predictions, such as government
agencies, the insurance industry and other businesses. To assess the risks
associated with weather events and their impacts, technical skills are needed in
both mathematics and atmospheric sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase changes of
water are a key part of the hydrological cycle. Of particular importance for
weather is the phase change from water vapor to liquid water within clouds, and
the subsequent formation of precipitation. The heat released from these phase
changes can drive atmospheric circulations, and, conversely, atmospheric
circulations shape the formation of cloud patterns and precipitation. This
coupling between water and atmospheric fluid dynamics is nonlinear and remains a
challenge to understand. The award activities aim to improve our fundamental
understanding--both mathematical and physical--of moist atmospheric dynamics
with phase changes, with attention to high precipitation events. To meet this
aim, a hierarchy of partial differential equations will be studied in order to
elucidate foundation aspects of such flows, such as: the influence of waves on
large-scale balanced flows; the transfer of energy between kinetic, potential
and latent energies; and the propagation of sharp interfaces between unsaturated
and saturated flow regions. The methods to be used include asymptotical analysis
of wave dynamics in the presence of phase changes, construction of discontinuous
analytical solutions, observational data analysis based on energy principles and
balance relations, and numerical modeling. Extreme rainfall events in the mid-
latitudes are always associated with large poleward fluxes of moisture
originating from the tropics, such as the structures called 'atmospheric
rivers.' The phenomena of atmospheric rivers and their associated jet streaks
are one of the central observations proposed for application
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.