* 1907948
* Analyzing Sociolinguistic Variation in Navajo
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Kayla Palakurthy, Palakurthy, Kayla P
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Documenting Endangered Languages program. The goal of the SPRF program is to
prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers
in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Robert Bayley at the
University of California, Davis, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist studying linguistic variation and change in contemporary
Dine Bizaad (Navajo), a Native American language spoken in the present-day
American Southwest. A significant legacy of American settler colonialism has
been the systematic eradication of North American languages, leading to
widespread shifts to English. In response, many communities have undertaken
projects to maintain and revitalize their languages, but a challenge for this
work is that Indigenous minority languages are thought to become highly variable
and to undergo significant changes, as speakers are increasingly exposed to
English. While the linguistic and social factors contributing to variation and
change in English are well understood, little research has focused on variation
in Indigenous minority languages, and questions remain about how local social
dynamics influence the spread of linguistic variation among speakers, and
whether changes in Indigenous minority languages are fundamentally different
from changes observed in other contexts. Results from the empirical examination
of these questions will inform scientific theories and may be applied in
Indigenous minority language teaching at a time of pivotal change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on targeted studies of linguistic
features in recently recorded interviews and conversations with bilingual Dine
Bizaad-English speakers. Specifically, researchers will analyze variation and
change in the Dine vowels, the classificatory verb system, and lexical tone in
order to produce descriptive and quantitative analyses that reveal social
patterns and assess evidence for change in topics known to be challenging for
language learners. Analyses will address the role of sociocultural factors such
as region, gender, prestige, and style in an under-described sociolinguistic
context, as well as the role of bilingualism in the origin and spread of
changes. Of particular interest is the way that younger speakers are introducing
and interpreting variation in newer varieties of Dine Bizaad. Furthermore, these
studies will test predictions about the types of changes that occur in
Indigenous minority languages. Overall, this research will inform theories of
language variation and change and expand the relevance of sociolinguistic
approaches beyond the often-studied larger global
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.