* 1907233
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Kathryn Wilsterman, Wilsterman, Kathryn
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This project
will determine how adaptation to high altitude affects function of the placenta.
Biologists study altitude adaptation to understand how animals evolve under
environmental challenges. At high altitude, there is less oxygen available, and
lower oxygen can cause problems for animal health. For example, high altitude
slows the growth of babies during pregnancy. However, animals that have adapted
to altitude have babies that grow at normal rates. One reason pregnancy might be
protected in adapted animals is because their placentas, which control growth of
the baby, have evolved some special functions. The fellow's research will
identify the changes to placental function that protect offspring growth by
comparing development of the placenta among altitude-adapted and non-adapted
populations of mice. This research will help us understand basic function of the
placenta and how the placenta evolves. The fellow will also establish a mentor
training program to teach mentoring skills to graduate students and other early-
career scientists.

The fellow will use three populations of mice to generate gestational timelines
of placental development, gene expression (TagSeq), and fetal development in
mothers gestating under normoxia or simulated-hypobaric hypoxia. The fellow will
compare outcome measures among deer mice derived from lowland- and highland-
resident populations and an outbred house mouse strain. Comparing placental
structure and gene expression among populations gestating under different
hypoxia regimes will allow the fellow to identify which hypoxia-dependent
regulatory systems in the placenta are conserved among all populations which
display signatures of adaptation. The fellow will also connect regulatory
network modulation in the placenta to fetal and maternal health to determine how
altitude adaptation has altered regulatory systems to preserve offspring
survival. As part of this project, the fellow will receive training in high-
throughput sequencing and functional genomics analyses. The fellow will recruit
and support students from underrepresented backgrounds to work on the proposed
project and she will initiate a mentorship program between early career
scientists and American Indian undergraduates to help them navigate STEM career
paths.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.