* 1907352
* CSR: Small: Improved Memory Management for Object-Oriented Big Data Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Harry Xu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2020
* USD 270,580.00

This project seeks to develop runtime system support for improving the
performance and scalability of a wide verity of data-intensive systems written
in managed, object-oriented languages. It is clear that Big Data analytics has
become a key component of modern computing. Popular data processing frameworks
such as Hadoop, Spark, Naiad, or Hyracks are all developed in managed languages,
such as Java, C#, or Scala, primarily due to the fast development cycles enabled
by these languages and their abundance of library suites and community support.
However, a great deal of evidence shows that memory management in Big Data
systems is prohibitively expensive, severely damaging system performance. This
project develops a series of runtime techniques that can automatically reduce
the temporal and spatial costs of the managed runtime, allowing Big Data
developers to fully enjoy the simplicity of managed languages without having to
pay the performance price. Modern life is relying increasingly on Big Data
analytics designed to support many concurrent users and quickly answer their
queries. Behind visible services are data-intensive computing systems that need
to quickly find useful information from a sea of data records, and therefore,
their performance is critically important to our daily lives. This project
provides an immediate performance benefit for such data-intensive systems,
leading to improved quality, usability, and user satisfaction. The educational
component of this project includes creation of new course materials, recruitment
of undergraduate students and students from under-represented groups, and
education of local programmers on how to develop highly-efficient Big Data
applications.