* 1907142
* CNS Core: Small:On Parallelizing Optical Network Design Problems:Towards Network Optimization as a Service
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,08/31/2024
* George Rouskas, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 439,148.00

Planning, deploying, and engineering the networks that make up the Internet
infrastructure involve complex problems generically referred to as "network
design" problems. Effective and efficient solutions to network design problems
are crucial to the operation and economics of the Internet and its ability to
support critical and reliable education, government, commercial and science-
related communication services. Network design gets increasingly difficult as
networks grow larger. This research project aims to address this challenge by
investigating new approaches for tackling network design problems for large
networks in a scalable manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to make
contributions that will lead to a paradigm shift in efficient, scalable
solutions to network design problems. The project approach will be to develop
parallel solutions that are applicable to a wide range of problems by exploiting
a feature common to all, namely, that the optimization process incorporates both
a routing aspect and a resource allocation aspect. The research plan is to
partition the solution space across the routing dimension into a set of mutually
exclusive and collectively exhaustive subspaces, which may be explored in
parallel as independent subproblems. Specifically, each subspace corresponds to
a fixed routing path for each node pair, and the corresponding subproblem
involves searching only for an optimal resource assignment along the given
paths. Consequently, subproblems are independent of each other and may be solved
in parallel by leveraging available cluster/cloud computing resources to speed
up the overall execution time. The approach will look at intelligent ways to
prune the set of subspaces that practically need to be explored. The algorithmic
results of this project will be integrated into an open-source tool that will be
made available to students, researchers, and practitioners. The research will
lay the foundation for a future "Network Optimization as a Service (NOaaS)"
model for network optimization to be delivered remotely and on demand as a cloud
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.