* 1907359
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  He pukoa kani aina:  A coral reef that grows into an island
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Haunani Kane, Kane, Haunani Hiilani
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase participation in groups underrepresented in biology. This fellowship
will examine how shifts in coral reef biodiversity and productivity impact the
natural resiliency of atoll islands to sea level rise. Atoll reefs and islands
are linked such that islands are composed entirely of sand and rubble that is
derived from the nearshore reef. Atoll reef-islands are highly significant as
they provide the only habitable land in certain regions of the Pacific, and the
loss of these islands is directly tied to cultural identity. It is widely
recognized among indigenous and underrepresented communities that there is a
need for culturally relevant applications of scientific and environmental
processes. To broaden participation of Pacific Island peoples in Biology the
fellow will partner with local educators in Hawaii to develop K-12 curriculum
for communities with a high native Hawaiian population. Furthermore the
University of Hawaii at Hilo is a minority serving institution and provides an
excellent setting for the fellow to mentor undergraduate students in all aspects
of the research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fellowship will elucidate the
bio-geological linkages that enable or limit island resiliency within
Papahanaumokuakea Marine National Monument in the context of future sea level
rise and other environmental stressors. Long-term photographic survey data
(2012-2019) will be used for photogrammetric 3D reconstruction of nearshore
coral communities. 3D reconstructions of each reef study site will be used to
characterize temporal and spatial shifts in reef composition, coral health, and
3D architectural complexity. Reef community composition will be compared to
atoll reef-island sediments to identify key island building species and their
relative abundance on modern reefs. Reef framework productivity (sediment rates)
and erosion will be quantified from 3D reconstructions to assess sediment
availability for island building and maintenance. An improved understanding of
how coral reefs respond to environmental stressors will guide efforts within
Papahanaumokuakea Marine National Monument, and across Pacific Island nations
aimed at protecting low lying atoll islands and
islanders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.