* 1907904
* Young Mathematicians: Expanding an Innovative and Promising Model Across Learning Environments to Promote Preschoolers' Mathematics Knowledge
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2024
* Deborah Schifter, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,184,762.00

Far too many children in the U.S. start kindergarten lacking the foundational
early numeracy skills needed for academic success. This project contributes to
the goal of enhancing the learning and teaching of early mathematics in order to
build a STEM-capable workforce and STEM-literate citizenry, which are both
crucial to our nation's prosperity and competitiveness. Preparation for the
STEM-workforce must start early, as young children's mathematics development
undergirds cognitive development, building brain architecture, and supporting
problem-solving, puzzling, and persevering, while strongly impacting and
predicting future success in school. Preschool children from low socio-economic
backgrounds are particularly at risk, as their mathematics knowledge may be up
to a full year behind their middle-income peers. Despite agreements about the
importance of mathematics-rich interactions for young children's learning and
development, most early education teachers and families are not trained in
evidence-based methods that can facilitate these experiences, making preschool
learning environments (such as school and home) a critical target for
intervention. The benefit of this project is that it will develop a robust model
for a school-based intervention in early mathematics instruction. The model has
the potential to broaden participation by providing instructional materials that
support adult-child interaction and engagement in mathematics, explicitly
promoting school-home connections in mathematics, and addressing educators' and
families' attitudes toward mathematics while promoting children's mathematical
knowledge and narrowing opportunity gaps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
design and development project is to address the critical need for innovative
resources that transform the mathematics learning environments of preschool
children from under-resourced communities by creating a cross-context school-
home intervention. To achieve this goal, qualitative and quantitative research
methodologies will be employed, integrating data from multiple sources and
stakeholders. Specifically, the project will: (1) engage in a materials design
and development process that includes an iterative cycle of design, development,
and implementation, collaborating with practitioners and families in real-world
settings; (2) collect and analyze data from at least 40 Head Start classrooms,
implementing the mathematics materials to ensure that the classroom and family
mathematics materials and resources are engaging, usable, and comprehensible to
preschoolers, teachers, and families; and (3) conduct an experimental study that
will measure the impact of the intervention on preschool children's mathematics
learning. The researchers will analyze Collected data using hierarchical linear
regression modeling to account for the clustering of children within classrooms.
The researchers will also use a series of regression models and multi-level
models to determine whether the intervention promotes student outcomes and
whether it supports teachers' and families' positive attitudes toward
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.