* 1907294
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:   What?s in a name? Linking type specimens, reproductive mode, and genetics in Pteridaceae
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Kathryn Picard, Picard                  Kathryn        T
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Tied to each species name is a reference (type) specimen. Type
specimens are critically important for biologists for identifying new species
and inferring relationships between species. However, due to poor DNA quality in
preserved specimens, there are few type specimens for which genetic data are
available. This poses a significant challenge to scientists studying evolution
in groups of organisms with unclear species boundaries or complex evolutionary
histories. Ferns are particularly noteworthy for their similar morphologies and
complicated genetic makeup, all of which can obscure evolutionary relationships.
To address this problem, the fellow will use advances in DNA sequencing
technology to generate gene sequence data from decades- and centuries-old type
specimens of ferns to estimate the role of genome changes and hybridization as
drivers of fern species diversity. The results of this research will not only
provide new molecular tools and important life history data for the fern
community, but will also contribute to the emerging discipline of museum
genomics, helping to unlock the wealth of biodiversity data contained within
natural history collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the initial phase of the
research, the fellow will use spore analysis to determine reproductive mode and
estimate ploidy level for the 500+ type specimens in the diverse fern family
Pteridaceae at the US National Herbarium. In the second phase of the project,
the fellow will extract DNA from all type specimens and use custom DNA
hybridization probes to enrich for two important chloroplast genes (the barcode
loci rbcL and matK) and 25 low- to single-copy nuclear genes. This phylogenomic
dataset will be used to (1) infer a family-wide phylogeny for the Pteridaceae;
(2) confirm the ploidy level of each type specimen; and (3) identify speciation
events driven by whole-genome duplications and hybridization. This research will
be hosted at the US National Herbarium at the National Museum of Natural
History. The fellow will receive training in phylogenomics, computational
biology, molecular biology and microscopy. The fellow will also direct a science
communication workshop series for graduate students and postdoctoral scholars.
Workshop participants and the fellow will develop classroom activities based on
their research, which will be brought to K-12 schools in the Washington, DC
metro area through 'Meet a Scientist' events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.