* 1907061
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Fluctuating Selection in Barley Driven by Biotic and Abiotic Factors
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Keely Brown, Brown, Keely E
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2023
* USD 285,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2019. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Keely Elizabeth Brown is "Fluctuating Selection in Barley
Driven by Biotic and Abiotic Factors". The host institution for the fellowship
is the University of California, Riverside and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Daniel Koenig.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Barley is the fourth most highly produced
grain in the world and is a staple crop across many varied environments, from
the mountains of Nepal to lowland regions in Northern Africa. Barley yield is
expected to be dramatically impacted by climate change, potentially resulting
not only in food shortages across the world, but in higher cost of luxury goods
like health products and malt in more developed countries. This project aims to
better understand how barley responds on a genetic level to changes in the
environment by using seed from an ongoing experimental evolution study that
began in 1929. The fellow will use historical weather data to identify patterns
of evolution that will help us to predict how well a plant will do in a
particular environment, given its genetic makeup. The broader impacts of the
project include providing basic research training for undergraduates from
diverse backgrounds and engaging the public in scientific discussions about
climate change in casual community outreach settings. Training objectives
include acquiring expertise in genomics and bioinformatic analysis of large
genomic data sets and training in agriculturally-relevant research. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;How genetic variation is maintained in crop plants is a question of
great intellectual and practical importance. This project will focus on temporal
environmental fluctuations as a mechanism to maintain variation in barley
(Hordeum vulgare, Poaceae). The project will address this question by leveraging
a set of parallel evolution experiments using a collection of barley Composite
Cross lines (CCs). Initiated in 1929, these experiments and the resulting
datasets provides a one-of-a-kind opportunity to link phenotype to genotype
under a wide variety of environmental conditions. Using existing genomic
datasets, the Fellow will map genes that maintain unusually high levels of
genetic diversity in different climates (e.g., that in Montana versus
California), and also how yearly environmental variability drives the retention
of genetic diversity. The project will also consider temporal fluctuations in
both abiotic environmental factors like temperature or rainfall and biotic
factors like varying pressure from the fungal pathogen Rhynchosporium secalis,
which causes barley scald. The analysis will exploit the key feature of the CC
populations, replication, to identify environmental drivers of allele frequency
change during local adaptation. Sequencing data from this project will be
archived and publicly available through the National Center for Biotechnology
Information Short Read Archive (NCBI SRA). Python or R code used for analysis
will be made available through Github, and phenotype data will be archived in a
public repository like Dryad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.