* 1907681
* Developing Organizational Capacity to Improve K-8 Mathematics Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Yue Yin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 06/30/2024
* USD 4,730,433.00

The Developing Organizational Capacity to Improve K-8 Mathematics Teaching and
Learning is a 4-year Implementation and Improvement project. The project will
develop and test a leadership model to improve K-8 mathematics teaching and
learning by involving stakeholders across the K-8 spectrum. The project will
support teachers, teacher leaders, and administrators in collectively
identifying and addressing problems of practice in the teaching and learning of
mathematics, and in turn develop plans to improve school and district
organizational capacities to support stronger mathematics teaching. At the heart
of the project is the Elementary Mathematics Leadership (EML) model, which is
designed to improve stakeholder understandings of effective math teaching
practices. The EML model involves collaboratively identifying classroom-based
problems of practice with school and district personnel, designing and
implementing professional development aligned with the problems of practice, and
iterating those cycles of development, implementation, and revision to assess
the model's effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EML model operates at the
teacher, school, and district level using a design-based implementation research
approach. At the district level, leadership teams in conjunction with
researchers will identify problems of practice for which work on those problems
will lead to a more coherent mathematics instruction in the district. Following
this, professional development and coaching at the teacher level will be
designed and implemented to target the problem of practice, with a focus on big
ideas within the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. This phase of the
model also includes professional development aimed at school leaders and
district administrators to strengthen organizational capacity to support and
lead change related to the problem of practice. The final phase of the model
calls on researchers, district, and school personnel to engage in an annual
redesign of the intervention, making use of data gathered during the school year
and evidence about what is happening in classrooms. This design acknowledges the
broader policy context in which schools and districts operate as they work
towards instructional change. To evaluate the effectiveness of the overall EML
model, the project will collect a wide variety of data, including student
achievement outcomes using standardized tests; assessments of teachers'
mathematical knowledge, instructional practices, and efficacy measures; and
measures of leader, administrator, and organizational capacities to support
high-quality mathematics instruction. Four districts will be recruited to
participate, enacting the model in pairs with a staggered start for one pair of
districts to be able to measure treatment effects, using a variation of a
switching replications design. Classroom practice and teacher outcomes will be
assessed using a variety of MKT assessments, the Mathematical Quality of
Instruction (MQI), and the Instructional Quality Assessment (IQA). School level
outcomes will be collected via a leadership assessment and interview data, and
district level outcomes will be assessed through the use of interview and
documentary data. Analysis will include a statistical analysis of the EML model
using hierarchical linear modeling, MANOVA/ANOVA, and regression as appropriate
at the level of students and teachers, and qualitative analysis and descriptive
statistics will be used at the school and district level due to small sample
size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.