* 1907561
* Strengthening Middle School Mathematical Argumentation through Teacher Coaching: Bridging from Professional Development to Classroom Practice
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Teresa Lara-Meloy, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,490,444.00

The Bridging Professional Development project is a professional learning
experience for middle school teachers to support them in developing five
mathematical practices in their teaching focused on mathematical argumentation.
These practices are: create mathematical arguments, use appropriate tools
strategically, look for and make use of structure, attend to precision, and look
for and express regularity in repeated reasoning. Mathematics argumentation is
an important component of complex problem solving and supporting students in
understanding the why, not just the how, of mathematics. The professional
development intervention consists of summer workshop focused on approximations
of teaching practice, and coaching during the school year. The coaching
component includes face-to-face coaching and a video-based tool that allows
teachers and coaches to engage with records of classroom interactions. The
project expands the successful Bridging professional development work by adding
four additional mathematical practices that relate to argumentation, adding the
coaching component, collecting data on students' equitable participation in
classroom discussions, and piloting an impact study to determine whether the
professional development that includes coaching leads to improved mathematics
teaching and learning, and the mechanisms by which that hypothesized improvement
occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bridging series of professional development
projects are built on a theoretical framework that begins with providing
teachers with opportunities to engage in meaningful mathematics teaching
practices, identify teaching moves that would support students in learning those
practices, and to try out those moves with other teachers in approximations of
teaching practice. The outcomes of such activity are increased teacher knowledge
that can be mobilized in the planning and enactment of lessons, and improved
pedagogical moves in the classroom. This in turn is likely to lead to increased
student engagement and mathematics achievement. In this award, Bridging adds
cycles of coaching to support teachers in translating lessons learned from
approximations of practice to the work in their classrooms with students, and to
provide ongoing school-year support for implementation. The research components
of the project focus on understanding the practice of the coaches, including the
design and deployment of coaching training and coaching sessions, as it relates
to teachers' abilities to foster stronger student engagement in mathematical
practices. The project will recruit 25 teachers at middle schools with
experienced mathematics coaches to participate, with teachers directed to select
a single focus class for data collection. Case studies will be pursued with six
teachers and three coaches that represent diverse backgrounds, experiences, and
levels of prior knowledge. Video records of coaching training and sessions will
be collected and analyzed, along with lessons plans and teacher-enacted lessons,
to determine the influence of the coaching on practice. The study will also
investigate the ways in which teacher engagement in the professional
developments leads to changes in teacher practice and student outcomes. Video
records of practice, written lesson plans, student work, and interviews will be
collected and analyzed to determine the impact on teaching practice. Teachers'
mathematical knowledge for teaching will also be assessed at key points in the
project to assess teacher learning, and student standardized assessment scores
and performance assessment outcomes will be collected to assess student
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.