* 1907711
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Toward Extreme Scale Fault-Tolerance: Exploration Methods, Comparative Studies and Decision Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Dorian Arnold, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2022
* USD 342,000.00

Current high-performance computing (HPC) research target computer systems with
exaflop (1018 or a quintillion floating point operations per second)
capabilities. Such computational power will enable new, important discoveries
across all basic science domains. Application resilience to computer faults and
failures is a major challenge to the realization of extreme scale computing
systems. This project, Simulation and Modeling for Understanding Resilience and
Faults at Scale (SMURFS), addresses this challenge by developing methods to
improve our predictive understanding of the complex interactions amongst a given
application, a given real or hypothetical hardware and software system
environment, and a given fault-tolerance strategy at extreme scale.
Specifically, SMURFS develops:&lt;br/&gt;1. New simulation and modeling
capabilities for studying application resilience at scale;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Capabilities to execute a comprehensive set of comparative fault-tolerance
studies; and&lt;br/&gt;3. Effective prescriptions to guide application
developers, hardware architects and system designers to realize efficient,
resilient extreme scale capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SMURFS explores the
impact of faults and failures, fault mitigation strategies and emerging
technologies by providing new analytical and component models for predicting
fault-tolerant application behavior at scale. The Iron simulation framework
integrates these models for validation and comprehensive performance studies
over a wide range of representative applications, application proxies, fault-
tolerance protocols and hardware configurations. These studies inform a rule-
based system for prescribing best fault-tolerance practices and configurations
for new candidate applications and scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SMURFS
renders (1) new simulation and analytical models that predict application
performance at scale; (2) detailed understandings of how application features
interplay with different fault-tolerance strategies and hardware technologies;
(3) new knowledge about application behavior at scale; and (4) valuable insight
and prescriptions for designing, developing and deploying future extreme scale
HPC systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, artifacts like the Iron
framework and the public suite of application traces will be valuable to the HPC
research, engineering, development, procurement and administrative communities.
Researchers can use these artifacts for their own research that can impact the
HPC exploration and design space. For example, this framework can be
instrumental in the co-design of cohesive extreme scale applications, software
environments and hardware platforms. Additionally, Iron-based research can
inform and improve scientific computing practices, accelerating the rate of
scientific discovery. Finally, Iron will be useful as an instructional device to
teach about HPC issues both in classroom and tutorial contexts and other
programs that engage diverse populations of middle, high school and college
students in New Mexico and Tennessee.