* 1907243
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Using research collections to reveal the genomic basis of adaptation to seasonal snow cover in snowshoe hares
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Timothy Thurman, Thurman, Timothy
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Many animals must cope with seasonal changes in their
environment. Most snowshoe hares, for example, molt from brown to white to
maintain camouflage against snowy backgrounds in winter. As with many seasonal
traits, the timing of these molts is critical. Hares that change color too early
or too late are mis-matched to their environment and easily seen by predators.
As climate change leads to warmer winters and shorter periods of snow cover,
snowshoe hares must adapt their molt timing. Otherwise, populations will decline
due to increased predation. To better understand seasonal adaptation, this
project will use DNA sequencing of extensive archived tissue samples of snowshoe
hares to determine which parts of the genome are associated with adaptation to
the environment and affect molt timing. This research addresses fundamental
questions in evolutionary biology while also assisting conservation efforts:
knowing which genes are important for adaptation will be helpful in identifying
which populations of snowshoe hares can adapt to shorter winters and which
populations are at risk of disappearing. Outreach events will highlight the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The archived tissue samples are sourced from a
broad network of museum specimens, scientists, trappers, and other stakeholders.
These georeferenced samples come from populations of hares from across North
America which experience a wide range of environmental conditions and vary in
their molt timing. The fellow will combine two approaches to investigate the
genetics of adaptation in hares. Landscape genomics will be used to relate DNA
sequence data (from exome sequencing) to climactic and environmental variables.
Then, divergence mapping will be used on two populations with significant
population- and individual-level variation in molt timing to zero in on the
regions of the genome that affect seasonal changes in color. Based on this
research, the fellow will develop outreach events which will advance the public
understanding of science and demonstrate the relevance of evolutionary biology
to wildlife and conservation. First, the fellow will create a mobile museum
exhibit on snowshoe hares geared to schoolchildren. This exhibit will include
video lessons recorded by the fellow such that it can be shared with schools in
remote communities. Second, the fellow will connect the general public with
scientists through a series of informal public presentations and discussions at
local microbreweries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.