* 1907971
* A Northern Hemisphere Holocene Paleoatmospheric Record of Ethane and Acetylene from the GISP2 Ice Core
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Murat Aydin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 01/31/2024
* USD 599,631.00

Biomass burning has a major impact on atmospheric composition and climate due to
emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols. The past history of fire emissions
is not well documented, and as a result, the relationship between fire and
climate on long time scales is not well understood. This project will
investigate the atmospheric histories of ethane and acetylene, trace gases
emitted to the atmosphere from biomass and biofuel burning. Measurements of
these trace gases in the air bubbles entrapped in Greenland ice cores will
document past variations in the atmospheric levels of these trace gases over a
wide range of climatic conditions and environmental change. The data will
provide new insight into the variability in fire on millennial time scales and
quantify the contribution of fire to past atmospheric levels of greenhouse
gases. This knowledge will contribute to the development of land surface and
earth system models capable of simulating fire in future climate scenarios. This
project will support the dissertation research of a PhD student in the UC Irvine
Department of Earth System Science and outreach activities in K-12 classrooms
through the non-profit CLEAN Education initiative founded and operated by
graduate students at UC Irvine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ethane and acetylene
measurements in firn air and shallow ice cores demonstrate that the entrapped
air in polar ice contains a paleoatmospheric record of these trace gases. In
this study, the investigators will analyze ethane and acetylene in ice core
samples from the GISP2 ice core (Summit, Greenland), spanning the last glacial
maximum, glacial/interglacial transition, and Holocene periods. Trace gas
emissions will be inferred from the atmospheric histories using a 3-D global
photochemical/transport model and biogeochemical box models. This study will
provide a northern hemispheric counterpart to an Antarctic ice core record under
development. Together, the Greenland and Antarctic records will provide
estimates of: 1) past global biomass burning emissions of these trace gases, 2)
partitioning of fire emissions between tropical and boreal sources, and 3) the
magnitude and variability of pyrogenic methane
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.