* 1907184
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Viruses: Architects of Microbial Community Metabolism
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Kalia Bistolas, Bistolas, Kalia
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Fellow
will explore the interface between viruses, their microbial hosts, and human-
driven changes in marine nutrients. Viruses are the most abundant biological
entities on the planet yet cannot multiply without cellular hosts, including
microbes. Viruses manipulate the metabolism of the microbes that they infect
through numerous mechanisms, which has consequences for global nutrient cycling.
One way that viruses modify microbial activities is by genetically altering
microbial metabolism to better suit viral replication and this can also alter
the way that microbes utilize key nutrients, including nitrogen. Nitrogen is a
fundamental chemical in oceans and an essential component of all organisms.
Human activities have increased the deposition of nitrogen into natural
ecosystems five-fold over the last century. This influx alters the composition
and function of microbial communities. The goal of this research is to
understand how the genetics of viruses contributes to microbial metabolism to
better predict how microbial communities respond to human-driven nutrient
increases. The Fellow will also enhance inclusivity in science by working with
students from underrepresented groups, including students with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets an aggregate portrait of
virus-encoded auxiliary metabolic gene (AMG) repertoires and host-virus dynamics
in nitrate/urea-replete marine ecosystems using a multidimensional sequencing
approach. By coupling in situ experimentation with in silico analysis of
coexisting viral and cellular consortia, this research aims to resolve the
significance of nitrogen amendment on (1) microbial community turnover and
putative metabolic capacity, (2) composition and distribution of virus-encoded
AMGs, and (3) microbial transcription of pathways involved in host-virus
interactions. The experimental design expects to differentiate between short-
and long-term impacts of eutrophication, providing both baseline information
about AMG dynamics and stability under transitional conditions. As integral
members of aquatic ecosystems, viruses govern microbial diversity, evolution,
and metabolism; it is imperative to investigate host-virus dynamics and virus-
mediated proliferation of AMGs under anticipated future biogeochemical
conditions. In addition to facilitating the Fellow's development of key
bioinformatic and molecular skills, this program will enable international
collaboration, improve inclusivity and integration of universal design at
fieldwork sites, and engage individuals of underrepresented groups through
curriculum design and mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.