* 1907491
* Collaborative Research:  Insect herbivore feeding guilds and compartmentalized plant defense
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Anurag Agrawal, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2023
* USD 535,341.00

Plants are the basic energy source in nearly all food chains and are responsible
for feeding the world. Yet over the eons, tremendous insect pressure on plants
has led to the evolution of a remarkable diversity of tactics to defend against
being consumed. Plants defend with toxins, spines, and sticky sap. Despite
demonstrations of how plant traits can reduce herbivory, in most wild plant
systems scientists lack an understanding of the mechanisms of plant defensive
responses. Do plants make specific toxins targeted at root feeders versus leaf
feeders, all the while not poisoning beneficial visitors such as pollinators?
Deciphering the mechanisms of plant defense not only advances scientific
knowledge of ecology and evolution but may have important societal benefits.
Because wild plants have been engaged in a long-term evolutionary battle with
insect pests, studying the mechanisms of defense may enhance crop pest
management. This project focuses on milkweeds, which are the only host for the
declining monarch butterfly. Basic knowledge of the interaction between monarchs
and milkweed will be gained, which could help sustain the monarch's threatened
migration. This project blends the latest advances in genomic manipulation,
toxicology and chemistry in a way that will train scientists to meld natural
history and important ecological problems. The investigators will expand their
communication to the public through schools, presentations, and a
blog.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about how plant defenses are aimed at
different attackers, whether there are trade-offs associated with multiple arms
races, and whether tissue-specific phenotypic plasticity is a means to manage
interactions with several pests. This work uses milkweeds as a model natural
system with well-characterized defense chemistry to test the specificity and
interdependence of interactions with diverse insect attackers that include leaf-
feeding monarch butterflies, root-feeding beetles, and seed-feeding bugs. From
the plant's perspective, trade-offs will be evaluated between multiple defenses
and their non-target impacts on pollinating bumblebees as costs associated with
constitutive or induced defenses. From the herbivores' perspective, assays of
plant toxin expression will be coupled to impacts on insect target site
enzymatic function, behavior, and whole-organism performance. Beyond guild-
specific plant defense and trade-off hypotheses, classic explanations for
diversity in plant defense will also be tested: the non-exclusive hypotheses
that (i) naturally occurring toxin mixtures are differentially expressed in
plant parts and (ii) mixtures are more effective than equal doses of single
compounds. This view on specialization and interaction addresses the dynamic
match in offense-defense traits that may generate diversity within plants and
insects through distinct arms races occurring from roots to fruits. Feeding
trials will be used to address how single cardenolides and natural mixtures
impact physiological function, insect behavior, sequestration, and fitness. By
extracting the Na/K-ATPase (the target of cardenolides) from the different
insects, the specific action of toxins will also be assessed in
vitro.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.