* 1907782
* Developing and Investigating Unscripted Mathematics Videos
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Joanne Lobato, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,521,015.00

This project responds to the recent internet phenomenon of widespread
accessibility to online instructional videos, which offer many benefits, such as
student control of the pace of learning. However, these videos primarily focus
on a single speaker working through procedural problems and providing an
explanation. While the immense reach of free online instructional videos is
potentially transformative, this potential can only be attained if access
transcends physical availability to also include entry into important
disciplinary understandings and practices, and only if the instructional method
pushes past what would be considered outdated pedagogy in any other setting than
a digital one. This project will use an alternative model for online videos,
originally developed for a previous exploratory project, to develop 6 video
units that feature the unscripted dialogue of pairs of students. The project
team will use the filming and post-production processes established during the
previous grant to create a repository of 6 dialogic mathematics video units that
target important Algebra 1 and 2 topics for high school and upper middle school
students, though the approach can be applied to any STEM topic, for any age
level. They will also conduct 8 research studies to investigate the promise of
these unscripted dialogic videos with a diverse population to better understand
the vicarious learning process, which refers to learning from video- or audio-
taped presentations of other people learning. Additionally, the project team
will provide broader access to the project videos and support a variety of
users, by: (a) subtitling the videos and checking math task statements for
linguistic accessibility; (b) representing diversity of race, ethnicity, and
language in both the pool of students who appear in the videos and the research
study participants; (c) providing teachers with an array of resources including
focus questions to pose in class with each video, printable task worksheets,
specific ways to support dialogue about the videos, and alignment of the video
content with Common Core mathematics standards and practices; and (d)
modernizing the project website and making it functional across a variety of
platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The videos created for this project will
feature pairs of students (called the talent), highlighting their unscripted
dialogue, authentic confusion, and conceptual resources. Each video unit will
consist of 7 video lessons (each split into 4-5 short video episodes) meant to
be viewed in succession to support conceptual development over time. The project
will build upon emerging evidence from the exploratory grant that as students
engage with videos that feature peers grappling with complex mathematics, they
can enter a quasi-collaborative relationship with the on-screen talent to learn
complex conceptual content and engage in authentic mathematical practices. The
research focuses on the questions: 1. What can diverse populations of vicarious
learners learn mathematically from dialogic videos, and how do the vicarious
learners orient to the talent in the videos? 2. What is the nature of vicarious
learners' evolving ways of reasoning as they engage with multiple dialogic video
lessons over time and what processes are involved in vicarious learning? and, 3.
What instructional practices encourage a classroom community to adopt productive
ways of reasoning from dialogic videos? To address the first question, the
project team will conduct two Learning Outcomes and Orientation Studies, in
which they analyze students' learning outcomes and survey responses after they
have learned from one of the video units in a classroom setting. Before
administering an assessment to a classroom of students, they will first conduct
an exploratory Interpretation Study for each unit, in which they link the
mathematical interpretations that VLs generate from viewing the project videos
with their performance on an assessment instrument. Both types of studies will
be conducted twice, once for each of two video units - Exponential Functions and
Meaning and Use of Algebraic Symbols. For the second research question, the
project team will identify a learning trajectory associated with each of four
video units. These two learning trajectories will inform the instructional
planning for the classroom studies by identifying what meaningful appropriation
can occur, as well as conceptual challenges for VLs. By delivering learning
trajectories for two additional units, the project can contribute to vicarious
learning theory by identifying commonalities in learning processes evident
across the four studies. For the final research question, the project team will
investigate how instructors can support students with the instrumental genesis
process, which occurs through a process called instrumental orchestration, as
they teach the two videos on exponential functions and algebraic
symbols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.