* 1907573
* The 2019 North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics Student Research Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Gregory Durrett, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization for computational linguistics and natural language processing,
which in turn is one of the primary application areas for research in machine
learning and artificial intelligence. The annual meeting of the North American
chapter of the ACL (NAACL) is one of the most prestigious and selective
international conferences in these fields. The proceedings of this meeting is
among the most cited publications in computational linguistics, and the meeting
itself is the most important meeting for North American researchers in the field
on years when it is held. This project will subsidize travel, conference and
housing expenses of students selected to participate in the NAACL Student
Research Workshop, which will take place during the main NAACL conference June
2-7, 2019 in Minneapolis, MN. The Student Research Workshop helps create a new
generation of researchers with a more thorough understanding of their field,
with connections and collaborations across institutions, and with innovative and
exciting research programs. This contributes to America's pool of researchers
with the needed scientific and engineering knowledge and skills. The workshop
encourages a spirit of collaborative research and builds a supportive
environment for a new generation of computational linguists. By sponsoring
student travel, the workshop can reach a wider audience, broadening the horizons
of the computational linguistics community and helping bring diversity to
computer science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Student Research Workshop
solicits two categories of submissions: research papers and research proposals.
The research proposal can have only one author who must be a student. The
research papers can have multiple authors, with the first author being a student
(at either the graduate or undergraduate level). Unlike typical workshops and
conferences, student authors have the opportunity to receive explicit mentoring
prior to submitting their work: they are put into contact with world-class
researchers in the field who provide guidance and help the authors polish their
submissions. The workshop is then a venue for students to receive constructive
critical feedback on their work from experts outside of their institution; the
early-stage work that students present here may later form the basis for full
conference papers, journal articles, or dissertations. These features are
particularly useful for students from underprivileged backgrounds or
institutions where they might not have access to such strong mentoring
resources. In addition, the workshop is organized and run by students. The
student organizers gain valuable opportunities for professional growth and
interaction with the researchers on the organizing committee of the main
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.