* 1907898
* Collaborative Research: Extreme-scale Ready High-order Methods for Astrophysical and Laboratory Turbulence
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Sean Couch, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,138.00

Astrophysical phenomena inherently involve multi-physics and multi-scales that
are nonlinearly coupled. The mathematical accuracy and efficiency of the
computational tools used to test theoretical models hugely impact the scientific
outcomes. The astrophysics community has thus long focused on developing
computationally accurate numerical algorithms that give improved solution
accuracy, stability, and efficiency. This project tackles the challenge of
developing new approaches to address these problems, and incorporating these
methods in the FLASH community code in order to reach a large audience in the
astrophysics community. The work lies at the nexus of applied and computational
mathematics, statistical Gaussian Process (GP) data predictions, and
astrophysics. Involvement in NSF-supported outreach will help to educate under-
represented community college students in computational astrophysics. Training
young scientists in astrophysical and laboratory turbulence using validated
simulations also helps to meet a critical national
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will develop high-order accurate, novel
algorithms with only modest complexity, using a new high-order GP spatial
reconstruction approach and a novel single-step high-order temporal integration
method. This powerful predictive tool will run on massively parallel high-
performance architectures. The study involves, firstly, using the novel GP
approach to overcome the second-order bottleneck in most finite-volume shock-
capturing astrophysics codes. The GP algorithms provide a simple mathematical
framework for computing highly accurate volume-averaged versus pointwise
quantities, and multidimensional spatial reconstructions. The second important
development is an efficient high-order temporal integration method in adaptive
mesh refinement grid configurations. This requires a single-step time update at
a single quadrature point per cell face, which will provide the most efficient
algorithmic framework in extreme-scale parallel simulations. Finally, comparing
simulation results based on solution accuracy, errors, and computational
performance for key astrophysical flow problems, including astrophysical and
laboratory turbulence, will demonstrate the impact and benefit of these
advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.