* 1907820
* AF: Small: New Approaches for Approximation and Online Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Anupam Gupta, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,999.00

The area of approximation algorithms focuses on NP-hard optimization problems,
and on obtaining fast algorithms that output solutions that are near-optimal,
say in polynomial time. In the area of online algorithms, the input is revealed
slowly over time, and the goal is to get good algorithms without knowing the
future portions of the input. Many questions considered in this project are NP-
hard, and often the resultant problems are not static problems but dynamic ones,
hence these areas are central to algorithm design. This research project aims to
develop new techniques in both these areas, to make progress on some long-
standing open problems. For instance, it aims to develop general tools to solve
convex optimization problems when the input appears online: given that convex
optimization underlies many techniques in algorithms and machine learning, such
results have broad applicability both within computer science and beyond. The
research component of this project goes hand-in-hand with its educational and
training component, which will include training both graduate and undergraduate
students, and in developing new courses and materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the goal is to bring together hitherto disparate techniques, and
use their combination to solve some central questions. For instance, many NP-
hard problems have been attacked using, on one hand, the tools of randomization
and convex optimization, and on the other, the perspective of fixed-parameter
tractability, where the algorithm is allowed to be exponential in some
parameter. The project hopes to bring these areas together, and use this
synthesis of ideas to further the state-of-the-art on the k-cut partitioning
problems and k-means clustering problems, among others. This fine-grained notion
of approximation algorithms should lead to new structural insights into these
fundamental questions. In online algorithms, the hope is to use ideas from
continuous optimization and online learning, in combination with the
combinatorial ideas typically used in the design of online algorithms, to make
progress on problems like k-server and online convex
minimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.