* 1907314
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Linking maternal investment and the neonate: Variation in maternal demand during lactation on offspring immune system development
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Chloe Josefson, Josefson, Chloe C
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The goal of
this project is to address novel questions using integrative approaches and to
use scientific research as a tool to empower underrepresented groups. Lactation
(milk production by mammals) is the most energetically-demanding phase of the
mammalian life cycle, yet is the least studied aspect of mammalian reproduction.
The composition of milk is affected by maternal activity, behavior, and maternal
physiology, and can carry long-lasting impacts on offspring. This project aims
to understand how lactation is affected by maternal illness by looking at
offspring development and immune defense via changes in milk compounds and/or
maternal behavior. Through investigating these relationships, this study will
advance the understanding of the non-genetic ways that mothers can influence
their offspring, with implications on the fields of ecological physiology, dairy
and animal science, and biomedicine. The fellow's outreach program aims to
promote and support the participation of Native American students in the
sciences, as these populations are underrepresented within both higher education
and STEM disciplines. The initiative combines mentorship for undergraduates in a
research environment with a sustainable community-based program. Insights
gleaned from this project will be disseminated at professional meetings on
biology education research, so that they can be used by the scientific community
to further promote and enhance diversity, inclusivity, and retention of
underrepresented groups within the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
formative role that milk plays in neonatal immune development, this project uses
a life history theory framework to systematically investigate the role of
conflicting maternal demands (i.e., lactation and immune defense) in determining
offspring phenotype and development. To conduct this work, experiments will be
conducted using immune-challenged female mice from both laboratory and wild-
derived populations. The fellow will observe maternal licking and grooming
behavior and will employ whole-animal respirometry to determine maternal demand.
Variation in milk composition and bioactive compounds, including secretory
immunoglobulin A, which is responsible for passive antibody transfer, will also
be measured. Maternal and offspring physiology and immunocompetence will be
determined using multiple techniques, including functional assays (i.e., immune
response to a challenge), morphological measurements of litter and offspring
characteristics, and expression of genes and proteins associated with immune
defense and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.