* 1907831
* Co-Developing a Curriculum Coherence Toolkit with Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Marcy Wood, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 06/30/2023
* USD 108,791.00

One important aspect of any mathematics curriculum is its coherence, or the
mathematical connections across lessons. This coherence links lessons and
activities so that mathematical ideas, representations, practices, skills, and
ways of thinking build upon each other to help students construct mathematical
meaning and enhance their learning. When teachers relied predominantly on
published curriculum materials, curricular coherence was largely provided by the
curriculum authors. However, many of today's teachers are no longer given a
foundational textbook or single set of resources. Further, teachers have
unprecedented access via the internet and social media to lessons and activities
produced by many different curriculum developers (including other teachers). As
a result, the important task of building curricular coherence becomes the
responsibility of the classroom teacher. And yet, very little is known about how
teachers think about curricular coherence or how their decisions about lessons
and activities reflect the coherent mathematical story they hope to students
will learn in their classrooms. This project will investigate the factors that
influence curriculum coherence and how teachers in Grades 3-5 respond to these
factors as they make decisions about their mathematics curriculum. A national
survey of 300 Grades 3-5 teachers will be conducted in in the first phase of the
project and the work will continue with small groups of four case study teachers
in each of four different districts across four states. Case study participants
will work with project researchers to co-develop a set of tools for supporting
curriculum coherence. The structure of the project and the selection of case
study participants will facilitate the collaborative co-development of tools
across institutions and across geographic and curricular contexts, supporting
the use of the tools across a wide range of contexts. The outcomes of this study
will contribute to broader impacts by developing understandings of curriculum
coherence that are robust across a range of curricular, policy, and
district/school contexts, with implications that support the participation of
students in diverse mathematics classrooms. The survey findings and the
coherence toolkit co-developed with teachers will be disseminated widely through
conference presentations, including teacher-oriented conferences, through
journal publications, and through making survey data available to other
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this study are to
explore 1) patterns of Grade 3-5 teacher curricular resource use across a range
of curriculum contexts, 2) teacher decisions about curriculum coherence, and 3)
how curriculum toolkits co-developed with teachers might support teachers in
making decisions related to curriculum coherence. Given the potential variation
among and within states and districts in terms of contextual factors impacting
curriculum use, teachers will be surveyed about their contexts, available
resources, and curricular decision-making. Survey data will be analyzed using
primarily descriptive analyses. Following the survey, in-depth case studies of
teacher curricular resource use in contexts that vary along two dimensions
(autonomy to select curricular resources and the complexity of curricular
influences, including the number of resources available) will be developed. Case
study data, including interviews, video-recorded co-design groups, and
curriculum use artifacts, will be analyzed using methods of discourse analysis,
thematic analysis, and document analysis and synthesized within and across
cases. By selecting cases along these dimensions, a set of tools will be co-
developed to support teachers as they navigate diverse curricular contexts to
enact a coherent curriculum for students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DRK-12
Program seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the program build on fundamental research in STEM education and
prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.