* 1907905
* CNS Core: Small: Wireless Network Control in Uncooperative and Adversarial Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Eytan Modiano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Recent growth in mobile and media-rich applications has greatly increased the
demand for wireless capacity, straining wireless networks. This dramatic
increase in demand poses a challenge for current wireless networks, and calls
for new network algorithms that make better use of scarce wireless resources.
Moreover, modern communication networks frequently operate in unfriendly
environments, where some of the users may be uncooperative, or even malicious,
and try to disrupt network services. This project develops network control
algorithms that operate effectively in adversarial environments that
increasingly characterize realistic network settings, thus leading to dramatic
improvement in network performance and enabling emerging wireless
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new optimization
framework for networks where some of the nodes, as well as the external dynamics
(e.g., link rates, exogenous arrivals), may be uncooperative and exhibit
adversarial or even malicious behavior. This novel framework envisions network
control algorithms that are "secure-by-design", in the face of adversarial
dynamics. Moreover, the developed control algorithms will have a "robust
optimization" flavor, in the sense that they will be designed from the outset to
perform well under worst-case conditions, while maintaining nearly optimal
performance under normal conditions. The research agenda includes the following
tasks: (i) Network Optimization in Uncooperative Environments: Use techniques
from model-based reinforcement learning to develop control algorithms for
networks where a subset of nodes are uncontrollable and use some unknown
stationary control policy. (ii) Network Optimization in Adversarial
Environments: Develop online learning algorithms for maximizing throughput and
network utility in networks where uncontrollable nodes can take arbitrary and
possibly non-stationary actions. (iii) Network Optimization in Malicious
Environments: Characterize the network's performance in overflow due to
adversarial flow injections, develop optimal flow injection policies for the
adversary, and network control algorithms to mitigate the effect of such
adversarial flow injections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.