* 1907492
* Star formation and molecular cloud structure at low metallicity
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Deidre Hunter, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 02/29/2024
* USD 437,995.00

New stars are continuously forming in galaxies like the Milky Way. Galaxies
begin as mostly hydrogen atoms, but nuclear fusion inside of stars produces
heavier atoms. These atoms, like carbon and oxygen, are spewed out by dying
stars, changing the chemistry of the space between the stars. The process begins
again with the formation of new giant clouds of gas, which become cold and dense
enough that atoms bond together to form molecules. New molecular clouds begin to
form the next generations of stars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These heavy atoms from
the first generation of stars are caught up in a molecular cloud and absorb
ultraviolet light from nearby stars. The absorption helps to protect the fragile
molecules from being broken apart, again changing the chemistry of the clouds.
The investigator seeks to understand these chemical processes by comparison of
the Milky Way to the chemistry in nearby dwarf irregular galaxies. These small
galaxies have much less of the heavy atoms compared to spiral galaxies like the
Milky Way. As a result, the outer parts of molecular clouds in those dwarf
galaxies are destroyed, leaving smaller molecular clouds than are found in
spiral galaxies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator is studying the
structure of molecular clouds in tiny dwarf galaxies. The investigator seeks to
understand the consequences on star formation in dwarf galaxies due to the
differences in molecular abundance. Stars are forming in dwarf galaxies, and the
investigator plans additional observations to understand the nature of the gas
in these galaxies. The answers to these questions will help us to understand
star formation in the early universe, before heavy atoms were formed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator leads the Lowell Observatory Native
American Astronomy Outreach Program, which pairs astronomers with 4th-8th grade
teachers in the Navajo and Hopi Nations. The program holds tri-annual teacher
workshops that introduce teachers to classroom activities enhancing their
understanding of astronomy. The collaborators create culturally responsive
curriculum that enables Native students to see themselves as scientists and
addresses the tribal and educational standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.