* 1907338
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The Genetic Architecture of Hydraulic and Whole-plant Performance Under Cold Temperatures in Sunflower
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jared Stewart, Stewart                 Jared          J
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2023
* USD 285,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2019. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Jared J. Stewart is "The Genetic Architecture of
Hydraulic and Whole-plant Performance Under Cold Temperature in Sunflower". The
host institutions for the fellowship are USDA-ARS Water Management and Systems
Research Unit (Fort Collins, CO), the University of Colorado-Boulder, and USDA-
ARS Sunflower and Plant Biology Research Unit (Fargo, ND) and the sponsoring
scientists are Drs. Sean M. Gleason, Nolan C. Kane, and Brent S. Hulke,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sunflower is one of the most widely produced
oil crops across the globe. In the United States, many of the top sunflower-
producing states experience episodic late-spring freezing temperatures. These
freeze-thaw events pose a considerable threat to agricultural productivity
through their dramatic impact on the water-transporting system of plants. This
project aims to address this issue through identifying traits and genetics that
confer superior performance under cold conditions in the common sunflower. Since
this integrative project will occur at two USDA-ARS institutions with
complementary missions as well as a public university, the results of this work
should benefit ongoing efforts across multiple applied and fundamental
disciplines. Furthermore, this experimental model could be adapted for other
crops that are grown in locations with regularly occurring freeze-thaw events
during the desired growing season. Training objectives for this project include
characterizing hydraulic traits, identifying genetics underlying relevant
traits, and developing high-throughput methods for efficient identification of
superior crop lines. Broader impact activities during this project will include
training and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students as well as
educational outreach at K-12 public schools and universities across northern
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet agricultural demand in the face of
climate change, plant functional traits and underlying genetics that allow
superior plant performance under suboptimal environmental conditions must be
identified. This project will contribute to this goal by characterizing the
genetic architecture of hydraulic functioning in relation to high photosynthetic
and whole-plant productivity under cold temperatures in sunflower. Relevant
anatomical and functional traits will be characterized in plants grown under
contrasting temperatures in climate-controlled growth chambers as well as plants
grown in large-scale field trials. These results will be used to identify
adaptive loci through both targeted and genome-wide association-mapping
techniques. This project will feature over 300 accessions of the common
sunflower, including the Sunflower Association Mapping (SAM) population, which
encompasses 90% of the allelic diversity of cultivated sunflowers, as well as
wild accessions that originate from a diversity of climates across its native
range. Phenotypic and genotypic data from the wild accessions will be compared
with climatic data from their respective sites of origin to provide ecological
and evolutionary relevance, which could guide future breeding efforts for
locations with exceptionally challenging climates. Phenotypic data from these
investigations will be made available through the Sunflower Genome Database
(https://www.sunflowergenome.org}, and genotypic data will be made available
through the NCBI Short Read Archive database
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: sunflower,
hydraulic trait, abiotic stress, ecophysiology, association mapping, genomics,
high throughput field-based phenotyping&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.