* 1907177
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The relationship between seasonal adaptation and plasticity in the sea slug A. willowi
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Serena Caplins, Caplins, Serena A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 03/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Seasonal
environmental change has long fascinated biologists and directs many of our own
activity patterns. Seasons often present opposing conditions (e.g., temperature
and precipitation in summer versus winter) and plants and animals must have ways
to cope with these seasonal changes. For organisms with short generation times,
seasonal conditions may effect genetic change through natural selection.
Alternatively, organisms may show different phenotypes (traits) in response to
different environments, without genetic changes. Or a combination of the two may
be occurring. Sea slugs, which are known to exhibit striking variation during
their life history, will be analyzed. The sea slug Alderia willowi is found on
the California coastline and produces many small larvae during the winter and
only a few large larvae during the summer. It has a short generation time and so
both genetic change and phenotype variability may play a role. This research is
particularly relevant to understanding how organisms may adapt to a changing
climate. The Fellow will perform the research activities while mentoring
undergraduate students in the bioinformatic analyses that are integral to the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research takes a multi-factorial and
integrative approach combining population genetics, gene expression, and
physiology to assess the degree of genomic and phenotypic change along seasonal
time scales. The Fellow will collect seasonally replicated samples from a single
population to search for repeated fluctuations in allele frequencies that
coincide with the summer and winter seasons. To determine how patterns of gene
expression are influenced by season, the Fellow will conduct lab experiments
manipulating the temperature and salinity experienced by slugs collected in the
summer and winter. Furthermore, the Fellow and undergraduate mentees will
perform physiology experiments throughout the year to document seasonal changes
that co-occur with changes in genotype and gene expression. The Fellow will
receive training in data analyses, scientific presentation and publication,
undergraduate mentorship, workshop design and implementation, and conference
organization. Throughout the PRFB tenure, the Fellow will run a bioinformatics
workshop at Cal State LA to introduce students to performing analyses on the
command line. Several students from this workshop will be recruited to continue
collaborating with the Fellow on analyses of the data generated during the PRFB
tenure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.