* 1907077
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The Effects of Tomato Domestication on the Circadian Clock and its Interaction with Resistance to Phytophthora infestans
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Ben Mansfeld, Mansfeld, Ben Nathan
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2023
* USD 285,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2019. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Ben Mansfeld is "The Effects of Tomato Domestication on
the Circadian Clock and its Interaction with Resistance to Phytophthora
infestans". The host institution for the fellowship is the Donald Danforth Plant
Science Center and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Rebecca
Bart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tomato is the second most important vegetable crop in
the world, the fruit of which is eaten fresh or consumed in several processed
products such as soups and sauces. Tomatoes are rich with important vitamins,
minerals as well as antioxidants with potential anti-cancer and other healthful
capabilities. The origin of the tomato plant is in equatorial countries in South
America. As such, over millions of years, tomato plants have evolved a
biological clock adapted to the day length around the equator. However, as
humans domesticated tomatoes over the last few thousand years, they also
traveled with the seeds, breeding tomatoes to be more successful crop plants in
high latitude regions. Through this process, the tomato biological clock was
altered to fit the new long days in these regions of the planet. The process of
altering a crop's biological clock through domestication is not unique to tomato
and may be quite common; however, because of its important role in regulating
how the plant protects itself from disease and insects, an altered biological
clock may thus increase a plant's susceptibility to disease. This research aims
to use tomato as a model to better understand how crop domestication affected
the biological clock and how this, in turn, may have affected the plant's innate
ability to defend itself from disease. The overarching societal goal for this
research is to contribute to increased crop defenses at a basic level, helping
growers reduce their inputs and produce cheaper, sustainable food for a growing
population. Training though this project will also further the Fellow's skills
in plant genetics, genomics and plant-pathogen interactions. Broader impacts
include mentoring high school and undergraduate students interested in learning
more about bioinformatics, plant disease and crop
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore the hypothesis that
alterations to the biological clock have affected cultivated tomato responses to
infection, specifically by Phytophthora infestans, the pathogen that causes
tomato and potato late blight. First, a collection of wild and domesticated
tomato lines will be screened for their circadian rhythm traits, using an
automatic camera system. A high-throughput bioassay will be then be used to
screen if these lines show a different response to infection by P. infestans, at
different times (a "gated" response). Transgenic tomato lines with altered clock
rhythms will also be generated and screened to test the effects of mis-
regulation of clock genes on the gated response to infection. The two lines
showing strongest difference in gated response will be used in a 72-hour gene
expression study, in which leaves will be inoculated with the pathogen at dawn
and dusk and sampled every 4 hours for RNA sequencing. Weighted gene co-
expression networks will then be used to compare the transcriptional responses
of wild and domesticated tomato and identify hub genes at the center of network
co-expression modules that differ between lines. Finally, to map loci
contributing to differences in wild and domesticated tomato, a segregating
population will be phenotyped and quantitative trait loci mapped using a bulk
segregant approach. Candidate genes will be validated using CRISPR-based
mutagenesis. All the data generated in this research will be made accessible
through an online web application as well as through public repositories such as
the NCBI's Short Read Archive (SRA), Dryad (https://datadryad.org), and the Sol
Genomics Network (SGN; https://solgenomics.net).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.