* 1907358
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Elizabeth Beckman, Beckman, Elizabeth Jane
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 04/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. When hybridization occurs (the exchange of genetic information)
between two species, genetic variants (known as alleles) that originated in one
species may be introduced into another species. Evidence from DNA sequencing in
vertebrates so far suggests that most introduced alleles are removed by natural
selection. However, sometimes introduced alleles are beneficial and impact
important traits like pesticide-resistance and coat color. Understanding the
role of natural selection to eliminate or promote introduced alleles is
essential to learning how wild populations adapt to their environments, but this
has not been well studied. In this project, the fellow will identify introduced
alleles and genes related to environmental adaptation in two closely-related
bird species that hybridized historically. If alleles related to environmental
adaptation in one species are found in the other, this will reveal a positive
role for selection on introduced alleles. By using new sequencing techniques,
working with undergraduates and creating an online educational lesson, the
fellow will develop skills required to succeed as a researcher and
teacher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To examine the dual role of natural selection on
introduced alleles, the fellow will characterize selection and introgression in
two species with different colonization histories to high elevation. The lack of
environmental oxygen (hypoxia) at high elevation presents a chronic selective
pressure on residents with high metabolic rates like birds, and many species
that occupy high elevation possess derived genetic adaptations. The fellow
previously documented genome-wide introgression between the Bolivian Hooded
siskin, a recent colonist to high elevation, and the Black siskin, a high
elevation specialist, as well as directional introgression of two high-elevation
associated loci. With this framework, the fellow will test for evidence of
adaptive introgression genome-wide in the Bolivian Hooded siskin. To examine if
natural selection has favored the introgression of high-elevation adapted
alleles into the Bolivian Hooded siskin, the fellow will (1) test if a
disproportionate number of alleles with Black-siskin ancestry in the Bolivian
Hooded siskin are in genes associated with hypoxia adaptation, and (2) if these
hypoxia-related genes from the Black siskin bear a signature of positive
selection in the Bolivian Hooded siskin. This study will demonstrate if adaptive
introgression has played a critical role in the persistence of the Bolivian
Hooded siskin at high elevation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.