* 1907840
* Improving Grades 6-8 students' mathematics achievement in modeling and problem solving through effective sequencing of instructional practices
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Samuel Coskey, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 06/30/2024
* USD 3,163,610.00

The Researching Order of Teaching project will provide structured and meaningful
scaffolds for teachers in examining two research-based teaching strategies
hypothesized to positively impact mathematics achievement in the areas of
mathematical modeling and problem solving. The first strategy, Explicit
Attention to Concepts (EAC), is a set of practices that draw students' attention
specifically to mathematical concepts in ways that extend beyond memorization,
procedures, or application of skills. This strategy may include teachers asking
students to connect multiple mathematical representations, compare solution
strategies, discuss mathematical reasoning underlying procedures, or to identify
a main mathematical idea in a lesson and how it fits into the broader
mathematical landscape. The second strategy, Student Opportunities to Struggle
(SOS), entails providing students with time and space to make sense of graspable
content, overcoming confusion points, stimulating personal sense-making,
building perseverance, and promoting openness to challenge. This strategy may
include teachers assigning problems with multiple solution strategies, asking
students to look for patterns and make conjectures, encouraging and promoting
discourse around confusing or challenging ideas, and asking students for
extended mathematical responses. This project investigates whether the order in
which teachers apply these practices within the teaching of mathematics content
has an impact on student learning. This study builds on previous work that had
identified an interaction between the EAC and SOS instructional strategies, and
associated teacher reporting of stronger use of the practices with higher
student mathematics achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have four
key design features. First, the project will adopt and extend the research-based
EAC/SOS conceptual framework, and explicitly responds to the call for further
research on the interactions. Second, the project will focus on the mathematical
areas of modeling and problem solving, two complex and critical competencies for
all students in the middle grades. Third, the project will position teachers as
collaborators in the research with needed expertise. Finally, the project will
make use of research methods from crossover clinical trials to implementation in
classrooms. The project aims to identify the affordances and constraints of the
EAC/SOS framework in the design and development of instructional practices, to
identify student- and teacher-level factors associated with changes in modeling
and problem solving outcomes, to analyze teachers' implementations EAC and SOS
in teaching modeling and problem solving and to associate those implementation
factors with student achievement changes, and to determine whether the ordering
of these two strategies correlates with differences in achievement. The project
will collect classroom observation data and make use of existing tools to obtain
reliable and valid ratings of the EAC and SOS strategies in action. The design
of the study features a randomized 2 x 2 cluster crossover trial with a sample
of teachers for 80% power. The project builds on existing state infrastructure
and relationships with a wide array of school districts in the context of
professional development, and aims to create a formal Teacher-Researcher
Alliance for Investigating Learning as a part of the project
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.