* 1907727
* SHF: Small: Testing and Profiling Asynchronous Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Frank Tip, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 507,828.00

Asynchronous programming is an increasingly popular programming paradigm that
targets scenarios where actions need to be performed in response to events.
Typical examples of such scenarios include user input being entered in the
graphical user interface of a web application, or messages arriving via network
connections in a server application. In such scenarios, is undesirable for
program execution to block until an event arrives. Event-driven programming is
widely used to accommodate asynchrony, and involves structuring an application
as a collection of event handlers that are executed in response to detected
events. However, recent years have seen the introduction, and broad adoption, of
more advanced programming-language features for asynchronous programming. These
features are complex, and lack of familiarity with their use may lead to
asynchronous software that is insufficiently well-tested, and that may exhibit
poor performance. Existing techniques for testing and performance analysis do
not work well for asynchronous applications. The main goal of this project is
the development of practical algorithms and tools for testing and profiling
asynchronous software. The project's broader significance and importance follows
from improvements in the quality of asynchronous software that are enabled by
the developed algorithms and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical focus of
this project is on the development of techniques for testing and profiling
asynchronous software. This includes the design, implementation, and evaluation
of feedback-directed random-testing techniques for event-driven asynchronous
applications. In addition, the research includes the establishment of coverage
criteria for promise-based asynchronous software and the development of
techniques for systematically exploring the execution paths in such programs
with the objective of maximizing coverage. The project also includes the design,
implementation, and evaluation of profiling tools for detecting situations where
suboptimal scheduling of asynchronous computations causes performance
degradation. The research targets software written in the JavaScript programming
language, a setting where asynchronous programming is practiced out of necessity
due to the absence of concurrency at the language level. Together, the developed
techniques facilitate the development of more reliable and efficient
asynchronous software, by providing programmers with suitable tools for testing
and detecting performance bottlenecks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.