* 1907604
* The 5th Stevens Conference on Bacteria-Material Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Matthew Libera, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2020
* USD 7,900.00

Nontechnical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a research
conference called the Stevens Conference on Bacteria-Material Interactions. This
two-day Conference will be held in June 2019 on the campus of the Stevens
Institute of Technology in Hoboken, New Jersey, very close to New York City. The
2019 Conference is the 5th in a series of Conferences that started in 2011, and
this series is recognized as a key national and international venue for pushing
the limits of scientific understanding about how bacteria interact with man-made
surfaces. Bacterial-material interactions is an important scientific subject
because of the devastating impact that bacterial colonization of man-made
biomedical devices, such as hip or knee implants, can have on patient outcomes.
Such infection can lead to long and painful hospital stays that can culminate in
compromised function, chronic disease, or death. This project is helping
graduate research students, post-doctoral research fellows, and early-career
Faculty members to attend the conference and develop their expertise and
professional careers in this important emerging
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the fundamental science underlying
how bacteria interact with biomaterials surfaces and how those surfaces can be
modified to resist colonization is at the heart of an emerging new sub-field
within Biomaterials Science and Engineering, namely, infection-resisting
biomaterials. While the idea of creating antifouling surfaces that resist
bacterial colonization has been known for decades, antifouling surfaces are not
useful in many key clinical applications, because their ability to resist
bacterial colonization also prevents the desirable tissue interactions
associated with healing. The scientific challenge thus focuses on creating
surfaces that are differentially interactive and can simultaneously promote
favorable tissue-cell interactions while also inhibiting bacterial interactions.
To deeply explore this subject, the 5th Stevens Conference is focused on the
scientific fundamentals addressing: (i) antimicrobials and antimicrobial action;
(ii) infection models; (iii) bacterial response to a surface; and (iv) surface
modification. The Conference features fifteen invited lectures by recognized
topical experts from around the world. Significantly, the Conference also
involves the perspectives of highly expert clinicians who can help keep
fundamental scientific advances aligned with critical societal needs. This
project is providing partial financial support that enables graduate research
students, post-doctoral research fellows, and early-career Faculty members to
attend the Conference. These young scientists and engineers consequently have
the opportunity to present their own research findings, network with and learn
from internationally recognized experts in the field, as well as develop their
professional careers to help impact this important emerging field in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.