* 1907683
* LTREB:  Streams to Screens: Bringing the Hubbard Brook Watershed Ecosystem Record (HB-WatER) into the 21st Century
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Emily Bernhardt, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 704,486.00

The chemistry of precipitation and streamwater have been measured throughout the
Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest in New Hampshire at least weekly since the
summer of 1963, making the Hubbard Brook Watershed Ecosystem Record (HBWatER)
one of the longest continuous records of its kind in existence. Over the last
fifty years, HBWatER has changed our understanding of the natural world. Early
work in the 1960s documented the problem of acid rain, while subsequent data
from the 1970-1990s proved the effectiveness of the Clean Air act in mitigating
this problem. More recently, the HBWatER record has documented the long-term
declines in the concentrations of calcium in soils and streamwaters as a result
of historic acid rain. Over the next decade this award will extend this long-
term record to document how the chemistry of precipitation and streamwater
continues to change in response to warming winters and more frequent stormflows;
how watershed ecosystems are responding to reduced snowpacks and natural forest
disturbances. A new data visualization platform will allow interested scientists
and students of all backgrounds to interact directly with HBWatER data through
guided data expeditions and easy to use data exploration tools. The longevity
and continuity of HBWatER makes it a vital resource for recording the impacts of
air pollution from fossil fuels, directional environmental change and emerging
forest pests and pathogens on the health of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.
To enhance the broader impacts, the data will become available sooner via a new
database and made more accessible via a new visualization platform. Training of
students including research experiences for undergraduates will continue to be a
focus of this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will extend the long-term
record of watershed biogeochemistry at the Hubbard Brook Research Forest for
another decade by continuing to collect weekly measures of precipitation and
streamwater chemistry at sites throughout the Hubbard Brook Valley. Three core
questions will continue to motivate and sustain the HB WatER research agenda as
they have since the 1960s: Q1. How is the chemistry of precipitation and
streamwater changing over time? Q2. How are watershed ecosystems responding to
environmental change and changing atmospheric deposition? Q3. What are the long-
term consequences of watershed ecosystem experiments in the context of regional
trends? In the next decade the study will expand to ask how long-term declines
in soil alkalinity and N deposition affect the responses of watershed ecosystems
to environmental change, physical disturbance and pathogen and pest outbreaks.
New questions for the coming decade ask: Q4. How will increasing stream
discharge and a shifting hydrograph due to changing environment interact with
the long-term decline in stream solute concentrations to alter the timing,
magnitude and form of watershed exports? Q5. Will future forest disturbances
lead to more or less dramatic watershed losses of nutrients as soils and
vegetation recover from acidification? And Q6. What are the long-term effects of
forest disturbance on stream pH and the export of weathering products and DOC?
In every decade this long-term record has yielded new insights into the
biogeochemistry of northeastern forests and has served as a basis for comparison
for similar watershed ecosystem studies from all over the world. The longevity
and continuity of the HB-WatER makes it a vital resource for recording the
impacts of air pollution from fossil fuels, directional environmental change and
emerging forest pests and pathogens on the movement of water and solutes into,
through and out of watershed ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.