* 1907053
* CIF: Small: Fundamental Limits of Privacy, Security, Structure and Alignment through the Lens of Private Information Retrieval
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Syed Jafar, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Privacy is widely recognized as a fundamental human right. Other societal
freedoms such as the freedom of association and freedom of speech are built upon
it. Motivated by increasing privacy concerns in the modern era of big data,
distributed storage and cloud computing, this project focuses on the problem of
Private Information Retrieval (PIR) where the goal is to allow users to
efficiently retrieve desired records from remotely stored datasets without
revealing any information to the servers about which records are desired, even
if the servers are computationally unbounded. The capacity of PIR is the
fundamental limit on the number of bits of desired information that can be
retrieved per bit of total download from all servers. It is important to study
PIR not only because privacy is important, but also because PIR has deep
connections to a number of other important open problems in theoretical computer
science and cryptography, coding and signal processing, and wireless
communications and network information theory. Fundamental advances in PIR are
likely to have a ripple effect on these related problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is comprised of seven research thrusts
centered around the capacity of PIR with upload constraints, data dependencies,
partial privacy, limited computation, data security, coded storage, and the
dualities that allow exchange of ideas across different problems that are
connected through PIR. While the thrusts are motivated by challenges that are
critical to the success of PIR, the significance of each of these thrusts
extends beyond PIR. Capacity of PIR with upload constraints is a stepping stone
for characterizing the information theoretic limits of locally decodable codes.
PIR with data dependencies addresses the challenge of jointly exploiting both
common information and interference alignment in distributed compression of
downloads from multiple servers. Partial privacy examines the robustness of
symmetric solutions to perturbations in symmetry. PIR with limited computation
leads to locally decodable codes that are also locally encodable. Security
constraints bring secret sharing into the picture and the combination of
security with privacy constraints leads to new interference alignment schemes.
PIR formulations with various coded storage constraints reveal insights into
optimal distributed storage structures, and dualities allow PIR solutions to be
applied to other related problems, such as oblivious transfer, instance hiding,
batch codes, secret sharing, secure computation, locally decodable codes, and
blind interference alignment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.