* 1907353
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Population genomics of elevational range limits in Andean birds
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Ethan Linck, Linck, Ethan B
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. All species occur within a limited area known as their
geographic range. Range limits can form without an obvious physical barrier
because competition with other species prevents further expansion, because they
are unable to adapt to a new environment, or because there are too few
individuals of the same species to reproduce effectively. Many tropical
organisms have narrow elevational ranges, meaning they occur only for a short
vertical distance on continuous mountain slopes. This allows many species to
coexist in a small area, and is part of why the tropics have so many species.
However, we know relatively little about what determines elevational ranges in
the tropics. The fellow will use DNA sequence data from extensive museum
collections of Andean birds to understand the role of evolutionary and
ecological processes in forming range limits. By understanding how these
processes interact, we can better predict how species will respond to human
induced environmental change. This has broad implications for biodiversity
conservation and human health as endangered species and new diseases experience
a warming world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will evaluate alternate
hypotheses for species range limits by comparing the spatial distribution of
genetic variation of tropical songbird species that have either narrow (&lt;1500
m) or broad (&gt;3000 m) elevational ranges. Using dense geographic sampling in
extant biological collections from the Peruvian Andes, he will generate genome-
wide DNA sequence data from across the full elevational ranges of 8
phylogenetically independent lineages. Each lineage will contain both
elevational specialist and elevational generalist species. He will first use
these data to identify the evolutionary and ecological processes that determine
elevational ranges in Andean birds. Comparing observed patterns with predictions
validated by simulations, he will evaluate the relative contribution of
decreasing effective population size, biotic interactions, and migration from
maladapted populations to the formation of equilibrium range limits. He will
then test whether functional variation in hemoglobin is a prerequisite for
elevational range expansion, and characterize whether adaptive variants have
undergone hard or soft selective sweeps. During his postdoctoral research, the
fellow will undergo training in museum curation and biodiversity informatics,
advanced statistical genomics, and functional genetics. The research will be
based at University of New Mexico, a majority-minority R1 institution, where the
fellow will serve as a mentor in a training program for underrepresented
students interested in research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.