* 1907363
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Multi-omic characterization of the coral mucus during sedimentation disturbances
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Clifford Kapono, Kapono, Clifford
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This research
specifically looks at the watersheds of Hilo, Hawai'i and the role these have on
coral survival in the bay. It is known that corals are affected by land runoff
after heavy rains, but very little research has been done to investigate the
mechanisms behind coral death. Coral survival depends greatly on the bacteria
and molecules found in their surface mucus. The fellow will investigate how
coral mucus changes in response to heavy rainfall. This project is important for
demonstrating the interdependent relationship between land and ocean ecosystems.
This project will broaden participation in biology by targeting Native Hawaiian
youth. Native Hawaiians are one of the most underrepresented demographics in
biology despite belonging to a culture that is rooted in scientific observation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will test the hypothesis that stable microbial
and molecular communities will be temporarily disrupted during heavy rain
events. Mucus collected from the most abundant coral species will be monitored
over three heavy rain events. The microbiome and metabolome of coral mucus will
be profiled and processed using next generation DNA sequencing and mass
spectrometry techniques. Additionally, the fellow will expand research training
in microbiome and metabolomic analysis while developing new methods in 3D
underwater photogrammetry. The fellow will present the findings of this research
throughout the duration of the project at the University of Hawai'i at Hilo's
Keaholoa student center. The findings will also be shared throughout the local
high schools in Hilo. A final community day at Honoli'i Beach Park will promote
the importance of ocean stewardship across watersheds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.