* 1907643
* From the Kac Model to Non-Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Federico Bonetto, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 239,366.00

The discipline of thermodynamics arose from the engineering need to design
better mechanisms of the transformation of heat into mechanical work in the
newly invented steam engine. It soon became clear that it was necessary to
understand statistical mechanics, i.e., how the mechanical motion and
interactions of the extremely large number of atoms and molecules determine
macroscopic thermodynamic parameters of the gas, such as the pressure or
temperature. Since then, the ideas and methods initially set forth to understand
the heat to work transformation have been extended to fluid motion, electrical
conduction, chemical reactions and many more settings. In the last 30 years,
they have been applied to a diverse variety of system formed by a large number
of interacting elementary constituents like neural network, animal populations,
large human networks and economic systems. These successes notwithstanding, the
deep conceptual and mathematical foundations of statistical mechanics are
incomplete, especially so for the non-equilibrium case. This project is aimed to
improve understanding of these foundations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mark Kac
introduced a very simplified model to study convergence to equilibrium and
emergence of effective macroscopic equations (the Boltzmann equation) in a
dilute gas of colliding hard spheres. Thanks to the simplicity of this model one
can compute exactly the spectral gap of the evolution and prove uniform
convergence of the one-particle distribution to the solution of the Boltzmann-
Kac equation. This comes at the price of losing all spatial structure and thus
the ability to investigate crucial phenomena such as local equilibrium and
approach to non-equilibrium steady states. This project will extend the Kac
model by reintroducing a space structure and connecting it with heat and
particle reservoirs in such a way as to obtain a model that is closer to a real
gas but still is rigorously treatable. By improving the mathematical techniques
developed to study complex dynamics of large systems, like scaling limits,
hyperbolic dynamics, and functional inequalities, the Principal Investigator
will extend the results known for the Kac system to this richer and more
realistic model. Although most of the work will be of analytic nature, numerical
simulation will be used as a guide toward more rigorous understanding. The final
goal is to have a model where one can rigorously describe the transition from
microscopic collision dynamics to a mesoscopic Boltzmann type equation and
finally to a macroscopic thermodynamic/hydrodynamic fluid
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.