* 1907022
* BEE:  Mechanisms and Scope for Adaptive Rescue in Polymorphic Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jeffrey Good, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,091,687.00

One of society's great challenges centers on how to maintain biodiversity during
the ongoing period of rapid global environmental change. Although plants and
animals can respond to environmental change by moving to a different area, they
could also adapt in place through either plasticity (e.g. by changing behaviors
to match the conditions) or by rapid evolutionary change via natural selection.
The option of rapid adaptation in place via plasticity or evolution remains
relatively unstudied. Research in this area is critical because the fate of wild
species in a rapidly changing environment will depend in large part on the scope
of this adaptive rescue. For 21 bird and mammal species globally, survival
depends on camouflage arising from seasonal color molts from brown to white to
track the winter presence of snow. Because a decreasing winter snow duration is
one of the most pervasive outcomes of ongoing climate change, these animals
increasingly find their winter white camouflage compromised against increasingly
brown snowless backgrounds. This research will use field studies, captive
experiments, and genetic analyses with snowshoe hares as a model to provide
general scientific insights to foster adaptive rescue - and therefore
biodiversity persistence - in a changing world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will evaluate the scope for adaptive rescue to climate change in a visually
compelling model system based on polymorphic snowshoe hare populations with
sympatric winter brown and winter white individuals. Field studies (including
radiotagging wild animals) will directly measure fitness costs and behavioral
plasticity for the sympatric winter color morphs. Captive experiments with the
polymorphic hares will quantify the scope for hares to recognize their own coat
color mismatch and behave to reduce either mismatch or risk of predation.
Collectively, the field and captive experiments will form the basis of a
mechanistic map linking genotype and trait phenotype in a polymorphic population
to mean fitness and population growth, while explicitly accounting for
behavioral plasticity and the dispersal of adaptive phenotypes.In addition to
these contemporary measures of natural selection and behavioral plasticity,
georeferenced snowshoe hare specimens archived in natural history collections
will facilitate genetic tests for temporal evolutionary responses in the
alternative camouflage phenotypes. Overall, this research program links
ecological and evolutionary drivers of seasonal camouflage in snowshoe hares and
provides a framework to predict how adaptive variation at this fitness-critical
trait will respond to future environmental changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.