* 1907705
* Orientation and stress dynamics in shear thickening colloidal rod suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jeffrey Urbach, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 05/31/2024
* USD 351,533.00

Dense suspensions composed of solid particles suspended in a fluid exhibit a
wide range of surprising mechanical behavior, including a dramatic increase in
viscosity under increasing flow rates. This phenomenon, known as shear
thickening, can be exploited for important applications, including energy
dissipation, shock absorption and impact resistance. However, shear thickening
can also produce undesirable effects in material transport and processing. While
substantial progress has been made in understanding shear thickening in
suspensions of spherical and other compact particles, much less is known about
shear thickening in suspensions of rod-like particles. These systems can show
dramatic shear thickening at particle concentrations much lower than the
concentration required for shear thickening in suspensions of spherical
particles. This suggests the possibility that suspensions with relatively low
concentrations of very long rods can take advantage of shear thickening behavior
in applications, or present challenges in material transport when shear
thickening is not helpful. The dynamics of the orientations of the flowing rods
is a critical determinant of the properties of suspensions of rods. This work
seeks to characterize and understand the orientation dynamics in the shear
thickening regime to enable prediction and control of the viscosity of rapidly
flowing suspensions. The research team will also participate with the
Science/Policy interface, a pilot project to involve a materials science
graduate student in an interdisciplinary group project in science policy, and
with outreach activities aimed at economically disadvantaged high school
students through hands-on soft materials modules for use in the Georgetown
University College Immersion Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposed research is to characterize shear thickening in suspensions of
colloidal silica rods, which can be synthesized with a range of aspect ratios,
and to utilize novel techniques to determine the dynamics of rod orientations
and&lt;br/&gt;directly measure stress fluctuations during shear thickening.
Using a customized high resolution microscope coupled with commercial
rheometers, the investigators will be able to directly measure the spatially and
temporally resolved orientation dynamics of the particles. In parallel, they
will use a new technique they have developed to measure boundary stresses
locally. Combining these two techniques will enable the team to determine the
interplay between orientation fluctuations and stress fluctuations, and
therefore identify the dynamical characteristics that determine shear
thickening. The researchers will then extend this approach to silica rods with
controlled nanoscale roughness. Orientation plays a critical role in the
behavior of anisotropic molecules and particles, and the ability to control
orientation through flow, external fields, or boundary effects is central to a
wide range of commercial applications. The proposed research will develop and
test novel tools and methods for characterizing the role of orientation in rod
suspensions, and provide the characterization necessary to identify
opportunities to manipulate particle orientation to control shear thickening.
More generally, the proposed research will support the development and
dissemination of a powerful techniques for measuring and analyzing orientation
and stress dynamics of flowing suspensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.