* 1907463
* Mixed-Integer Programming Approaches for Risk-Averse Multicriteria Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Simge Kucukyavuz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2019
* USD 64,215.00

Risk-averse optimization aims to address decision-making problems in the
presence of uncertainty that involves events of low probability but severe
consequences. In addition, decision makers are often required to consider
multiple and conflicting performance criteria when faced with such problems.
Despite their ubiquity and wide-ranging impact, risk-averse optimization
problems that involve multiple criteria, discrete decisions and recourse actions
are not well studied. The goal of this project is to bridge this gap by
developing novel models and effective methods that will enhance our knowledge
base, and enable the solution of more realistic and general risk-averse
multicriteria optimization problems. In particular, the problems that will be
studied are prevalent in homeland security and humanitarian relief applications.
By developing models and effective methods for such problems, this project will
improve our ability to prepare for and respond to national
emergencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves three major thrusts that
will advance the development of models and methods for risk-averse multicriteria
optimization. First, in the realm of single-stage optimization, a novel model
for risk-averse multiobjective optimization is proposed, where the relative
importance of the multiple criteria is ambiguous. To this end, a new robust
multivariate risk measure with desirable theoretical properties must be defined.
In this project, the problem of optimizing such a risk measure will be
formulated as a concave minimization problem for which effective solution
methods will be developed. Second, a rigorous study of the fundamental non-
convex polyhedral substructures arising in the cut generation problems for
optimization under multivariate risk will be conducted. Third, two-stage
optimization problems under multivariate risk will be formulated to allow
recourse decisions. For these problems, decomposition algorithms that involve
successive linear approximations of the second-stage problems will be devised.