* 1907614
* A New Paradigm for Non-Geosynchronous Satellite Communications and Radio Astronomy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Hlaing Minn, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 06/30/2023
* USD 425,181.00

Spectrum is a precious natural resource for various active (transmit and
receive) and passive (receive only) wireless systems, both of which provide
several benefits to the society. However, phenomenal growth of active wireless
systems and related spectrum allocations have caused less spectrum observation
opportunities and greater chances of radio frequency interference (RFI) for
passive wireless systems. One of the expansions of active wireless systems that
deserves a special attention is the emergence of large-scale non-geosynchronous
orbit (NGSO) satellite communication systems (SCSs). The prospects of such
large-scale SCSs impose a distressing RFI situation to passive wireless systems
such as radio astronomy system (RAS). Radio astronomy enables study of the
universe, astro-physics and astro-chemistry as well as testing of the laws of
fundamental physics, thus its growth is crucial for advancing science and
knowledge discovery. The existing spectrum allocation/access paradigm is
difficult to accommodate mutual growths of RAS and NGSO SCS. The purpose of this
project is to develop a new paradigm for RAS and NGSO SCS where both types of
systems can coexist and expand beyond what is achievable in the existing
paradigm. Instead of viewing large-scale NGSO SCSs as a threat of RFI, this
project views them as an opportunity to develop an integrated large-scale NGSO-
SCS and NGSO-RAS system that can provide space-based RAS observation services,
in addition to their main communication services. By enabling a large-scale
NGSO-RAS, the proposed paradigm will open a new era for RAS with numerous
enhanced capabilities and observation opportunities. This can lead to new
exciting science discoveries on a larger scale. On the other hand, some spectrum
originally allocated to RAS can be re-purposed for active wireless systems, thus
stimulating more wireless applications and business opportunities for active
wireless systems. The overall spectrum utilization efficiency will also be
substantially enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces a new
paradigm of spectrum access for RAS and NGSO SCS by means of transforming a
large-scale NGSO SCS into an integrated large-scale NGSO-SCS and NGSO-RAS. This
is different from the current paradigm where RASs implemented on ground are
prone to RFI caused by SCSs, and conflicting spectrum needs from both SCSs and
RASs cannot be resolved. To have broader applicability, the project considers
three types of integrated systems: i) a system with all dual-purpose satellites
(each with SCS and RAS receivers), ii) a system with a mixture of dual-purpose
satellites and single-purpose SCS-only satellites, iii) a system with a mixture
of single-purpose SCS-only satellites and single-purpose RAS-only satellites.
For each type of the integrated systems, further detailed technical developments
are as follows: 1) The project will develop innovative approaches for spectrum
access and resource allocation needed for the new paradigm. The project will
also study new achievable performance in terms of RAS data rate, SCS data rate,
and outage performance. Furthermore, promising deployment scenarios and
recommended changes of frequency allocation rules will be investigated for the
new paradigm. 2) The project will study new capabilities of the proposed large-
scale NGSO-RAS under several deployment scenarios and practical constraints. In
addition, novel solutions to enable RAS observations in the bands assigned to
higher-orbit satellite systems will also be developed. 3) The project will
develop efficient data transport strategies for both delay-sensitive SCS data
and space-borne delay-insensitive RAS data under several deployment scenarios
and optimization metrics. Joint design of resource allocation and data transport
will also be developed for further performance
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.