* 1907466
* Experimental Study of Heavy Flavor and CP Violation with the LHCb Experiment at the CERN LHC Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Abolhassan Jawahery, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2022
* USD 370,844.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists,
leaves open many questions about the universe. These include why matter
dominates over anti-matter in the Universe (CP violation), the values of the
masses of the fundamental constituents, the quarks and the leptons, the size of
the mixings among the quarks, and separately among the leptons, and the
properties of dark matter. Most explanations require the presence of new
particles, symmetries or forces, which we call Beyond the Standard Model Physics
(BSM). This project is designed to pursue searches for BSM physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LHC is the premier High Energy Physics particle
accelerator in the world and is currently operating at the CERN laboratory near
Geneva Switzerland, one of the foremost facilities for answering these BSM
questions. The Maryland group is a collaboration member of LHCb, an experiment
designed specifically to study the decays of hadrons containing b or c quarks at
the LHC. The goal of LHCb is to identify new physics in nature by examining the
properties of hadrons containing these quarks. New physics, or new forces, can
be manifest by particles, as yet to be discovered, whose presence would modify
decay rates and CP violating asymmetries of hadrons containing the b and c
quarks, and thus allow new phenomena to be observed indirectly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytically, the Maryland program is focused on
measurements related to two of the current anomalies in the decays of B mesons:
hints of departure from Lepton Flavor Universality in semi-leptonic B decays and
the long-standing so-called K-pi puzzle where the measured CP asymmetries in the
family of B decays into the K-pi final state deviate from the expected simple
predictions. These anomalies, if confirmed, could be due to the imprints of BSM
physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the Maryland group leads the
development and construction of the off-detector electronics for the new
upstream tracker (UT) in the LHCb upgrade and participation in the installation
and commissioning of the tracker. The UT represents a major US contribution to
the upgrade of the experiment to improve event reconstruction overall and
particularly for rare events of the type under study by the Maryland
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group works closely with an outreach program run
by the physics and astronomy departments at the University of Maryland, called
GRAD-MAP, which is aimed at providing research and training opportunities for
undergraduates from underrepresented groups in the Maryland and Washington area
community colleges. The LHCb experiment, with its technical challenges and
exciting physics program, serves as a major attractor for student
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.