* 1907163
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Temporal Dynamics of Pacific Kelp Forest Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Emma Elliott Smith, Elliott Smith, Emma A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Many species are threatened because of climate change and human
impacts. By examining how species lived before human environmental influences,
we can help mitigate future environmental change. This project studies Pacific
kelp forests. Today, these nearshore habitats are vulnerable because of their
proximity to large cities. The fellow will use chemical techniques to quantify
the importance of kelp to ancient fish and marine mammals using bones collected
from archaeological sites. Sites range from Alaska to southern California, and
date from 12,000 years ago to modern day. Additionally, the fellow will
characterize nutrient flow between kelp forests and nearby open ocean habitats.
Overall, this project provides a picture of what habitats along the Pacific
coast of North America looked like prior to European contact. The work is
important not just for species living in kelp forests, but for human communities
relying on them. The fellow will present this research to visitors at the
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History (NMNH), and develop learning
modules for high schools and scientific researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will examine the dynamics of Pacific kelp forest ecosystems over the
Holocene and Anthropocene. Incorporating data from archaeological contexts adds
to our understanding of these ecosystems by providing a pre-industrial baseline.
The fellow will conduct delta13-C analysis of essential amino acids (EAA) on
faunal remains from archaeological sites to reconstruct the importance of kelp-
derived energy to ancient food webs. Sites span the northeast Pacific margin and
past 12,000 years. At each location, the fellow will analyze fauna from three
distinct functional groupings benthic, pelagic or mixed-habitat foragers to
quantify kelp versus pelagically-derived energy. The fellow will compare these
to analogous modern fauna to characterize ecosystem change. The fellow will work
at the Smithsonian NMNH, a premier research and educational institute and
popular cultural attraction. The fellow will: 1) learn important curatorial and
faunal identification skills, and 2) interact directly with the general public
about the importance of kelp forest ecosystems. The fellow will also develop
curriculum based around historical conservation ecology for use in high schools.
This research aids in understanding kelp forests dynamics, and engages
scientists and the public in their protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.