* 1907446
* Emissions of Secondary Organic Aerosol Precursors from Volatile Chemical Products
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Allen Robinson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 389,115.00

Particulate matter (PM) is directly linked to the important societal problems of
public health and climate. Improving our understanding of the emissions and
sources of PM addresses both problems. A large fraction of ambient PM is formed
via atmospheric oxidation of organic precursor molecules. This project will
quantify the emissions of organic precursors and subsequent PM formation from
volatile chemical products (VCPs), a largely overlooked class of sources. VCPs
include a wide range of non-combustion products including personal care
products, fragrances, paints and coatings, and cleaning products, as well as
other non-combustion industrial processes. The research results from this
project will improve our understanding of the ambient PM burden with a focus on
urban areas and will contribute to improved accuracy of PM formation in models.
Crucially, this proposal directly addresses PM formation from a previously
neglected source class that appears to be increasing in importance. Successful
completion of this research will lead to a better characterize potential risks
to human and ecological health. Both graduate and undergraduate researchers will
participate in the research, and the training they receive will prepare them for
successful careers in STEM fields, thus improving the scientific literacy and
science preparedness of the Nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to quantify the emissions and potential formation of secondary
organic aerosol (SOA) from volatile chemical products (VCPs). VCPs are non-
combustion organic compounds associated with personal care products, fragrances,
paints and coatings, cleaning products, and other non-combustion industrial
uses. Recent research suggests that VCPs are an important source of urban SOA.
However, there is uncertainty regarding the validity of the hypothesis because
it is based upon emissions data that are focused on ozone formation rather than
SOA formation potential. This project will address this address this uncertainty
through a systematic study of SOA-forming emissions from VCPs under varying
conditions. The underlying hypothesis of this research is that VCPs slowly emit
low-volatility SOA precursors and that the volatility distribution and SOA
formation potential of these emissions evolve over time. The specific objectives
of the proposed research are to 1) measure VCP emission rates with a specific
focus on SOA precursors as a function of humidity, air exchange rate, and
substrate; 2) measure changes in emissions rate, composition, and SOA formation
potential from VCPs as a function of time; 3) parameterize VCP emissions of both
resolved and unresolved species for use in chemical transport models; and 4)
quantify SOA production and composition from VCPs as a function of time and
changing emissions. Successful completion of the research will increase our
understanding of the contribution of VCPs to ambient SOA formation and address
two key knowledge gaps regarding the emission rates and composition of organic
vapors from two common VCPs (paints/coatings and adhesives/sealants) and the
contribution of these VCP classes to ambient SOA loading. This research will
also enable better quantification of the burden of anthropogenic SOAs and
subsequent assessment of impacts on climate and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.