* 1907097
* Analytical and Computational Approaches for Quantitative Tomography of Tissue
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Alexandru Tamasan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,999.00

This project will develop new non-invasive quantitative tomographic methods by
imaging the electrical properties of biological matter, based on coupled physics
inverse problems. The research holds promise to enable new technologies for
decoding data used in current medical diagnostic practices and biomedical
research by providing the theoretical basis for new imaging methods of higher
accuracy and resolution than existing ones. The quantitative distribution of
electrical conductivity and permittivity is known to distinguish a benign tumor
from a malignant one, it can apply to monitor the pulmonary function of the
lung, the thoracic blood volume, hyperthermia, the gastrointestinal function in
newborns in intensive care, etc. This project will advance the understanding of
information content in the data and produce quantitative images of biological
tissues with anisotropic structures while using an optimal number of
measurements. Another facet of this project is the development of robust methods
which produce quantitative images of biological structure corresponding to
frequencies where contrast is optimal. As a consequence, it will provide new
tools in biological research by enabling imaging of biological processes at a
smaller scale. During the course of the project, graduate students will be
trained in an interdisciplinary area of research. The project's findings will be
integrated in a student seminar and a special topics course for Mathematics,
Physics, and Engineering students at the University of Central
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates novel advances in the
mathematical analysis of nonlinear inverse problems with engineering advances in
sensor design and data acquisition and aims to shift the paradigm in some of the
current engineering practices. The analytical component of the project lies at
the intersection of nonlinear Inverse Problems, Geometry, Optimization, and
Geometric Measure theory. The principal investigator (PI) plans to improve the
current knowledge of the anisotropic least gradient problems arising in physical
models which are close to the actual engineering practices. In particular, the
PI seeks to determine the anisotropic structure of biological tissue in
reconstruction of two-tensors by employing minimal interior data. Another facet
of this project seeks to produce quantitative images of the complex biological
structure at radio frequencies by coupling the nonlinear inverse problem
techniques for Maxwell electromagnetics with the quantum model of resonance of
the magnetic spin. The project also aims to determine the electric conductivity
distribution in materials with infinite limiting contrast on graphs or neural
networks. Based on the analytical findings, the reconstruction methods will be
translated in algorithms and tested on simulated data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.