* 1907997
* III:Small: Optimal Query Processing meets Information Theory: from Proofs to Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Dan Suciu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The demand to analyze large datasets is increasing at a rate faster than our
ability to compute meaningful insights from the data. Despite the advances in
query processing, query optimization, and novel hardware, efficient query
evaluation remains a major challenge for the database community to date. This
project will explore new ways to design query processing algorithms by using
techniques from information theory. The field of information theory has been
developed over the last seven decades and has found many applications ranging
from communications to machine learning, but it has not been used yet in a
significant way to support query processing. This project transfers techniques
from information theory to the task of processing massive amounts of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces a new paradigm for query
evaluation, called "from proofs to algorithms," which maps an information-
theoretic proof of a query's upper bounds into optimal query evaluation
algorithms. The project will pursue four thrusts. In the first thrust it will
use information theory to derive new bounds on the query answer based on
database statistics. The second thrust will develop a mapping from the
information theoretic inequalities to relational operators, and from the
complete proof of the query size to a complete query plan with provably optimal
runtime. The third thrust will extend these techniques to finer grained
statistics, including sketches, distinct values, and heavy hitters. Finally, the
fourth thrust will extend the algorithm to queries with projections, aggregates,
and group-by's.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.