* 1907293
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Ecology and evolution of a rare phenomenon: structural color in fruits
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Miranda Sinnott-Armstrong, Sinnott-Armstrong, Miranda
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Fruit color plays an essential role in the life cycle of many
plants by attracting animals who eat the fruits and carry the seeds away from
the parent plant. Blue fruits are relatively rare, and some produce vivid colors
without the use of pigments. They accomplish this via nano-scale structures in
their cell walls that interfere with light to produce color. This research will
identify new species that exhibit such structurally colored fruits, and describe
the bio-physical mechanisms responsible for these colors. In addition, this work
will examine the evolution of structural color in fruits from a group of trees
native to Australia, the Indo-Pacific, and Southeast Asia. The project will
inform our understanding of the evolution of rare traits (such as blue fruit
color) as well as provide a platform for multi-disciplinary interaction between
biologists, physicists, and material scientists. In addition, this work will
provide training for the fellow and undergraduates who will be involved in the
work. The project's findings will be disseminated through scholarly publications
and conferences as well as to the public via outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The paucity of known structurally colored
fruits has limited hypotheses about the ecological function of structural color
in fruits and the circumstances behind its evolution. Northeast Australia has a
relatively high number of blue-fruited species, including two of the known
structurally colored fruits, E. angustifolius and Delarbrea michieana. The
fellow will rely on both herbarium and living collections in botanical gardens
to 1) survey herbarium collections for new species that may exhibit structural
color, 2) describe the biophysical mechanism behind structural color in new
species using optical and transmission electron microscopy, and 3) test the
hypothesis that structural color serves as an honest signal of high nutritional
reward in Elaeocarpus using phylogenetic comparative methods. The fellow will
quantify a variety of color, nutritional content, morphological traits, and cell
wall nanostructures across Elaeocarpus. She will collaborate with an
interdisciplinary team at the University of Colorado-Boulder and the University
of Cambridge, train biology and physics undergrads, and participate in science
outreach activities in both locations. The research has the potential for
bioinspired and biomimetic engineering applications, and will improve our
understanding of the origin, evolution, and ecology of rare structural
colors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.