* 1907612
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Reeb graph flows: Metrics, Drawings, and Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Erin Chambers, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 152,623.00

Shape data such as images and 3d scans come from a wide variety of sources,
including medical imaging, biological analysis of plants and animals, digital
preservation of artifacts, computer graphics and animation, and many others. To
distill this data to its essence, this project uses tools from computational
topology, a field which combines tools from mathematics and computer science to
find efficient and practical ways to simplify, store, and analyze these images.
One of these tools, the Reeb graph, provides a skeleton of the structure which
is useful for visualization. This project creates tools to quantify, visualize,
and analyze these skeletons in a time-varying fashion, i.e. when the input image
data is actually a movie. Given how often multiple images or scans are collected
from an object in motion or over time, the results of this project have broad
applications in many fields. These results will be disseminated through
publications, presentations, open-source software, and participation in a
variety of workshops and activities, all of which continue collaborative and
interdisciplinary work in a larger network of shape-analysis and computational-
topology researchers. In addition to core theoretical development of new tools,
both PIs are dedicated to broadening participation in mathematics and computer
science, and as part of the project will focus extensively on teaching and
mentoring students and junior researchers, including active leadership and
mentoring in societies that focus primarily on underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In numerous application fields, there is
an increasing need to analyze topological and geometric information about shapes
that are generated by scanning some 3d structure. However, when given a time-
varying shape, there are few strategies that utilize prior scans to quickly
update and maintain a continuous family of visualizations with desirable
properties. In this project, the PIs will collaborate to develop improved
visualization toolkits for one of the major ways to analyze this type of data,
the Reeb graph, which is heavily used in computational topology, shape analysis,
and visualization. These skeletons give compressed and accurate ways to store
the shape and compute shape invariants and statistics, but can nonetheless be
large and difficult to visualize. In particular, the project is focused on the
analysis of a time-varying Reeb graph, known as a Reeb graph flow. Over the
course of the project, the PIs will investigate properties of such Reeb flows
coming from a variety of natural input domains, and determine which settings
allow faster and more accurate visualization and analysis. Results from this
project will include a range of theoretical and applied publications, open-
source software development, and will be disseminated to a larger network of
researchers interested in shape analysis and the use of topology for algorithms
and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.