* 1907541
* Collaborative Research: Human-Machine Collaboration for Design Space Exploration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Daniel Selva Valero, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2022
* USD 246,650.00

This project researches the collaboration between artificial intelligence (AI)
agents and humans for Design Space Exploration (DSE). At the core of the
research is a new perspective on designing complex systems, one in which
machines complement humans instead of replacing them. The project addresses two
research questions for human-machine collaborative design in the context of
Design Space Exploration. First, how can engineers benefit from working with a
team of separate expert AI agents, each taking a different role in the human-
machine dialog? Second, how can an AI agent infer the engineer's underlying
design intentions beyond explicit actions? These questions are addressed while
taking into account user experience considerations and an engineer's cognitive
style. The first question is approached by developing design assistants with
various roles (e.g., Critic, Analyst, Historian) and different levels of
initiative (proactive, reactive) and measuring their effect on design quality,
diversity, learning, agent perception, and trust in the system through human-
participant studies. The second question is approached by using probabilistic
graphical models, including Dynamic Bayes Nets and Conditional Random Fields,
taking into account explicit and implicit human behaviors, and then using Markov
Decision Processes to estimate the best action. Research on user experience and
the effects of cognitive style will identify the mechanisms through which these
agents and benefit designers with different preferred modes of processing
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first intellectual merit of this project
is the exploration and evaluation of AI tools that significantly go beyond the
state of the art in Engineering Design Space Exploration (DSE). This project
will advance knowledge towards human-multi-agent DSE, towards models of
probabilistic intention inference in the DSE space, and towards embodied
frameworks for human-machine collaborative design. The second intellectual merit
is the provision of new data sets of collaborative DSE to shed light on how
designers use their explicit actions and nonverbal communication with AI
assistants. The third intellectual merit is investigating how people with
different cognitive styles can benefit from AI assistants in design tasks. The
research questions in this project apply to a large number of design problems,
and can thus have impact on many industries which engage in design, including
architecture, medicine, urban planning, industrial design, and business
management. Enhancing the capabilities of humans through new modes of
collaboration with artificial intelligence can significantly impact how design
is performed across the above areas. Additionally, the research project here
provides opportunities for education and outreach during its execution. Students
will be directly involved in this research agenda, and the research will be
integrated with AI, robotics, user experience, and design
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.