* 1907348
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Using herbarium specimens and animal movement data to assess when animals will help plants track niches in a changing climate
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Tristan Nunez, Nunez, Tristan A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow, Tristan Nunez, and will utilize biological
collections in innovative ways. The fellow's research asks whether animals can
help plants move in response to a changing climate. Plants have to follow the
climatic conditions that are right for each species. Many plants depend on
animals to move their seeds for them, but the loss of wildlife habitat has made
it harder for animals to move freely. The fellow will use innovative computer
models to test whether animals could disperse plants in the right direction, and
quickly enough, to enable plants to track expected future changes in climate.
Herbarium collections will provide information on where plants are found and the
timing of seed production. Online databases will provide information on the
timing and direction of animal movements. This research will help scientists
better understand the development of ecological communities and patterns of
plant species diversity and distribution. The maps and predictions coming from
this research can help ranchers, farmers, foresters, and land and wildlife
managers understand how a changing climate might alter where important plants
are found. This will help society manage ecologically and culturally important
plant species, such as huckleberries and other traditional foods, and also
better understand the spread of invasive species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will assess the hypothesis that species traits related to animal
movement direction and rate and plant seed phenology will mediate plant range
shifts. Species distribution and phenology models for multiple North American
genera of berries and forbs will allow projection of the timing and distribution
of plant seed availability in the present as well as in the future. State-space
and network flow models of bear, bird, and ungulate movements will describe
spatial patterns of animal seed dispersal relative to the future niche spaces of
plants. Findings will be communicated through a museum exhibit and on platforms
supporting indigenous communities and managers in understanding the effects of
global change on traditional foods, wildlife, and ecosystems. The fellow will be
mentored by Dr. Laura Prugh, a wildlife ecologist, and Dr. Janneke Hille Ris
Lambers, a plant community ecologist, at the University of Washington. The
opportunity will further the fellow's academic training, by broadening the
research focus to include plant-animal interactions and phenology, and through
development of a network of academic and agency collaborations and outreach
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.