* 1907050
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Ocean Literacy through Immersive Virtual Reality
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Jeremy Bailenson, The Hydrous
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2022
* USD 149,987.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. The project will develop and research how an
emerging technology, immersive virtual reality (IVR) using head mounted displays
(HMDs), can enhance ocean literacy and generate empathy towards environmental
issues. Recent advances in design have resulted in HMDs that provide viscerally
realistic and immersive experiences that situate participants in underwater or
other remote environments. IVR can provide many people with virtual access to
these environments, including persons with disabilities, people living away from
coastal areas, or those who lack access for other reasons (e.g., low-income
families, underserved/underrepresented communities, persons untrained in
diving). The project will develop a high quality 360-degree underwater film that
includes live action footage, animation, and interactive elements. The IVR
experience will take the participant through an immersive underwater journey of
a Pacific reef, using realistic visualizations, narrative, and a compelling
story to engage participants in learning the ecology and biology of coral reefs,
as well as the impacts of climate change and human disturbances on ocean
ecosystems. In addition to the IVR ocean journey, the project will integrate
interactive functionality of being on a reef during mass coral spawning, an
annual natural phenomenon through which coral reefs replenish their populations.
With hand-held controllers, participants will be able to "swim" through the
water, watch the degraded reef recover and grow and will have the ability to
change the rate of coral recovery and learn how increases in temperature impede
coral recovery. While research has been conducted on early, desk-top versions of
IVR, the potential impact of IVR on learning is still unclear. The research
findings will help guide the development of IVR for use in informal STEM
environments such as aquariums, zoos, science museums, and others. The IVR
experience will be shared on online platforms for home viewing, at film
festivals and conferences, and in informal learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the need for research
on the impacts of IVR devices as it become more affordable and more widely used
at home and in other informal and formal environments. Few studies have
investigated how design elements impact the user in IVR, in which the increased
immersion affects the stimuli perception and cognitive processing. The research
will assess the learning affordances and impacts of the IVR experience on
participant ocean literacy (adapting items from an existing ocean literacy
survey), environmental empathy/feelings of presence (naturalistic observations
and post-experience interviews), and perceived self-efficacy (pre-post survey,
post-interview interviews). In addition, the project will research how
segmentation (i.e., a continuous experience vs. an experience with breaks),
generative learning tasks (hands-on experiences and interactive during IVR), and
gender of the narrator in an IVR experience supports learning about ocean
environments. Researchers will collect data from students attending high schools
with predominantly minority student enrollments. Research findings will be
widely shared through peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations, and
publications for educators and designers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.