* 1907211
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Rough skin: microstructural and fluid dynamic studies of elasmobranch skin to understand how denticle morphology affects locomotion
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Molly Gabler-Smith, Gabler                  Molly          K
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. This research focuses on the morphology of fish skin,
specifically, the microscopic scales called denticles on sharks and rays.
Denticles have many proposed functions, including protection from predators,
abrasion reduction, and alteration of water flow over the body. Shape
characteristics of denticles are known to differ among species as well as along
different positions of the body within an individual. Denticle shape is thought
to alter water flow along the body of fish, by decreasing hydrodynamic drag. The
functional significance of these scales is of particular interest because sharks
and rays use many different ways of swimming, and there are many different
denticle sizes and shapes. By comparing skin form with function, the fellow will
answer questions about fish biology, including evolution, locomotion, and
habitat. The Fellow will gain understanding of fish functional morphology by
learning new techniques, including robotic testing of 3D printed skin. The
results will also be important for learning about underwater locomotion for
human use. The Fellow will work closely with the Atlantic White Shark
Conservancy to develop a hands-on teaching seminar for young girls interested in
shark research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will use elasmobranch specimens
from the Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology to conduct a large-scale
comparative analysis of denticle shape. The Fellow will be trained in multiple
three-dimensional (3D) imaging techniques to examine denticle morphology of
species that employ various locomotor modes (i.e. axial-undulatory and pectoral-
fin propulsors). The Fellow will use gel-based profilometry, which determines
surface metrology variables (i.e. denticle roughness) together with micro-
computed tomography, to create 3D models of individual denticles along various
parts of an animal's body. These models will be used in a high-resolution 3D
printer to produce a flexible material for quantitative hydrodynamic testing to
investigate the fine-scale fluid dynamics produced by the skin denticles.
Understanding how the morphology of the denticles contributes to hydrodynamic
function and the ecology of elasmobranchs is important for understanding the
structural and functional evolution of elasmobranchs and to design more
efficient biomimetic materials for underwater locomotion for human
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.