* 1907704
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Effective Labeled Data Generation via Generative Adversarial Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Jiliang Tang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Recent successes in applying deep learning to solve many challenging data
science problems is in part due to the availability of large-scale labeled
training data. However, creating large-scale labeled datasets is time consuming,
labor-intensive, costly, and often requires significant domain knowledge. Many
real-world applications, therefore, come with only data with limited label
information (i.e., a small amount of labeled data or no labeled data). Thus,
lack of labeled training data is still one of major roadblocks in applying deep
learning techniques to challenging data science problems. On the other hand,
recent advancements in generative adversarial learning have shown promising
results in generating realistic data, which could enable a new perspective for
alleviating the problem of lacking labeled training data. Thus, this project
explores effective labeled data generation via generative adversarial learning.
The proposed research extends the state-of-the-art labeled data generation and
generative adversarial learning to a new frontier, investigates original
problems that entreat innovative solutions and paves the way for a new research
endeavor effectively tame synthetic labeled data generation. As many real-world
problems face the challenge of limited labeled data, the project has potential
to benefit many real-world applications from various disciplines such as
Computer Science, Education, Politics, Healthcare and
Bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes novel approaches
based on generative adversarial learning for effective labeled data generation
to facilitate deep learning with limited label information, investigates
associated fundamental research issues and develops effective algorithms. It has
three primary research objectives. First, when a small amount of labeled data is
available, it explores to estimate the underlying data distribution from
unlabeled data and incorporate the label information for labeled data
generation, including extremely imbalanced data and incomplete label scenarios.
Second, when labeled data is not available, it adopts an alternative weak
supervision (e.g., inaccurate labels, inexact labels and pairwise constraints)
for generating labeled data. Third, when neither labeled data nor weak
supervision is available, it explores to integrate human involvement to
generative adversarial learning for providing supervision. Disparate means are
planned to disseminate the project and its findings, such as web enabled data
and software repositories, books, journal and conference publications, special
purpose workshops or tutorials, and industrial collaborations. The project can
be effectively integrated to undergraduate and graduate courses as well as in
student research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.