* 1907190
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Assembly in the air:  Experimentally testing colonization versus niche hypotheses in aerial plant communities
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Michelle Spicer, Spicer, Michelle
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The rainforest
canopy remains one of the most diverse yet understudied areas of earth's
biology. Epiphytes, such as orchids, ferns, and mosses, live in the canopy.
These aerial plants are highly diverse, contribute to important ecosystem
processes, and provide vital resources for animals. Epiphytes, however, are
being threatened by logging and the effects of a changing climate across the
world. This research, therefore, also has implications for conservation. The
project aims to understand how epiphytes assemble, change over time, and
maintain a diverse and healthy community. Epiphytes will be analyzed in the
canopies of forests in the Pacific Northwest and Panama. The Fellow will
continue work promoting a more inclusive scientific community by teaching,
mentoring, and leadership in Spanish and English. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Fellow's research will directly contribute to the longstanding theoretical
debate between colonization versus niche processes as drivers of plant community
assembly. If niche processes are the primary driver of community assembly,
epiphytes will be sorted by host species (the Host Tree Species Specificity
Hypothesis), by height strata (the Vertical Niche Stratification Hypothesis),
and by orientation to the ground. Alternatively, if colonization processes are
the primary mediator of epiphyte assembly, propagule availability will be a
better predictor of subsequent diversity than microhabitat (the Dispersal
Limitation Hypothesis). To test these hypotheses, the Fellow will establish 540
epiphyte-free permanent sampling plots throughout the profile of 30 epiphyte-
laden focal trees in both temperate and tropical rainforests, experimentally
manipulating substrate height and orientation. Each year, the Fellow will survey
all plots to quantify changes in the diversity and composition of the re-
establishing epiphyte communities. The work involves collaboration
internationally and with the New York Botanical Garden, which will contribute to
training in taxonomy, DNA sequencing and provide a new ecosystem. The Fellow
will promote diversity in academia via three major aims: 1) Bridging
communication for increased Latinx participation; 2) Mentoring undergraduates
via hands-on research; and 3) Extending international experiences to
underrepresented groups via independent study
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.