* 1907751
* Fusing Equity and Whole-School STEM Models: A Conference Proposal
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Nicole Kowrach, Museum of Science and Industry
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 07/31/2022
* USD 98,157.00

Interest in whole-school STEM education models is rapidly expanding in the
United States, but there is limited agreement on the essential features of
effective STEM schools and a limited research base on effective practices. There
are also concerns regarding equity issues associated with whole-school STEM
models. This project will address these issues by planning, implementing, and
evaluating the outcomes of an invitational conference on the role of equity in
whole-school STEM education models, particularly Inclusive STEM Schools (ISS),
at the high school level. The conference will include 25 invited participants
who have expertise as researchers or practitioners in equity issues or whole-
school STEM reform efforts. These participants will discuss how to: 1) Create a
collective understanding among a community of stakeholders regarding the role of
equity in whole-school STEM models, 2) Map, synthesize, and report the terrain
of existing research around the role of equity in whole-school STEM and non-STEM
models including both strengths and gaps in the research base, and 3) Identify
central issues and questions that can guide future research in order to
prioritize these topics and initiate productive collaborations among
participants to pursue answers to critical questions. These discussions will
result in two key outcomes: 1) A practitioner centered logic model that
integrates equity into the design and implementation of STEM at the whole-school
level, and 2) A research model that supports building an empirical understanding
of the intersection between equity and whole-school STEM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are various models of STEM-centered
schools, with the most significant difference across models being the enrollment
criteria. This project will focus on Inclusive STEM Schools which have open
enrollment and provide paths for all students to advanced learning or careers in
STEM fields. Federal initiatives have promoted and supported expansion of these
schools, but there is little research on the impacts of these schools, and even
less research on the role of equity considerations on the design and
implementation of these schools. This project will address the limited research
base by focusing specifically on culturally relevant and culturally responsive
programing for inclusive STEM schools and initiating a research agenda on the
role of equity in designing inclusive STEM programs. The project will seek to
identify effective practices, and document outcomes on diverse
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.