* 1907155
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:   Oxidative stress and immune function markers to elucidate and differentiate impacts of acute and chronic stress in marine mammals
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2021
* David Ensminger, Ensminger, David Charles
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 10/31/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. As the human
population grows, so does the level of interaction between humans and wildlife.
Stressors, such as noise, pollution, and habitat destruction, typically have
negative consequences on the health and survival of wild animals. However, the
ways these stressors cause detrimental effects is poorly understood. This
project will test the effects of long-term stress exposure in marine mammals and
discover the biochemical mechanisms. These results will help develop accurate
methods to assess the health status of animals that experience environmental
stressors. This project has a strong public outreach component, will broaden
participation of underrepresented groups, and will provide mentorship and
training by the fellow for undergraduate and graduate students. Through this
project, the fellow will develop a lesson plan on wildlife conservation and
research for implementation in grade schools in the local area. The fellow will
also facilitate student participation in the field and laboratory through
collaboration with UC Berkeley organizations focused on promoting inclusivity
and student retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental and ecological
stressors increase the concentration of circulating glucocorticoids in affected
animals, potentially altering their behavior, physiology, and fitness. However,
the consequences of prolonged exposure to high levels of glucocorticoids remain
elusive in many species, and particularly in marine mammals. Such a lack of
knowledge hinders our ability to predict and assess health outcomes of increased
exposure to environmental stressors and anthropogenic activities. This project
will examine the impacts of glucocorticoid exposure on cellular and whole-body
level responses in marine mammals by experimentally elevating glucocorticoids or
blocking their action. The fellow will specifically examine the effects of
short- and long-term glucocorticoid exposure on several health-relevant measures
including reactive oxygen species generation, oxidative stress, inflammation,
and immune function using a combination of primary cells in culture and whole
animal studies with free-ranging elephant seals. The results of this project
will help identify pathways responsible for health effects following short- or
long-term exposure to stress. This will allow better prediction of negative
consequences of increased environmental and anthropogenic stressors and identify
potential biological indicators of stress in marine mammals and other at-risk
species to facilitate their management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.