* 1907396
* Collaborative Research: Toward a 1% measurement of the Hubble Constant with gravitational time delays
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Christopher Fassnacht, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 231,014.00

In recent years, high precision measurements have allowed astronomers to realize
that the current expansion velocity of the Universe does not agree with the
velocity predicted, on the basis of the standard cosmological model, by
observing phenomena that have taken place in the first few hundred thousand
years of the Universe. If the conflict between the prediction and the
measurements is confirmed beyond any reasonable doubt, then the standard
cosmological model would be incorrect, which would therefore lead to the
discovery of new physical phenomena and thus to a true revolution in the way we
understand the natural world. In order to achieve the most precise measurement
of the current expansion velocity of the Universe independently of any other
method, this project will use a technique called "gravitational time delays,"
which the collaborating teams have developed over the past twenty years. The
measurement will determine whether the conflict is real and whether new physics
is required. The broader impact of the program will be achieved through a
comprehensive educational/public outreach component, aimed at communicating both
the content of the research and the importance and significance of the
scientific method. The program includes teaching the foundations of scientific
research at the high-school, undergraduate, and graduate levels, as well as
mentoring of undergraduate students in the context of the NSF-funded CALBRIDGE
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 8% discrepancy between cosmic microwave
background measurements and the local determination of the expansion rate of the
Universe H0 hints that the standard cosmological model might not be entirely
accurate. If confirmed, this discrepancy could lead to the discovery of new
physics such as dark energy that is not the cosmological constant, or additional
families of relativistic species. Our ambitious plan based on gravitational time
delays aims to achieve the most precise absolute distance measurement to date,
independent of the local distant ladder. A three-step program will be carried
out. First, time delays will be used to measure absolute cosmic distances and
thus cosmological parameters. With state-of-the art techniques developed by the
PIs' teams, it has been shown that just four lenses are sufficient to measure H0
with 3% precision. Second, the teams will carry out follow-up (including high
resolution imaging, deep spectroscopy and monitoring with dedicated telescope
access) and modeling of lenses that they have recently discovered to further
improve the precision. Third, the program will lay the foundations for time
delay cosmology in the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope era by developing tools
and carrying out simulations and data challenges with the ultimate goal of
reaching sub-percent precision and accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.