* 1907460
* Spanning Boundaries: A Statewide Network to Support Science Teacher Leaders to Implement Science Standards
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Julie Yu, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,615,390.00

Current priorities in school science education include building strong
professional learning communities that foster ongoing professional growth among
teachers, teacher leaders, and school administrators. This project responds to
these priorities by developing and testing a two-year professional development
model for secondary school science teacher leaders that will help them support
their colleagues in implementing the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS).
The new model for professional learning combines three key elements: 1) Focusing
on teacher leaders who can interpret, translate, and incorporate new approaches
and resources into local contexts, 2) Engaging the expertise of informal science
education specialists who are well versed in teacher professional learning and
experiential approaches to learning, and 3) Establishing a statewide network of
peers who can share experiences beyond individual school and district contexts.
By developing a geographically-distributed network of support for science
teacher leaders, the project is poised to create more equitable access to high
quality professional learning opportunities for teachers as well as provide much
needed support to the disproportionate number of novice teachers in schools with
high populations of historically underrepresented students in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This early stage design and development project is guided
by two research questions: 1) How do teacher leaders utilize structures,
practices, and tools within an informal science institution-based network to
interpret, filter, and translate available resources into professional learning
supports for localized implementation of phenomena-based instruction? And 2) How
do the professional learning supports developed by teacher leaders become more
aligned with best practices for professional development (e.g., active learning,
sustained, coherent, collaborative, and content-based) and incorporate aspects
of informal learning (e.g., choice and experiential learning) throughout their
participation in an ISI-based network? The project will engage two cohorts of 25
middle and high school science teacher leaders in overlapping two-year, one-week
summer institutes, and a minimum of 12 online meetings during the academic
years. The 30-hour summer institutes will be designed to address the multiple
roles of teacher leaders as learners, classroom teachers, and teacher
professional development providers. To sustain professional development across
the academic year, monthly two-hour online meetings will be used to nurture the
community of practice. Some sessions will focus on leadership and topics related
to the NGSS, and other sessions will focus on deepening science content
knowledge. The sources of data to be used in addressing the research questions
include: 1) Video recordings, field notes of observations, and artifacts of
professional development meetings, 2) Interviews with teacher leaders, and 3)
Journal entries and artifacts from professional development sessions implemented
by teacher leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.