* 1907417
* The Origins of Fastest Stars in the Milky Way: A Chemo-Kinematic Perspective
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Keith Hawkins, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2023
* USD 302,462.00

The fastest stars in the Galaxy are often referred to as hypervelocity stars
(HVSs). These stars are excellent laboratories to study the extreme physics that
accelerates stars. The stars are also key tracers of the Galaxy's elusive dark
matter. Yet their origin and nature are still not well understood. With new data
from the Gaia spacecraft, hundreds of these fast-moving elusive stars have been
found. The investigator's primary goal to understand the origins and nature of
HVSs. This project will also discover new HVSs using the next release of data
from the Gaia mission. The chemical fingerprint of these fast-moving stars will
also be measured to tag where they were born. The project will also measure the
motions of these stars to constrain the mass of the Galaxy and determine the
physics needed to accelerate stars to such high speeds. Each of these novel
measurements will advance the field by providing key constraints of the origin
of HVSs and use them to make inferences about the mass of the Milky Way and its
dark matter halo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will engage the public
and train the next generation of our STEM workforce with an emphasis on under-
represented minority students. The investigator will work with students from the
TARUS program at the University of Texas. This program focuses on training
minority students in various aspects of computer coding and research methods.
This project, through TARUS, will provide underrepresented minority students
technical expertise that can be transferable throughout STEM careers. The
project will also advance public scientific literacy by creating an annual
'Stars on the Run' outreach night for Austin, TX area. This event will enable
the public to learn about the fastest stars discovered by this project. It will
also focus teaching the public about basic astronomical and physical principals.
This will be done through an exciting set of lectures, demos, and night sky
observing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.