* 1907384
* Collaborative Research: Developing an Online Game to Teach Middle School Students Science Research Practices in the Life Sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* David Gagnon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,976,013.00

The project will develop and research AquaLab 9, an online video game to engage
middle school students in learning science research practices in life sciences
content. By engaging in science research practices, students will develop
intellectual skills that link directly to many state academic standards and are
important for developing Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM)
literacy and pursuing STEM career pathways. Learners will take on the role of a
scientist working at an ocean-floor research station, cut off from the surface
due to a catastrophe. They must identify problems, design experiments, create
models, and argue from evidence to lead the station to survival. Learners will
be challenged with highly relevant, contemporary issues such as waste
management, energy use/production/storage, and ecological sustainability in the
setting of a fantastical story. Designed for Grades 5-8, the game will be
playable in 30-minute segments and will work on Chromebooks and tablet
computers. The game will involve 40 educators in a yearlong fellowship where
they will become co-designers, steer the project to serve the diverse students
they represent, learn about games in education, facilitate playtests in their
classrooms, and report their experiences to peers. The resulting game, in
English and Spanish, will be utilized by at least 162,000 students by the end of
the project and hundreds of thousands more after the project is completed. The
project will broaden access through digital distribution and minimal technology
requirements, which will create a low-cost opportunity for students to engage in
science practices, even in schools where time, equipment, or expertise are not
available.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Learning progressions are the steps that
students go through when they are learning about a topic. The project will
research how learning progressions can provide a framework for educational game
design. These progressions will be empirically derived from large audience game
play data. The game can thus be designed to create personalized interventions
for students to improve learning outcomes. Project research will use an approach
called stealth assessment, which analyzes data from students' game behavior
without requiring a disruption or intervention in the game activities. This
project will use this approach for developing empirically validated
understandings of how different students develop their science practices. Based
on this research, the game will be revised to improve student learning by
providing individualized feedback to each student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.