* 1907876
* CDS&amp;E: Feedback of energetic particles on plasma turbulence
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Jane Pratt, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 396,783.00

This project will develop a new computational framework for modeling
astrophysical sources of high energy particles. In space, the vast majority of
visible matter consists of hot charged gas, called plasma. Astrophysical flows
of plasma can move very fast, become turbulent, and generate shock waves. This
kind of plasma turbulence is key to a broad range of space and astrophysical
problems, including black-hole accretion disks, supernova explosions, star
formation, and even space weather. Some of the particles in a turbulent plasma
gain enormous amounts of energy by interacting with the turbulent motions, and
with shock waves. In different settings, these particles may be called cosmic
rays, solar energetic particles, or pick-up ions. While these particles gain
energy, they also change the structure of the shock waves, and the fundamental
characteristics of the turbulence. In this project a new theoretical model for
this interaction will be developed by extending a theoretical framework that has
been successfully used to model particle interactions for turbulent combustion
in car engines. State-of-the-art simulations will be produced to examine how
energetic particles can modify plasma turbulence and shocks. These simulations
will provide detailed understanding of how energetic particles move through an
astrophysical plasma, and may have a practical impact on improving space weather
prediction to help minimize satellite radiation damage. This project will also
support efforts to increase diversity among students and professionals in high
performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasma turbulence and instabilities
play a fundamental role in accelerating particles to high energies. As particles
gain energy, they interact with the plasma surrounding them, resonating with
certain types of plasma waves to stabilize them while destabilizing others, and
changing the character of the background turbulence in ways that have not been
fully quantified or understood. This interaction with the turbulent background
plasma is key to the acceleration of many types of energetic particles including
high-energy cosmic rays, solar energetic particles, and pick-up ions. In this
project, a new computational model and tool for simulating multi-species
compressible plasma turbulence will be produced by expanding on a state-of-the-
art model for multi-component turbulent engineering flows and combustion. This
model will self-consistently include the energetic particle feedback on the
plasma. The main focus of this project is to produce high-quality simulations of
the shock structure and surrounding turbulence as they are modified by energetic
particles. This will address several open questions: (1) How do energetic
particles alter turbulence around a shock? (2) How do energetic particles alter
the magnetic field and magnetic instabilities around a shock? (3) How do
modifications to shocks, turbulence, and magnetic instabilities contribute to
particle acceleration? The simulations targeted in this project will also allow
particle movement to be traced to produce a physically-clear understanding of
how modification of the shock affects the particle acceleration
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.