* 1907918
* FET: Small: Spectrally Efficient High-dimensional Quantum Communications in an Integrated Quantum Photonic Platform
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Ivan Djordjevic, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Quantum information processing opens new avenues for next-generation high-
precision sensing, high-performance computing, and reliable communications.
Entanglement is a unique resource for quantum information processing. Quantum
communication is the cornerstone to fully unleash the power of entanglement. On
the secure communication front, quantum communication leverages underlying
principles of quantum mechanics to realize distribution of keys with verifiable
security, known as Quantum Key distribution (QKD). Despite appealing features of
quantum communication, a number of fundamental and technical challenges need to
be tackled prior to its widespread applications. This project will develop high-
dimensional protocols and tailored efficient photonic-integrated circuits to
substantially advance scalable, high-rate, and long-haul quantum communications,
thus providing solutions to challenges faced in practical deployments. This work
enables high spectral efficiency quantum communications so that communication
rates can be substantially improved. As such, this project will represent an
essential step toward low-cost integrated quantum communication systems that can
be mass-produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-dimensional quantum communication
enables transmitting quantum information in a large Hilbert space, opening
promising routes for constructing new quantum error-correcting codes, building
efficient quantum repeaters, and high-rate quantum-secured communications. The
project seeks to introduce a new framework of quantum communications with high-
dimensional entangled-qubits encoded in orthogonal Slepian sequences bases. This
approach is highly robust against turbulence effects in free-space optical links
and dispersion effects/nonlinearities in fiber-optics channels, thereby
improving the quantum communication distance. Generation, processing, and
detection of Slepian-states will be implemented in an integrated quantum
photonics platform. This project will make possible the development of
electronically controlled waveguide Bragg gratings (EC-WBGs) implemented in
nonlinear photonic-integrated circuits as a key component employed in the
quantum transmitters and receivers for high-dimensional quantum communications.
Compared to fiber Bragg gratings, EC-WBGs can be mass fabricated in a photonic-
integrated circuit platform, so that quantum information encoded in a large
number of mutually unbiased basis can be processed. As such, scalability is
significantly improved while substantially reducing the cost. The Slepian-state
sources and the photonic-integrated circuits-based EC-WBGs will be integrated to
perform quantum communication tasks including high-dimensional entanglement
distribution and high-dimensional QKD. This project is dedicated to 1) analyzing
high-dimensional quantum communication protocols based on Slepian states; 2)
developing entangled and single-photon-level Slepian-state sources and scalable
processing units in a photonic-integrated circuit platform; and 3) demonstrating
Slepian-state high-dimensional quantum communication systems and testing the
developed high-dimensional quantum communication prototypes in a real-world
quantum network testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.