* 1907079
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: What you eat affects the enemies that eat you: Examining the relationship between diet and natural enemies
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Dhaval Vyas, Vyas, Dhaval
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This study
examines how the diet of an animal can help it survive attacks from other
animals. The Fellow studies the fall webworm, a caterpillar that eats the leaves
of different trees. Fall webworms are attacked by parasitic insects that lay
their eggs inside the caterpillar and use it as a host. The caterpillar's immune
system can help defend against these parasitic insects, but the strength of the
immune system can be affected by the caterpillar's diet. The Fellow uses
experiments and field surveys in Colorado to understand whether different trees
increase the immunity of the fall webworm against wasp attacks. The survival of
insects, like many animals, is dependent on the plants in their habitat. As
changes in climate transform many plant communities, insects are likely to be
affected too. This study will increase understanding of how plant-insect
interactions might change if major climatic events drastically modify plant
communities. In addition, the Fellow works closely with youth from
underrepresented minority students from urban areas in Denver. Students will
participate in wildlife surveys, which increase awareness of wildlife. The
fellow will also promote opportunities for mentorship and guidance by creating
an online network of biologists from minority backgrounds who will advise high
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For widely distributed animals, the
relative importance of diet and natural enemies can vary depending on location
and composition of ecological communities. The Fellow will use genomics to
identify and quantify the diversity of parasitic insects attacking fall webworm
across its range in Colorado. Next, the Fellow will use lab experiments to
measure the relationship between diet and the nutrient quality of fall webworms.
Finally, the Fellow will manipulate the caterpillar's diet to examine how
different tree species impact the caterpillar's ability to launch immune
defenses against parasitic insects. This research includes two approaches to
increase interactions with nature among underrepresented minority students in
urban public schools. First, the Fellow will use an experiential learning model
to create interactive out-of-school learning opportunities for middle school
students. Second, the Fellow will build an online network of professional
biologists who agree to be mentors for high school students with interests in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.