* 1907979
* Conference: Sharing Knowledge about Language and Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Alice Taff, Sealaska Heritage Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2023
* USD 98,546.00

This award supports a multidisciplinary conference that brings together
participants from three Alaska Native language communities (Tlingit, Haida and
Tsimshian) together with Indigenous and non-Indigenous academics to generate
data that supports resilience and tracks language viability. The Native American
Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, recognizes the unique status
and value of Native American languages. These three communities have experienced
significant environmental and social change, and each has survived; with the
lessons from these experiences embedded in languages, offering valuable insight
into cultural resilience and the potential to define new research questions.
Broader impacts of the conference include increased opportunity to engage
underrepresented Alaska Native youth in STEM, the potential to foster new and
innovative research collaborations, and the video recordings of conference
presentations, which will be publicly available online for broad dissemination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "Sharing Our Knowledge" (SOK) conference provides a
venue for interaction between Indigenous language speakers, learners, and
scientists from a variety of disciplines, including anthropology, linguistics,
ecology, meteorology and hydrology. SOK encourages and documents the use of
Indigenous languages throughout the conference, including usage surrounding the
wide range of participating disciplines. Attendees are primed to examine
concepts in the three languages. These activities are in line with convergent,
transdisciplinary approaches underlying other initiatives, including the Big
Ideas at the National Science Foundation. Face to face interactions at the
conference enable participants to draw on their diverse backgrounds to
investigate regional social and environmental issues and inform resilience-based
approaches for future planning in regional and other Indigenous communities. The
public availability of presentations contributes to the enhancement and
improvement of STEM by stimulating Alaska Native language use, as well as
document, and disseminate cutting-edge exchanges of information concerning
historic, current and future resilience among participating Alaska Indigenous
nations in the face of numerous changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.