* 1907506
* Teaching Science Outdoors: A Next Generation Approach for Advancing Elementary Science Teaching in Urban Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Gail Richmond, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,117,481.00

This project addresses a long-standing challenge in science education centered
on providing meaningful science education opportunities to students living in
communities of high poverty and attending under-resourced elementary schools.
These students are significantly less likely to receive high-quality science
learning opportunities and to be encouraged to engage in (rather than simply
learn about) science. This Michigan State University research project is
designed to enhance the capacity of elementary teachers in high-poverty urban
communities for enacting Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) -aligned
science approaches using the outdoors as part of their classroom. It builds on
and advances prior outdoor education work for the current context of science
education that requires elementary teachers to engage students in making sense
of phenomena using next generation science and engineering practices. The goal
of this project is to advance elementary teachers' pedagogical practices and
determine how this affects cognitive and non-cognitive learning outcomes of
their students, particularly those who are traditionally marginalized in science
classrooms. It also will advance knowledge on ways to bridge informal and formal
learning environments. To achieve these goals, the project will develop, enact
and study a program that involves a scaffolded series of summer professional
development sessions focused on outdoor learning and school year follow-up
meetings and classroom-based coaching for elementary teachers and informal
educators from two high-need districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design-based
research will be utilized to: 1) foster teacher practices and study how these
develop over time, 2) work with teachers to measure student outcomes, and 3)
determine what aspects of this formal/informal approach are productive, measures
of student engagement and student learning artifacts--will be analyzed. The
project will serve as a model for developing partnerships between informal
science organizations, educators, and K-12 programs. Revised measures and
outcomes of teacher practices and student learning; outdoor-focused lesson
plans; cases illustrating how elementary teachers develop and enact NGSS-aligned
outdoor lessons; a revised informal-formal theoretical model; and information
about dissemination of products including facilitation guidelines and coaching
approaches will be developed and disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.