* 1907014
* Brains On! the Move: STEM Podcasts as Facilitators of Automobile-Based Family Learning Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Amy Grack Nelson, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,201,991.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This four-year research study will investigate
families' joint media engagement (JME) and informal STEM learning while
listening to the child-focused STEM podcast, Brains On! Prior research has shown
that the setting where families most often listen to this podcast together is
the family automobile as children are being driven to school, on road trips, or
other activities. Brains On! is rooted in the mission-driven principle of public
radio to educate and inspire. The target audience is children 5-12 years old and
their parents or caregivers. Each episode ranges from 20-45 minutes in length
and presents ideas from a variety of STEM disciplines such as physics,
chemistry, biology and engineering featuring sound-rich explanations of concepts
through fun skits, original songs and interviews with scientists. The episodes
use a light-hearted, humorous approach to share oftentimes complex STEM
information. To provide an interactive experience, hosts encourage the audience
to participate with the show by sending in drawings, emailing photos of plants
and animals, or posing questions to be answered in future episodes. Every
episode is co-hosted by a different child who interviews top scientists about
their work. The scientists are selected to be representative of the range of
topics presented and are meant to serve as role models for the listeners and
demonstrating a wide range of career options in the STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research adds to the social learning theory of joint media
engagement (JME) which has shown that interactions between people sharing a
media experience can result in learning together. Recent work on Joint Media
Engagement has focused on parent/child interactions with television/video in the
home. But little is known about how families engage with children's STEM
podcasts together and what learning interactions occur as a result. Even less is
known about this engagement within an automobile setting. This research project
will build new knowledge filling a gap in the informal STEM learning field. It
will use a mixed-methods research design with three phases of research to answer
these questions: 1) How does the Brains On! podcast mediate STEM-based joint
media engagement and family learning in an automobile setting? 2) What does STEM
based joint media engagement and family learning look and sound like in this
setting? 3) How do "in-automobile" factors foster or impede STEM-based joint
media engagement and family learning? Phase 1 is a listener experience video
study of 30 families listening to the Brains On! episodes. Phase 2 is video-
based case studies of the natural automobile-based listening behaviors of eight
Phase 1 families. Phase 3 is an online survey of Brains On! listeners to
understand how representative the findings from Phases 1 and 2 are to the larger
Brains On! Research. Results will be shared widely with key audiences that can
use the findings (media developers, ISE practitioners, ISE evaluators and
researchers, and families). It will also make an important contribution to the
Joint Media Engagement literature and the ISE field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.