* 1907356
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:   Coevolutionary genomics of a dual-purpose marine symbiosis
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Eric Caldera, Caldera, Eric Justin
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Coevolution
between animals and the microorganisms they live with (microbial symbionts)
often results in changes such as novel molecules, that can protect the host
organism. If the microbial symbionts are passed from parent to offspring it is
usually an advantage when the environment stays the same. In contrast, marine
ecosystems, which often experience change, may provide an advantage to organisms
that acquire their microbial symbionts from the environment. This project will
analyze the interaction of a marine crustacean called an isopod with microbes
called cyanobacteria. The research will use this model system of marine
symbioses to test evolutionary theories about how organisms coevolve. The fellow
will simultaneously develop a bridge program focused on providing marine science
research opportunities to underrepresented community college students, thus
giving students training unavailable at their home institutions. In doing so,
the project will provide training in population genomics, meta-genomics, and
scientific diving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reef-dwelling isopods (Santia) cultivate
dual-purpose, cyanobacteria - these symbionts are the isopod's primary food
source and provide defense from predation. Defense is conferred via conspicuous
warning coloration and compounds that are unpalatable to predatory fishes.
Theory predicts these symbionts should be a diverse and undifferentiated
microbial assemblage, consistent with the 'Everything is Everywhere' hypothesis.
However, Santia brood their young, which should favor vertical transmission and
co-diversification. This research will use microbial community profiling to
determine whether symbiont benefits derive from a consortium of microbial
species or a single specialized lineage. Symbiont transmission will be
determined by comparing isopod geographic population structure against spatial
patterns of symbiont genetic population and community structure. Isopod and
symbiont co-divergence will be examined using comparative phylo-genomics with an
isopod-symbiont system lacking defensive compounds and pigment. The fellow will
create a 'Marine Science Pathways (MSP)' program that will act as a feeder to
'The Diversity Project' a research-intensive international summer program
focused on increasing diversity in marine science by providing a pathway to PhD
programs. MSP will recruit underrepresented students from community colleges to
conduct research and participate in a journal club where PhD students who are
TDP alumni will discuss science and paths to graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.