* 1907974
* EAGER:  Feasibility of Reconstructing the Atmospheric History of Molecular Hydrogen from Antarctic Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Eric Saltzman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 12/31/2022
* USD 159,941.00

Hydrogen (H2) is one of the most abundant trace gases in the atmosphere, with a
mean level of 500 ppb and an atmospheric lifetime of about two years. Hydrogen
has an impact on both air quality and climate, due to its role as a precursor
for tropospheric ozone and stratospheric water vapor. Projections indicate that
a future "hydrogen economy" would increase hydrogen emissions. Understanding of
the atmospheric hydrogen budget is largely based on a 30-year record of surface
air measurements, but there are no long-term records with which to assess
either: 1) the influence of climate change on atmospheric hydrogen, or 2) the
extent to which humans have impacted the hydrogen budget. Polar ice core records
of hydrogen will advance our understanding of the atmospheric hydrogen cycle and
provide a stronger basis for projecting future changes to atmospheric levels of
hydrogen and their impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve
laboratory work to enable the collection and analysis of hydrogen in polar ice
cores. Hydrogen is a highly diffusive molecule and, unlike most other
atmospheric gases, diffusion of hydrogen in ice is so rapid that ice samples
must be stored in impermeable containers immediately upon drilling and recovery.
This project will: 1) construct a laboratory system for extracting and analyzing
hydrogen in polar ice, 2) develop and test materials and construction designs
for vessels to store ice core samples in the field, and 3) test the method on
samples of opportunity previously stored in the field. The goal of this project
is a proven, cost-effective design for storage flasks to be fabricated for use
on future polar ice coring projects. This project will support the dissertation
research of a graduate student in the UC Irvine Department of Earth System
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.