* 1907434
* Rapid 3D Bioprinting of Engineered Bionic Corals towards Scalable Biofuel Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Shaochen Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 06/30/2024
* USD 534,650.00

Algae has been identified as one of the most promising sources of energy for
biodiesel production. However, current algae cultivation techniques are
inefficient and costly, which limits its scalability to meaningful production
levels. In nature, coral reefs stand among the most productive ecosystems,
powered by the high photosynthetic efficiency of the coral-algae symbiosis. But
algae self-shading is currently a key limiting factor prohibiting expansion of
commercial algae cultivation. The goal of this project is to investigate a novel
manufacturing method to produce engineered corals with biomimetic light
management strategies to cultivate living algae towards scalable algae-based
biofuel manufacturing. If successful, this research will lay the foundation for
rapid three-dimensional bioprinting of coral tissues. This work will define a
new class of bionic materials capable of interacting with living organisms. The
high spatial efficiency of the bionic coral system in three dimensions is
particularly suitable for the design of compact bioreactors for algae growth in
dense urban areas or as life support systems for space travel. Therefore, this
research will have transformative impact to diverse sectors including advanced
manufacturing and biofuel production, and directly impacts the economic welfare
and national security of the United States. In education and outreach, the
project will offer exciting interdisciplinary training that integrates contents
from nanomaterials, biomaterials, to biomanufacturing. A diverse group of
students, especially women and minority students at graduate, undergraduate, and
K-12 levels will be trained in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of the project is to understand how material composition and structure
design affect the manufacture of the biomimetic coral construct and the
proliferation of algae cells on the coral scaffold. To achieve this objective, a
rapid 3D bioprinting method will be employed to manufacture optically-tunable
scaffolds with nature inspired geometry to mimic coral tissue with microscale
precision to cultivate algae. Analytical analysis will be carried out to
simulate light propagation mechanism in the coral scaffolds. These simulation
results will guide the design and 3D bioprinting process. Experiments will be
conducted to study the mechanical, chemical, and biological properties of the
biomimetic coral structure. This will be the first attempt in the field to use
3D bioprinting for algae biofuel manufacturing, therefore it will be high risk.
But if successful, this work will transform the field of biofuel research and
manufacturing. The PI is a pioneer in 3D bioprinting with an outstanding track
record of research publications in the areas of 3D bioprinting, biomaterials,
and nanophotonics. His laboratory and institution have excellent resources and
facilities to support this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.