* 1907268
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The effect of fatherhood on behavioral and neural responsiveness to offspring sensory cues
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Kerianne Wilson, Wilson, Kerianne Murphy
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This research
will be valuable for better understanding the role of males in caring for
offspring in species in which both males and females care for young. Few studies
have been conducted on paternal care, relative to maternal care, and many of the
studies on paternal care were conducted in species in which only females care
for young, making it difficult to gauge their ecological relevance. Before,
during, and after giving birth, females undergo neural and hormonal changes that
increase maternal care, in part by increasing attraction to sensory stimuli from
newborns. The fellow will examine whether similar patterns occur in new fathers
by assessing their responsiveness to newborn sensory cues and exploring the
relative importance of acoustic and olfactory cues for eliciting paternal care.
This work could provide insights into the normal expression of parental care as
well as, conversely, maladaptive parent-offspring interactions. Findings can
also help improve conservation efforts for critical populations. Because human
activities can interfere with acoustic and olfactory communication in many
endangered species, they may also interfere with parental behaviors. This
research will provide valuable training for the fellow, and support efforts to
increase the participation and career persistence of underrepresented minorities
in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will test the hypothesis that the
onset of paternal care in the monogamous, biparental California mouse
(Peromyscus californicus) will be associated with increased attraction and
altered neural responses to olfactory and auditory stimuli from pups. To test
this hypothesis, the behaviors and neural responses of un-mated males, expectant
fathers and new fathers will be compared. First, males behavior in response to
pup odors and/or vocalizations will be quantified. Neural activity will be
measured in brain regions associated with olfaction, audition, parental
behavior, reward and/or fear by measuring the expression of an immediate-early
gene product, Fos. Lastly, the hormonal control of behavioral and neural
responses to pup stimuli in males will be examined. Through this research, the
fellow will learn techniques in behavioral neuroendocrinology and will actively
recruit undergraduate assistants through programs aimed at providing research
training to underrepresented minorities, resulting in mentorship of at least
nine undergraduates. This research will also be used to generate open-access,
app-based lessons to improve science literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.