* 1907051
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The role of male-male competition in driving weapon diversification and speciation
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Zachary Emberts, Emberts                 Zachary        T
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The research component of this fellowship investigates the
evolution of exaggerated animal weapons. Examples of such weapons include the
branching antlers of deer, the enlarged claws of crabs, and the elongated horns
of beetles. At their extremes, these weapons can compose up to half of an
individual's body mass (e.g., claws in fiddler crabs) and can be more than twice
an individual's body length (e.g., front legs in harlequin beetles). Moreover,
these weapons can dramatically differ in their size and shape among closely
related species. The fellow will specifically investigate the factors that
promote this weapon variation. Investigating the evolution of animal weapons can
provide insights into: 1) arms-races between weapons and defensive structures,
2) the importance of plant diversity in driving animal diversity, and 3) other
factors that promote new morphological structures. The broader impacts
associated with this fellowship include undergraduate mentoring, enhancing and
expanding the digitization of museum collections, and the production of
scientific research videos for the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will
use data from museum specimens in combination with phylogenetic comparative
methods to investigate the degree to which male-male competition promotes
phenotypic diversification and speciation in leaf-footed bugs (Insecta:
Hemiptera: Coreidae). Specifically, the fellow will test multiple weapon
diversification hypotheses and determine the extent to which male-male
competition influences speciation and net diversification. Because the role of
male-male competition in diversification has been largely neglected, this
research will help clarify whether selection via differential access to mates
generally promotes phenotypic diversification and speciation or whether such
patterns are specific to female choice. This research will also contribute to
museum digitization efforts, mentoring of undergraduate researchers, and the
fellow's professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.