* 1907288
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Improving C4 Crop Tolerance for Heat Stress by Engineering Thermostable Rubisco Activase
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Sarah Stainbrook, Stainbrook              Sarah          C
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2023
* USD 285,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2019. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Sarah Stainbrook is "Improving C4 Crop Tolerance for Heat
Stress by Engineering Thermostable Rubisco Activase". The host institution for
the fellowship is the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center (DDPSC) and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Ru Zhang.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global population
growth, coupled with a transition to dependence on biofuels, will require a
doubling of production of maize and other grain crops by 2050. However, the
projected 3.5 degrees Celsius temperature increase in 2050 will reduce global
maize production by 23%. Even now, heat waves such as those experienced by the
U.S. in 1980, 1988 and 2012 could devastate agricultural productivity, with
losses estimated at 55, 71, and 31 billion dollars, respectively. One solution
to this impending food security crisis is by improving the thermotolerance of
crops to withstand heat stress by focusing on Rubisco activase (Rca), the most
thermosensitive enzyme involved in photosynthesis. This project will leverage
naturally occurring variation in Rca in different plants to find or create a Rca
enzyme variant that can improve the ability of maize to withstand high
temperatures. Broader impacts include teaching a non-majors undergraduate
biology class to improve science literacy and mentoring high school students
from underprivileged or minority backgrounds through the Mutant Millets outreach
program at the DDPSC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C3, C4, and CAM are three different
photosynthetic processes that plants use to fix carbon. One of the primary
factors limiting carbon fixation during heat stress is the activation state of
the carbon fixation enzyme Rubisco. Rubisco must be activated by its catalytic
chaperone, Rubisco activase (Rca). It is estimated that the net photosynthesis
rate of maize could be doubled at 40 degrees Celsius if a thermostable Rca could
be found or created. This research will focus on identifying and isolating
variant Rca enzymes from C4 crops maize and sorghum, as well as the closely
related model grass, Setaria viridis. Rca isolates from these plants will be
characterized by in vitro carbon assimilation assays and correlated to
chlorophyll fluorescence and gas exchange measurements taken from intact plants.
Heat-adapted isolates from these plants, as well as from C3, C4 and CAM plants
from a variety of environments, will be similarly assayed to determine the range
of naturally occurring variation in Rca thermotolerance. Additionally, protein
engineering techniques will be used to improve Rca thermostability. Variants
with improved properties will be introduced into S viridis to verify that the
engineered thermostable enzyme improves thermotolerance of photosynthesis in the
transgenic plant. Once verified, the engineered thermostable Rca will be
introduced into maize. All phenotypic and biochemical data generated in this
project, including from plants from diverse climates, will be added to existing
genetic information maintained in a publicly accessible database and further
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and conference presentations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: thermotolerance, carbon fixation, maize, C4
photosynthesis, Rubisco activase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.