* 1907923
* Stability and Spatial Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Margaret Beck, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 333,748.00

Whether or not a specific state of a system, such as a striped pattern in desert
vegetation or a vortex in a fluid flow, is observed depends on how robust it is
to perturbations. If a small perturbation, or fluctuation, in the system would
drive it away from that state, then the state is unlikely to persist over long
times and hence unlikely to be observed. Such a state is unstable. Conversely, a
stable state is one that would persist even in the presence of small
perturbations, thus rendering it physically observable. Mathematical models are
often used to help predict the evolution of real-world systems. This project is
focused on the development of mathematical methods for analyzing the stability
of solutions of such models. Detecting whether or not a given state in a
mathematical model is stable is a key step in predicting its observability, and
hence in predicting real-world behavior. In this project, stability in models
described by partial differential equations is analyzed using tools from
topology, geometry, and analysis, with a focus on systems having more than one
spatial dimension. Because many of the existing mathematical tools are valid in
only one spatial dimension, while many physical systems, such as those mentioned
above, have two or more spatial dimensions, this focus is of particular
importance. Graduate students participate in the research of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the long-time behavior of
solutions is important when using partial differential equations to model
physical systems. A key aspect of this is identifying certain solutions or
coherent structures of the model and determining if they are stable. This means
that small perturbations of them remain small as time increases, thus rendering
them physically observable. In one space dimension, spatial dynamics has allowed
many problems related to nonlinear waves, and in particular their stability, to
be cast in a dynamical systems framework by viewing the spatial variable as a
time-like evolution variable. In higher dimensions, the notion of spatial
dynamics is not well-defined, because in general there is no distinguished
spatial variable to view as the time-like variable. Recently, multi-dimensional
stability problems have been recast using a family of shrinking domains and by
relating the Morse index of the linearized operator to a Maslov index connected
with this family. This indicates both that the Maslov index could be a powerful
tool for determining the spectral stability of multi-dimensional nonlinear waves
and that a generalization of spatial dynamics to the multi-dimensional setting
could be developed through the one-dimensional variable that indexes the domain.
This project is focused on developing both of these possibilities. Graduate
students participate in the research of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.