* 1907369
* Optimizing the Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Nanoparticle Crystal Assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Fernando Escobedo, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2023
* USD 299,997.00

Nanoparticles are materials that have dimensions on the nanometer scale, and
they can be assembled into larger materials. The shapes and surface chemistries
of nanoparticles can be tailored in ways that atoms or molecules cannot. While
spherical nanoparticles with one type of surface coverage or patchy coverage
have been studied extensively, other particle shapes that can be prepared, like
polyhedra and frames, have been much less explored. This research project aims
to devise and validate general computational methods to guide investigators in
selecting the key characteristics of arbitrarily-shaped components that lead to
their efficient self-assembly into target materials. The outcomes of this
research could impact the advanced materials and semiconductor industries by
providing principles to design and prepare materials for photonics,
photovoltaics, and catalysis applications. The results of this research will be
disseminated through presentations at professional meetings, an industrial
outreach program organized by Cornell, and a podcast created by graduate
students of the Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (CBE) Department. The
research project serves as a training ground for graduate students to perform
cutting edge research. An undergraduate student will be recruited to create a
multimedia module about engineering self-assembly at the nanoscale to be
disseminated through the CBE Women's group outreach initiatives that target
rural High School girls. Results from this investigation will also be used in
the curriculum of two graduate statistical mechanics courses at
Cornell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project involves formulating and
validating variational principles for enhancing thermodynamic and kinetic
assembly behavior. The researchers will implement efficient simulation methods
to test and improve the variational principles by applying them to systems
containing: (i) hard-core components, (ii) nanoparticles grafted with
complementary DNA strands that favor inter-species bonding, (iii) nonconvex
shapes where non-additive mixing can occur, and (iv) building blocks that form
open lattices. The particle shapes to be investigated include spheres,
polyhedra, and frames. The research is based on the hypothesis that the
minimization of a free-energy figure of merit can identify how particle-particle
interactions should be tuned to enhance their productive assembly into target
superlattices. In terms of thermodynamic behavior, it is hypothesized that the
free-energy at the order-disorder phase transition should be minimized for
optimal stability of pure-component crystals and substitutionally ordered
compounds. In terms of kinetic behavior, it is hypothesized that inter-particle
interactions that lead to a reduced free-energy barrier height for the disorder-
to-order transition, at a fixed degree of supersaturation, correlate with
optimal kinetic ability to self-assemble. Advanced methods to map such free-
energies as a function of parameters of the system's Hamiltonian will be used to
identify optimal values of such parameters. In testing these variational
principles, the phase and kinetic behavior of many systems of scientific
interest will be mapped out, potentially unveiling new phases and nucleation
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.