* 1907745
* Using Animated Contrasting Cases to Improve Procedural and Conceptual Knowledge in Geometry
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Jon Star, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2024
* USD 449,451.00

This project aims to support stronger student outcomes in the teaching and
learning of geometry in the middle grades through engaging students in animated
contrasting cases of worked examples. Animated contrasting cases are a set of
two worked examples for the same geometry problem, approached in different ways.
The animations show the visual moves and annotations students would make in
solving the problems. Students are asked to compare and discuss the approaches.
This theoretically-grounded approach extends the work of cognitive scientists
and mathematics educators who have shown this approach supports strong student
learning in algebra. The project will design a series of animated geometry
curricular materials on a digital platform that ask students to compare
different approaches to solving the same geometry problem. The study will
measure changes in students' procedural and conceptual knowledge of geometry
after engaging with the materials and will explore the ways in which teachers
implement the materials in their classrooms. This work is particularly important
as geometry is an understudied area in mathematics education, and national and
international assessments at the middle school level consistently identify
geometry as a mathematics content area in which students score the
lowest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project draws on prior work that documents the
impact of comparison on students' learning in algebra. Providing students with
opportunities to compare multiple strategies is recommended by a range of
mathematics policy documents, as research has shown this approach promotes
flexibility and enhances conceptual knowledge and procedural fluency. More
specifically, the approach allows students to compare the effectiveness and
efficiency of mathematical arguments in the context of problem solving. An
initial pilot study on non-animated contrasting cases in geometry shows promise
for the general approach and suggests that animating the cases has the potential
for stronger student learning gains. This study will examine the extent to which
the animated cases improve students' conceptual and procedural knowledge of
geometry and identify factors that relate to changes in knowledge. The project
team will develop 24 worked example contrasting cases based on design principles
from the prior work in algebra. The materials will be implemented in four
treatment classrooms in the first cycle, revised, and then implemented in eight
treatment classrooms. Students' written work will be collected along with data
on the nature of the classroom discussions and small-group interviews with
students. Teachers' perspectives on lessons will also be collected to support
revision and strengthening of the materials. Assessments of students' geometry
knowledge will be developed using measures with demonstrated validity and
reliability to measure changes in student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.