* 1907517
* Linear and Nonlinear Rheology of Thread-like Micelles: Multi-scale Simulations, Theory, and Experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 355,792.00

Aqueous surfactant (i.e., soap) solutions are very widely used in consumer-care
products including shampoos, body washes, and gels, cleansing products, as well
as in industrial products, including emulsions and adhesives. Surfactants in
solution self-assemble into spherical or cylindrical aggregates called
"micelles", whose shape and size control the properties of the surfactant
solutions. The micelle sizes and shapes are in turn controlled by the molecular
structure of the surfactant and by the concentrations added salts and other
ingredients. An ability to predict and control these dependencies is the key to
the rapid design of surfactant products. The project will therefore develop
molecular simulation tools at multiple levels of scale that, together, will
produce a deep understanding of the energies and forces that control surfactant
self-assembly allow for predictive design of surfactant products. Software tools
developed under this project will be made public and we expect it to be used by
companies such as Procter and Gamble, as has been the case with software
developed under the previous NSF funded grant. The new project will train Ph.D.
students, aided by interactions with P&amp;G, including possible internships
there.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;We will used molecular dynamics (MD) simulations
and the Weighted Histogram Analysis Method (WHAM) to extract the scission free
energy required to break a thread-like micelle, and the free energy for removal
of a micellar branch. This information will be combined with simulations at a
coarser scale, using the ?Pointer Algorithm,? which tracks rates of micellar
breakage and fusion and branch formation along with rates of sliding of micelles
along entanglement pathways. These methods will be used to predict the rheology
of ensembles of linear and branched micelles. These predictive tools will be
tested by measuring rheological data for well-defined micellar solutions of CTAC
(cetyl trimethylammonium chloride) mixed with either NaCl or with sodium
salicilate (NaSal), and other surfactant solutions. We will also develop a
simulation method and constitutive theory for the nonlinear rheological
properties of thread-like micelles that accounts for breakage/fusion, nonlinear
deformation, and entanglements. This simulation method will be novel hybrid of
Brownian dynamics simulations of breakage/fusion of bead-spring chains, with the
slip-spring model of Likhtman to account for entanglements, providing the first
simulation method for the nonlinear properties of thread-like
micelles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.