* 1907343
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Quantifying the Impact of Transposable Elements on Maize Fitness and Adaptation
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Michelle Stitzer, Stitzer, Michelle Corey
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 11/30/2023
* USD 285,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2019. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Michelle Stitzer is "Quantifying the impact of
transposable elements on maize fitness and adaptation" The host institution for
the fellowship is Cornell University and the sponsoring scientists are Drs.
Cedric Feschotte and Edward S. Buckler.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transposable
elements are pieces of DNA that can jump to new positions in genomes. Unlike
genes which are reliably inherited from generation to generation, transposable
elements can move and generate new copies of themselves at novel positions
throughout the genome. Originally discovered in maize, they are now known to
exist in genomes across the tree of life. They are particularly active in plant
genomes, making up 40% of the DNA in the rice genome and over 85% of the DNA in
the maize and wheat genomes. Although transposable elements have been
hypothesized to produce mutations valuable for adaptation to stressful
environments, this has not been comprehensively tested. This project tests the
impact of new transposition on maize adaptation and develops computational
resources for transposable element annotation in plant genomes with possible
implications for non-plant genomes. Broader impacts include the development of
workshops focused on the use of statistical programming language R. These
workshops will be tailored to undergraduate biology students with a focus on
increasing participation from students underrepresented in STEM. Training
objectives include obtaining expertise in plant phenotyping, computational, and
molecular techniques as well as experience in communicating coding and
bioinformatic techniques to diverse audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
majority of plant genomes are comprised of transposable elements, but little is
known about how their movement impacts plant fitness and phenotypes. Using maize
as a model system, the project will directly investigate the impact of
transposable elements on plant fitness and response to selection. Specific
objectives are to: 1) develop software to detect and annotate transposable
elements in sequenced reference genomes; 2) phenotype a mapping population of
maize that varies in copy number of a transposable element to test whether copy
number impacts yield and other fitness-related traits; and, 3) activate
transposable elements genome-wide by chemical demethylation to test whether
novel insertions generate mutations selected for during adaptation to abiotic
stress. All project outcomes will be made accessible for use by the broader
research community through various public repositories. All data, scripts, and
software produced will be publicly available through GitHub, Figshare
(https://figshare.com), MaizeGDB, and/or NCBI-SRA. Germplasm generated in this
project will be deposited in the Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: transposable elements, maize genetics,
adaptation, genome annotation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.