* 1907906
* Students and Teachers Learning from Nature: Studying Biologically-Inspired Design in High School Engineering Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Michael Ryan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,927,839.00

Scientists and engineers often learn from nature to develop new products that
benefit society, a process called biologically-inspired design. Aerospace
engineers, for example, have studied the intricate folding patterns in ladybugs'
wings to gain ideas for designing more compact satellites. In this project, high
school engineering teachers will spend five weeks in a research lab devoted to
biologically-inspired design, as they partner with cutting-edge engineers and
scientists to study animal features and behavior and their applications to
engineering designs. After this lab experience, the high school teachers will
receive three six- to ten-week curricular units, tailored for tenth- through
twelfth-grade students, which teach biologically-inspired design in the context
of problems that are relevant to youth. The teachers will also participate in
ongoing professional development sessions that demonstrate strategies for
teaching these units. The research team will study whether and how the lab and
professional development experiences influence the teachers' understandings of
engineering and perspectives toward nature, among other outcomes. Additionally,
the research team will study whether the curricular units are associated with
positive learning outcomes for students. The curricula and professional
development modules will be shared publicly through online resources and teacher
workshops, and research findings will be widely disseminated through journals.
Because previous research has suggested that biologically-inspired design is a
promising approach for attracting and retaining women in engineering careers,
this project is likely to result in products that foster high school girls'
interest in engineering during a critical period when they are imagining their
future career trajectories. Moreover, these products are likely to fuel national
innovation by teaching students how to look to nature to find answers to
pressing problems, and by generating knowledge about motivational educational
approaches that encourage a wider range of high school students to pursue
engineering careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the persistent
underrepresentation of girls in engineering careers by developing and testing
three sets of curricula that are expected to lead to positive outcomes among
high school females. These curricula incorporate biologically-inspired
engineering, humanistic engineering, a focus on sustainability and ideation, and
authentic design contexts. Ten high school teachers will participate in
extensive professional development experiences that prepare them to effectively
teach the curricula. These experiences include a five-week lab experience with
scientists who are applying biologically-inspired design; a one-week workshop
demonstrating strategies for teaching the units; weekly implementation meetings;
and web-based professional development modules. To study the effect of the
professional development on teachers, researchers will collect curriculum design
logs, teacher enactment surveys, and engineering teaching self-efficacy surveys;
they will also conduct classroom observations and interviews. Qualitative
analyses of these sources will indicate whether and how the professional
development affected teachers' understanding of the engineering design process,
engineering teaching self-efficacy, and perspective toward the natural and
designed world. To study the effect of the curricula on over 1,100 high school
students, researchers will use a pre-post design with validated measures to
determine whether the curricula are associated with greater understanding and
use of the engineering design process; ability to generate well-formulated
engineering design problems; engineering self-efficacy; attitudes toward the
natural and designed world; sustainability awareness; and intent to persist in
engineering. Subsequently, a quasi-experimental design with a matched comparison
group will enable the researchers to determine whether the treatment group
outperformed the comparison group on pre-post measures. Qualitative analysis of
focus groups and interviews with a sub-set of high school girls will indicate
whether and how the curricula supported their sense of belonging in engineering.
This project is designed to advance knowledge and practice in engineering
education for high school students, especially among girls, ultimately resulting
in broadening participation in engineering pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.