* 1907334
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Examining Natural and Anthropogenic Influences on the Physiology, Population Structure, and Trophic Structure of Larval Rockfishes
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Garfield Kwan, Kwan, Garfield Tsz
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Determining how environmental factors influence larval fish
populations is essential to predicting the adult population structure and will
enhance fishery management strategies. The primary factors affecting early-life
mortality are predation and starvation, which are affected by oxygen, nutrients,
and other ocean conditions including warming and acidification linked to human
activity that has increased carbon emissions. To better understand factors that
affect larval physiology and predator-prey interactions, this project will apply
modern biochemical techniques to larval fish collections spanning 67 years.
These specimens together with a corresponding oceanographic dataset were
collected by the California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations program
and represent the longest fishery-independent dataset in the world. This work
will contribute to understanding the 'winners' and 'losers' in future ocean
conditions, and provide fishery managers with crucial information that may be
applied to maintain commercially-important fishery stocks and preserve local
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will perform analysis on
previously collected larval cowcod (Sebastes levis) and bocaccio (Sebastes
paucispinis), two commercially important species that have experienced dramatic
decline throughout the 20th century. Using modern biochemical techniques, three
long-term physiological, genetic, and isotopic datasets will be generated using
immunohistochemistry, DNA-sequencing, and stable isotope analysis. These
datasets will then be paired with oceanographic datasets and aligned with the
collapse and recovery of the two rockfish populations to determine whether the
implementation of the Marine Protected Area was successful. This analysis will
also reveal the effects of anthropogenic carbon emission on larval physiology.
Formalin-fixed specimens are notorious for being problematic for
immunohistochemical and DNA-sequencing analysis. These techniques will be
refined in this work to establish approaches that could be applied to biological
collections around the world. Finally, the fellow will also translate this
research project into a webcomic via Squidtoons for public dissemination,
ultimately facilitating better public understanding and appreciation of
biological research and collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.