* 1907121
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Context-Dependent Life History Responses to Climate Change
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Kelsey Reider, Reider, Kelsey
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The proposed
research will test the hypothesis that climate variation is driving changes in
high-elevation ecosystems. The study combines insights from 29 years of existing
data with new field observations and experiments to understand how extreme
weather and environmental variables such as warming temperatures and reduced
snowpack affect salamanders in a rapidly changing mountain environment. In
addition to being broadly applicable to other amphibians, this research will
inform conservation approaches for many other species in rapidly changing high-
mountain ecosystems and other ecosystems experiencing climate variation.
Amphibians are among the most threatened vertebrate animals on the planet, and
high-mountain environments are undergoing dramatic ecological changes in
response to climate variation. There is an urgent need to understand the
mechanisms of species responses to climate variation to design effective
conservation measures for particular environmental contexts. The fellow will
involve undergraduate students from groups underrepresented in biology in the
project and develop teaching tools that prepare students from diverse
backgrounds to pursue and fund graduate research.

First, the fellow will explore the effects of past climatic variation on
phenology (e.g., timing of reproduction and hibernation) and life history (e.g.,
body condition, survival, fecundity, longevity, etc.) using long-term
demographic data. Sophisticated statistical models will be used to evaluate
relationships and links between population dynamics in salamanders that have
polyphenic adult morphs (aquatic and terrestrial) that live in the same location
but are subject to climate variation under different environmental contexts.
Second, this research will compare temperature and water stress impacts of
climate trends, which are crucial physiological considerations for amphibians,
under different environmental contexts (using data-logger-implanted salamanders
as mobile temperature sensors) and under conditions of accelerated snowmelt (by
combining biophysical salamander models and experimental manipulation of
snowmelt date). Results from this research will inform how asymmetric life
history impacts of climate variation under different environmental contexts can
promote or hinder population resilience to a changing climate and provide a case
study of how other species might respond. The fellow will participate in career
development activities such as advanced statistical training, proposal writing,
and teaching. The fellow will develop and teach an undergraduate equity course,
initiate a diversity journal club, and create a database of annotated examples
of research by biological science practitioners from under-represented groups
that will be used in undergraduate courses and disseminated online.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.