* 1907471
* Building professional capital in elementary science teaching through a district-wide networked improvement community model
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jessica Thompson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,999,226.00

This project will focus on a networked improvement community (NIC) model of
professional learning that shifts K-5 science instruction from traditional
approaches to a three-dimensional design as outlined in the Next Generation
Science Standards. The need to make this shift stems from the school district's
decision to address inequities in science as some schools offer minimal to no
science instruction during the elementary years. The NIC model will draw on
expertise from school personnel and university partners to ensure that students
will have access to and benefit from authentic model-based inquiry daily in the
early grades. This model embraces the challenges of scale and sustainability by
targeting the design and substance of professional learning and its organization
within the district, balancing integration with existing system infrastructure,
and shifting the system based on theory-driven practices. To prepare teachers
for this major change, professional development will shift from: (1) training on
the use of kit-based curricular materials to professional learning grounded in
NGSS-inspired sets of practices and tools; (2) working as individual
practitioners to teaching as collaborative investigations; (3) using centralized
efforts to distributed knowledge-building and leadership; (4) learning science
as decontextualized facts to deep engagement with real-world phenomena; and (5)
teaching lessons as prescribed by curriculum to a focus on responsive teaching
and building on students' funds of knowledge. The NIC model will provide a
pathway for integrating and implementing these shifts via a multilevel,
knowledge-building, problem-solving system. This system will go beyond a single
focus on improving students' understanding of science content to incorporating
teaching practices that advances knowledge about student's written and spoken
scientific language and use of explanations and arguments. Through the NIC model
all K-5 elementary students in the district will benefit from a rigorous and
equitable approach to science learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
feature a multi-level model involving university educators and researchers and
school district practitioners in an effort to co-defined problems of practice
valuable to both parties. A mixed methods research design will examine how the
NIC model develops professional capital through changes in implementation over
multiple iterations. These changes will be captured through short and long-term
instruments. Regarding the shorter term, practical measures sensitive to change
and directly tied to small manageable, short-term goals will provide quick
responses to everyday real-time questions. These measures will help assess
specific improvement goals using language relevant and meaningful to researchers
and practitioners. For longer term goals, in-depth case studies, interviews,
observations, pre-posttests, surveys, and questionnaires will collect data on
several variables critical to documenting improvements at the teacher and
student levels. Both sets of data will generate knowledge about ambitious and
equitable science teaching practices with a focus on students' cultural and
linguistic resources and experiences. Through such pathways, knowledge will be
generated on teachers' and students' growth as active builders and collaborators
in the development of improved learning and experiences. The outcomes will
identify critical facets that support advances and sustainability that
illuminate variations within the district to better understand what works, for
whom, and under what conditions. the research findings will also be used to
inform decision making about teaching science at the elementary grades and to
further refine equity-based practices, resources, and tools for building on
students' funds of knowledge vital to supporting, sustaining, and scaling
educational outcomes for all students in the district and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
this program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research
and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justifications
for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.