* 1907716
* Understanding Gas Transport through Nanopores in Graphene Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Daniel Blankschtein, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Industrial processes that separate chemical mixtures are essential for
civilization, including, for example, the production of energy, materials, and
commodity chemicals. The development of more selective and energy efficient
separation processes is therefore an important technological challenge,
promising the potential for substantial cost savings as well as reductions in
energy consumption and harmful emissions. Most industrial separations are
energy-intensive thermal processes, which account for 10-15% of the world's
overall energy consumption. Membrane-based separation processes offer attractive
alternatives to thermal separation techniques due to their reduced energy
consumption and excellent reliability. However, the trade-off between gas flux
and selectivity of conventional gas separation membranes has historically
limited the overall performance of a membrane separation unit, as well as the
motivation for replacing energy-intensive processes with these more efficient
alternatives. Graphene, an atomically thin layer of carbon atoms, is regarded as
the potential ultimate limit of membrane efficiency for gas separation. Graphene
and other two-dimensional materials are a single atom or unit cell thick and
represent the absolute lowest mass transfer resistance (or highest throughput)
among candidate membrane materials. Hence, this ultimate thinness can yield
orders of magnitude higher gas fluxes than those attained using conventional
membrane materials. To fulfill this potential, the goal of this project is to
experimentally generate nanopores in the graphene layer with controlled size
distributions for gas separation. Measurements of gas permeation will be used to
gain fundamental understanding about molecular transport through these new types
of nanopores using a theoretical and simulation framework. The project will
contribute to ongoing educational efforts on the MIT campus, including learning
modules for a course called Engineering Nanotechnology, and will engage under-
represented student populations at MIT and the Cambridge academic community
through high school internship and undergraduate research opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to use a combined
approach of experiment, molecular simulation, and theoretical analysis to
advance the understanding of transport of gas molecules through molecularly
sized nanopores in two-dimensional membranes such as graphene. Firstly, theory
and simulations will be used to investigate nanopore formation in graphene and
to study the permeation kinetics for different gas species through these
nanopores, eventually creating a comprehensive theory to predict gas permeation
through a realistic pore size distribution. Secondly, nanoporous graphene
membranes will be fabricated, and the gas permeances through these membranes
will be measured. Lastly, the formation, modification, and functionalization of
the graphene pores will be investigated to further understand gas transport
through different graphene pore structures. The combination of theory, molecular
simulation, membrane fabrication, characterization, and gas flux measurements
will provide the first fundamental links between pore structure and distribution
with observed gas permeance, and elucidate the underlying mechanisms of
molecular-pore interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.