* 1907673
* AF:Small: Algorithmic Management of Heterogeneous Resources
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Kirk Pruhs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2023
* USD 239,352.00

Energy arguably ascended over time as the dominant computational resource circa
2000, when standard information technologies could no longer cope with the
consequences of Moore's law, which states that the density of computational
units doubles every couple of years. Thus the community is about a decade or two
into an information-technology revolution in which a wide range of technologies
are being redesigned with energy as a first-class design constraint. Over the
last several decades, when time and space were the dominant computational
resources, computer-science researchers developed many techniques for designing
algorithms that made efficient use of these resources, and for analyzing the
time and space required by particular algorithms on simple models of a computer.
These techniques are commonly taught in algorithms and theory/complexity classes
that are required for computer scientists. The ability to reason abstractly
about time and space in simple computational models is undoubtedly a valuable
skill for computer scientists and software engineers, and many of the most
successful computing companies are famous for job interviews that tests these
reasoning skills. The PI's long term goal is to build a body of knowledge
related to algorithm design and analysis techniques for problems related to
managing heterogeneous resources, and managing energy as a computational
resource. The PI expects that this body of knowledge will eventually be taught
to future software engineers, and will serve these software engineers, when
faced with problems in which power/energy/temperature is the key scarce
resource, just as the current algorithmic theory of time as a computation
resource now serves them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most common
mechanisms for achieving energy efficiency is building a system with
heterogeneous devices with different energy/performance characteristics. For a
given area and power budget, heterogeneous designs often give significantly
better performance, for a given energy/hardware budget, for standard workloads
than homogeneous designs. The PI will address algorithmic problems related to
managing heterogeneous resources in several technologies arising from this
information-technology revolution. Briefly, these problems are online convex
optimization with applications to energy-efficient load balancing of data
centers, energy-efficient routing in a network, designing combinatorial circuits
that optimally trade-off energy efficiency and reliability, determining the
complexity of finding schedules that optimally trade-off energy and performance,
and analyzing scheduling algorithms on a heterogeneous multiprocessor. Managing
heterogeneous resources is algorithmically significantly more challenging than
managing heterogeneous resources, and many existing algorithmic techniques are
not sufficient for handling these algorithmic problems. This project aims to
invent new algorithmic techniques for solving these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.