* 1907169
* Conference on Computational Mathematics and Applications (CCAM)
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Zhijian Wu, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 18,389.00

This award provides participant support to Conference on Computational
Mathematics and Applications (CCMA), to be held at University of Nevada Las
Vegas (UNLV), October 25-27, 2019. Computational Mathematics is a rapidly
growing multidisciplinary field lying at the intersection of mathematics and
many disciplines of science and engineering. With the increasing of
computational technology in recent years, the pivotal role of Computational
Mathematics continues to expand to broader areas that include not only the
traditional science and engineering, but also social sciences, finance, medical
science and data science. In order to disseminate the state-of-the-art
computational techniques and put them into broad applications, the organizers
propose to host "Conference on Computational Mathematics and Applications (CCMA)
at the University of Nevada Las Vegas (UNLV) during October 25-27, 2019. Holding
the proposed conference at UNLV will not only provide a strong stimulus for our
graduate students and increase the local research activity for mathematicians
and people from other related disciplines, it will also serve as a new catalysis
for proposing new computational methodology and pointing some new research
directions in scientific computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will
bring many prominent scholars in Computational and Applied Mathematics to
address important topics that have fundamental scientific merits and significant
application values. Topics to be focused are: "Recent advances in wave
propagation and applications", "Numerical methods for stochastic PDEs and
applications", "Numerical analysis and modeling of complex fluids", and "Machine
Learning for Scientific Computing". The organizers plan to host around 60
participants with 6 invited plenary 50-minute talks, and several parallel
sessions of 30-minute talks. The organizers will strive to support about 10
postdocs and junior faculty, especially women and under-represented minorities.
The subjects covered in this conference will benefit not only mathematics, but
also many other computational related fields such as mechanical engineering,
geosciences, physics, and medical sciences. To create a long term impact, a
refereed conference proceeding will be published after the conference either as
a book in the AMS Contemporary Mathematics series or as a special issue of a
computational science journal. More details are available at http://cams.sites.u
nlv.edu/conferences/ccma2019/ccma2019.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.