* 1907240
* Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The Diversity of a New Carbon-Activating Halogenase from Cyanobacteria
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Nathaniel Glasser, Glasser, Nathaniel
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 172,500.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Photosynthetic bacteria known as cyanobacteria produce a
variety of organic molecules with unusual chemical structures, including
halogenated molecules, which contain chlorine and bromine and are produced using
enzymes called halogenases. The enzymes are unusual because they can form
chemical bonds at carbon atoms that other enzymes cannot use. A better
understanding of halogenases will lead to new insights in chemistry. Towards
that goal, the fellow will study a newly discovered type of halogenase that is
able to attach halogen atoms to molecules called fatty acids. This project will
lay the groundwork for understanding a new type of carbon-activating enzyme,
with applications for the development of new synthetic methods in chemistry to
produce industrially important molecules. The fellow will engage in public
outreach, including interactive museum exhibits, to highlight the importance of
microbiology in every-day human life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an international
collaboration with the University of Porto, Portugal, this research will use DNA
sequence data to identify new halogenases from the LEGE collection of
cyanobacteria. Using a PCR-based approach, the fellow will identify LEGE strains
that contain homologs of a fatty acid halogenase, with follow-up validation by
whole genome sequencing. The fellow will clone, heterologously express, purify,
and functionally characterize the new homologs from the LEGE collection, in
addition to homologs from other culture collections, to identify genetic
determinants of enzyme selectivity and explore the relationships between
evolution and enzyme activity. The fellow will also use liquid chromatography
and mass spectrometry to identify new halogenated compounds produced by species
in the LEGE collection. The fellow will isolate and structurally characterize
these compounds with the goal of connecting new halogenase-containing
biosynthetic gene clusters to the molecules they produce. By characterizing the
functional and genetic diversity of fatty acid halogenases in cyanobacteria,
this work will document the utility of new halogenases for carbon activation in
chemical synthesis. In performing this research, the fellow will receive
training in bioinformatics, chemical synthesis, and natural products isolation
and characterization. This research will be performed with assistance from
undergraduates, whom the fellow will train and mentor, and it will build new
collaborations for the analysis of interdisciplinary datasets in chemistry and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.