* 1907738
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: New Challenges in Graph Stream Algorithms and Related Communication Games
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Amit Chakrabarti, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2022
* USD 249,995.00

Computational problems in many domains call for analyzing interactions among a
very large number of entities. For instance, the friendship links in a globe-
spanning social network contain a vast amount of knowledge. Detailed analyses of
these links can drive research in the social sciences, aid security analysis and
intelligence gathering, and guide infrastructure planning. Some other important
examples of large networks (graphs, in mathematical parlance) that hide a wealth
of information are the networks of genes and neurons in biology, the network of
web pages, and the network of geometric and physical relationships between stars
and galaxies. Further, many such graphs are continually evolving as links appear
and disappear, potentially necessitating repeated costly computation. It is
usually infeasible or inefficient to perform computations on graphs this large
while holding them entirely in memory. To address this broad challenge, over the
last decade or so, researchers including this project's investigators have
developed algorithmic techniques known as streaming and sketching to compute
more efficiently on large data sets, including large graphs. A streaming
algorithm treats its input as an ordered sequence of values, each of which can
be read only once. Sketching refers to techniques for summarizing a stream of
data using memory much smaller than the data stream. This project will (1)
develop novel streaming and sketching algorithms for graph problems that are
fundamental enough to have broad applicability and (2) develop the underlying
mathematical theory of such algorithms to better understand their possibilities
and limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a technical level, one major goal of
this project is to attack basic directed graph problems in the streaming model,
from both upper and lower bounds perspectives: the existing theory is mostly
focused on undirected graphs. Another goal is to deeply understand the role of
randomness in solving graph problems that admit efficient linear sketches: such
understanding is currently limited to problems from basic statistics. The theory
of streaming and sketching algorithms is closely tied to communication
complexity, which studies protocols for solving problems (sometimes called
games) where the input is distributed across two or more sites. Accordingly,
this project will seek new protocols or lower bounds for some such communication
games and design novel communication games that address aspects of streaming
algorithms specific to graph problems. The investigators will leverage the
geographical proximity of their respective universities to build more formal
ties between their respective theoretical computer science research groups,
including an annual day-long workshop. They will continue their established
history of developing pedagogical materials on the research topics included in
or closely related to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.