* 1907069
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Peroxisomal quality control: Elucidating pexophagy control mechanisms
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* DurreShahwar Muhammad, Muhammad, DurreShahwar
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Plants are at
the base of all food chains, are vital to materials production, and maintain our
atmosphere, making plant research critical for sustainability in a changing
world. Plants isolate reactions involved in breaking down fats for energy and
hormone production in subcellular compartments called peroxisomes. These
reactions support growth and development throughout the life cycle, but also
create toxic byproducts that can damage the peroxisome and the entire cell if
not degraded. This project focuses on uncovering the mechanism responsible for
'taking the trash out' within cells. The goal is to identify signals responsible
for targeting damaged or obsolete peroxisomes for decay in the model plant,
Arabidopsis thaliana. Problems in 'taking the trash out' are believed to
contribute to the aging processes in plants, as well as several peroxisome
biogenesis disorders in humans. Given that over half of peroxisomal proteins are
conserved between plants and humans, peroxisome research in Arabidopsis can
impact both agriculture and human health, making it a vital process to
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cellular quality control used to manage damaged
peroxisomes is a form of specialized autophagy (pexophagy) in which the cell
creates a structure to engulf and discard the damaged peroxisome. The research
will leverage the recent finding that functional peroxisomes are targeted for
destruction by an overzealous autophagy machinery when an Arabidopsis
multifunctional protease protein is dysfunctional, leading to the hypothesis
that signals responsible for pexophagy are degraded or refolded by the
multifunctional protease. Several protein studies will be used to identify
interacting proteins, followed by studies to determine how and why the
interaction regulates pexophagy. By identifying the signals regulating
pexophagy, we can begin to elucidate the stressors that induce pexophagy, the
benefits of increased and decreased pexophagy, and how to selectively regulate
the activity. The project is designed to expand the expertise of the Fellow into
organelle biology. Moreover, the project has manageable subprojects that will be
executed by mentored undergraduates from historically underrepresented
backgrounds, allowing the Fellow to hone mentoring and management skills needed
to successfully run an independent research lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
was co-funded by the Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology Program in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Cellular Dynamics and Function
Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.