* 1907910
* Following the Molecular History of Stellar Ejecta: Combining Observations with Laboratory Spectroscopy and Imaging
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 624,921.00

Mass loss from stars in the late stages of evolution is a major avenue by which
the interstellar medium gets enriched in gas, dust, and heavy elements. This
research project will investigate the nature of the material ejected by evolved
stars and planetary nebulae. Results from the study will allow astronomers to
understand how the physical and chemical properties of stars in late stages of
evolution influence the lifecycle of material in the interstellar medium. This
project will train graduate and undergraduate students, including ones from
groups that are underrepresented in science, in advanced techniques of radio
astronomy and laboratory astrophysics research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will undertake a combined program of astronomical observations,
laboratory experiments, and chemical modeling to explore the nature of stellar
ejecta in the gas phase and in dust grains, and its impact on the diffuse
interstellar medium. They will conduct molecular spectral line observations of
circumstellar envelopes and planetary nebulae using ground-based single-aperture
and interferometric radio telescopes. To complement and guide the observations,
they will measure laboratory rotational spectra of metal-bearing molecules
postulated to be important in carbon-rich and oxygen-rich envelopes of evolved
stars. They will perform transmission electron microscopic imaging of carbon and
silicate dust grains extracted from meteorites to investigate the relationship
between metallic and non-metallic constituents of the grains, and they will
perform quantum chemical calculations of dust destruction by ultraviolet
radiation and shocks characteristic of planetary
nebulae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.