* 1907223
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Holistic Restoration: Integrating Community Ecology into Coastal Mangrove Conservation
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Alexandria Moore, Moore, Alexandria Chanel
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2021
* USD 143,750.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Coastal
wetlands are among the most valuable and threatened ecosystems across the globe.
Given their declining status, significant effort has been devoted to
conservation and restoration. However, most efforts fail to meet stated goals
because of an emphasis on practices rooted in an incomplete understanding of
these ecosystems. Due to traditional restoration approaches, a knowledge gap
exists in our current understanding of the factors that maintain the health and
functioning of coastal wetlands. Further, conservation practices that aim to
protect ecosystems often fail to consider local values, knowledge systems, and
needs (altogether known as 'biocultural values'), an oversight which can cause
conflict and impact conservation outcomes. This project therefore aims to link
the ecological values of coastal wetlands with the associated biocultural values
anchored to the surrounding communities. This interdisciplinary approach
endeavors to guide conservation practices towards just and sustainable
solutions. The restoration and management recommendations that result from this
work will thus have implications for conservation and restoration approaches in
the various global locales where the need for environmental conservation and
cultural preservation overlap.

The objectives of this study are to (1) address a biological knowledge gap in
coastal wetland ecosystem ecology, (2) determine the social and biocultural
values associated with coastal wetlands, and (3) incorporate ecological data and
biocultural knowledge and values into coastal wetland restoration practice and
land management decisions. These objectives will be addressed by (1) conducting
a consumer presence-absence field experiment to determine impacts on various
essential coastal wetland processes, (2) conducting focus groups and open-ended
key informant interviews along with a systematic literature review, and (3)
engaging with local environmental management officials to inform best-practices
for restoration utilizing the results of the field experiment and interviews.
This project also aims to increase diversity, equity, and inclusion in
conservation by engaging high school and undergraduate students from
traditionally underrepresented backgrounds through various means, including the
AMNH-sponsored Inclusive Conservation Community Initiative, the Science Research
Mentoring Program, and Fellowship-sponsored research assistants. Additionally,
specific training objectives include developing and piloting focus group
interview procedures, engaging local government and land management agencies in
data-driven restoration decisions, and combining ecological and sociocultural
perspectives to improve conservation outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.