* 1907907
* RI: SMALL: Robust Inference and Influence in Dynamic Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Lillian Ratliff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2023
* USD 365,958.00

Many application domains, such as online content recommendation, medical trials,
and logistics and operations in intelligent infrastructure require the
practitioner to sequentially make decisions given little information about the
environment and the optimality of selected actions.On a limited measurement
budget, adaptive data collection can make the difference between measuring a
phenomenon, or missing it. Recent advances in machine learning have provided
rich insights into ways of using past observations to guide planning of future
measurements. Most state-of-the-art approaches assume observations arise from an
environment with fixed probabilistic characteristics. Yet, in practice,
environments such as these tend to be the exception and not the rule. To handle
this, practitioners supplement existing algorithms with ad-hoc exceptions and
rule of thumb mechanisms, but relying on heuristics to account for brittle
assumptions may itself be brittle and call into question the entire experiment.
The objective of this project is to develop algorithms with performance
guarantees for collecting data adaptively in dynamic and unpredictable
environments with the goal of making robust inferences, faster and
cheaper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical agenda of this project will advance
the state-of-the-art by introducing a contextual non-stochastic pure exploration
framework that extends recent advances in context-free non-stochastic best-arm
identification, and exploits available contextual information when possible
while simultaneously giving robust guarantees in non-stochastic environments. By
taking a best-of-both-worlds approach, the project will also introduce
resilience into the design of algorithms for adaptive inference and influence by
building model misspecification into the framework. This will allow for simple
models to be used as an approximate model for inference and influence when the
model is accurate, but not mislead when it is not. The framework will also
extend to hyperparameter tuning of machine learning models in the more
challenging setting of contextual non-stationary or streaming-data environments
(e.g., federated learning on mobile devices for ``edge computing'') thereby
providing theoretical advancements with utility in several application domains.
The project will conduct experiments informed by real world data in its
development of a rigorous theoretical framework. Accompanying the technical
agenda is an integrated research and education plan that includes cross-
disciplinary undergrad and grad course development leveraging the experimental
platform as well as student opportunities to engage with
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.