* 1907273
* Molecular mechanisms of translation termination in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Yury Polikanov, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 06/30/2024
* USD 700,000.00

Translation termination - an essential biological process in all unicellular and
multicellular organisms - ensures that all proteins manufactured by the
molecular machine known as the ribosome have the lengths strictly defined by the
genes that code for them. This process is mediated by proteins know as Release
Factors, which promote release of newly synthesized polypeptide product from the
ribosome. Release must be tightly controlled to prevent the accumulation of
truncated or extended polypeptides that can be non-functional or even toxic to
the cell. The goals of the current project are to elucidate the molecular
mechanism implemented by the Release Factors during the fundamental biological
process of termination of protein synthesis. This project will have a broad
impact on the advancement of our understanding of biology at the molecular
level. Ultimately, the mechanistic details of the ribosomal machinery to be
determined can reveal new avenues for the development of antibiotics that target
the bacterial ribosome. In addition, the project will train both undergraduate
and graduate students in powerful techniques in structural biology and introduce
high school students to research at the forefront of structural and molecular
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All Release Factors (RF) share a universally
conserved tripeptide sequence motif Gly-Gly-Gln (GGQ) that is critical for
eliciting hydrolytic activity at the active site of the ribosome, the peptidyl
transferase center. Despite a number of previous biochemical and structural
studies, the exact molecular mechanism of how Release Factors promote hydrolysis
of peptidyl-tRNA at the peptidyl transfer center remains elusive. Thus, the
overall goal of the proposed project is to uncover this yet undefined catalytic
mechanism of RF-mediated peptide release and answer the long-standing
fundamental questions in the field: how do release factors promote hydrolysis of
the peptidyl-tRNA in the ribosome and what is the contribution of the
universally conserved GGQ tripeptide motif to this process? As part of this
work, multiple crystal structures of pre-termination 70S-RF complexes will be
determined. These structures require the preparation of 70S-RF complexes trapped
in the pre-termination state with the use non-hydrolyzable amide-linked
peptidyl-tRNAs that will be engineered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.