* 1907250
* Manufacturing USA: Precision Alignment of Roll-to-Roll Printing of Flexible Paper Electronics Through Modeling and Virtual Sensor-based Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Xiaoning Jin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 544,170.00

Demand is increasing for advanced manufacturing technologies that can print
electronics accurately and at high speed. Roll-to-Roll printing techniques that
can continuously transfer a printed electronic pattern onto a flexible substrate
are very promising for high-volume production of flexible electronic devices.
However, there is a significant challenge to overcome, which is that multilayer
printed electronics have very tight alignment tolerance requirements, and there
are no reliable tools available to monitor and control the overlay registration
accuracy in real-time. To overcome this challenge, this award develops precision
alignment of roll-to-roll printing using modeling and virtual sensor-based
control. Another challenge is the overwhelming use of plastic as the substrate,
which are manufactured from petroleum-based materials and therefore are not
biodegradable, making them environmentally hazardous to produce and dispose. To
address these challenges, this award pursues paper substrates as recyclable and
environmentally friendly alternatives to plastic for flexible electronics. This
interdisciplinary project transcends the boundaries of several important fields,
including advanced materials engineering, cyber-manufacturing and data
analytics. The knowledge attained from this project helps catalyze new
technologies in nano and micro additive printing that feed into the innovation
pipelines of the Manufacturing USA Institutes. The outcomes of this research
benefit next-generation ecologically-friendly flexible electronics, such as,
greener disposable sensors for patient care or lower-cost embedded home
electronics. Educational activities promote interdisciplinary capstone projects
and increase students? hands-on learning experience in manufacturing research.
This supports the nationwide effort in educating the next generation
manufacturing engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
advance the fundamental understanding of roll-to-roll (R2R) printing of
functional paper electronics. The study involves understanding the mechanism for
spatial variation generation and its propagation and accumulation. The knowledge
on spatial error propagation is used to develop virtual sensing to achieve
unprecedented control in the creation, integration and manipulation of
multilayer microstructures that form the foundation of printed paper
electronics. Furthermore, this project studies materials-process-control-device
performance relationships in a closed loop approach. This research expedites
intelligent R2R systems with high traceability, predictability and
controllability for high-resolution additive printing of flexible paper
electronics, enabling a host of technologies spanning sensing, biomedical
devices, and renewable energy. The development of R2R printing of electronics on
paper ushers in a new era of environmentally-friendly, flexible paper devices
such as water quality sensors at throwaway prices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.