* 1907221
* Nonlinear and Nonlocal Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Olga Turanova, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 84,891.00

The project concerns nonlinear and nonlocal partial differential equations
(PDEs) and their applications. Nonlocal equations are used to describe a wide
variety of physical and biological phenomena. Nonlocality means that a small
perturbation in one location can affect the entire system. The project will
enhance the tool-box available to mathematicians and widen the class of models
that can be studied rigorously. There are three interconnected topics. The first
is tumor growth models. The aim is to establish connections between models that
describe the tumor at a cellular level and those that characterize the tumor as
a region with a law governing the movement of its boundary. The second topic is
evolutionary ecology. Rigorous analysis of the relevant PDEs will be used to
study the dynamics of populations in which individuals can migrate as well as
undergo mutation between generations. The third topic concerns numerical methods
for certain PDEs. The mathematical ideas involved will also be used to develop
algorithms for getting many autonomous robots to perform a cooperative task
(examples include robotic pollinating bees or automated surveillance). The three
topics making up the project have the potential to impact several areas of
broader interest to society - namely, medicine, ecology, and technological
development. The project will promote scientific progress by increasing our
understanding of mathematics and by strengthening the connections between it and
other disciplines. In addition, the principal investigator will teach and mentor
students, as well as conduct outreach to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will shed light on multiple classes
of PDEs. Degenerate diffusion equations and free boundary problems underlie the
work on tumor growth models. The aim is to study these equations and establish
rigorous connections between them. The goal of the work on evolutionary ecology
is to understand propagation phenomena in nonlocal reaction-diffusion equations.
An important tool is the link between these PDEs and Hamilton-Jacobi equations.
The third topic concerns novel numerical methods for second order PDEs and
involves understanding the structure of the PDEs and their regularizations. The
aim is to prove convergence of the numerical methods, as well as to use these
tools to develop algorithms in robotic control. An important theme connecting
the three topics is nonlocality. Nonlocal PDEs often lack a comparison
principle, which is a key tool in the study of classical PDEs. Moreover, some
equations to be studied are conjectured to be unstable with respect to initial
condition. Being able to overcome this, and even studying the causes and effects
of instability, will be a significant development, and may lead to progress on
other problems. In addition, this work will involve understanding and developing
new notions of weak solution. In many real-world systems, it is natural to
expect degeneracy or non-differentiability to form; so, for PDEs to be useful in
these contexts, a novel sufficiently robust notion of solution is
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.