* 1907207
* Stratospheric Gravity Wave Study During the 2019 South American Solar Eclipse
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Jennifer Fowler, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 05/31/2021
* USD 24,872.00

Solar eclipses are rare and fascinating natural events that offer opportunities
to advance knowledge in numerous areas of physical sciences. In the atmosphere,
eclipses generate disturbances in the neutral density (gravity waves) that can
propagate long distances in both horizontal and vertical directions and carry
significant amounts of energy. Gravity waves can also interact with and modify
general atmospheric circulation (i.e. winds). While gravity waves generated
during solar eclipses in the upper atmosphere are well documented, their
counterparts at the tropospheric and stratospheric heights remain virtually
unexplored. Recent observations during the Great American Eclipse of 2017 have
produced new experimental information about stratospheric gravity waves (SGWs)
generated by a solar eclipse. The 2019 eclipse in South America offers a unique
opportunity to build on this work and obtain detailed physical characterization
of eclipse-generated SGWs and explore their generation mechanisms. Balloon-borne
radiosondes in coordination with the Andes Lidar Observatory in Cerro Pachon,
Chile will be used to measure disturbance levels in the neutral atmosphere prior
to, during, and after the eclipse. Undergraduate students will be involved in
this project for 10 weeks during summer of 2019 including five weeks of training
before the event, the week-long campaign in South America, and four weeks
focusing on analysis of data collected during the event. The proposal would
support a graduate student at the University of Montana to lead the data
analysis effort and operate radiosonde systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of the 2019 campaign is to focus exclusively on stratospheric gravity
wave measurements during an eclipse. Detection probability is enhanced with
increased temporal resolution prior to the eclipse. The 2019 campaign is
designed to have two balloons at various altitudes starting 24 hours before the
eclipse, with at least one of the two balloons in the 25 - 35 km range every
hour the night prior to the total darkness (totality). The timing of launches
during the late afternoon of July 2nd will be based on phases of the eclipse.
Unlike the Wyoming 2017 eclipse radiosonde campaign that focused on a specific
atmospheric layer, the structure of the 2019 campaign along with collaborator
data is expected to produce definitive evidence of and important physical
information on eclipse-generated gravity waves. These data will fill the
observational gap pertaining to gravity waves that are a known mechanism of
momentum and energy transfer to atmospheric mean flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.