* 1907423
* Quantum plasmonics with extreme nonlinearities for on-chip supercontinuum generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Zhaowei Liu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Nonlinear optics has been a rapidly growing scientific field in recent decades
and holds promise for critical applications in optical information processing,
telecommunications, and etc. Because the nonlinear coefficients for most
materials are typically low, exploring new materials with higher nonlinear
responses has always been one of the greatest challenges in this field. As a
distinct research field, plasmonics has emerged as a novel approach to
manipulate light at nanoscales. Recent advances in nanofabrication enable
plasmonic structures at nanometer scales, leading to exceptionally high
nonlinear responses due to the quantum size effect. This project aims to combine
the field of quantum plasmonics with nonlinear optics to discover new optical
materials with extremely high nonlinear responses and to apply such new
materials for on-chip supercontinuum generation with an ultra-small footprint.
This project involves fundamental science exploration, nano-material design and
fabrications, on-chip supercontinuum generation device design and fabrication,
and optical characterizations. This research will address fundamental issues at
the cross-section of nanoplasmonics and nonlinear optics, and train graduate and
undergraduate students in important areas of nanomaterials design and growth,
optical characterization, device fabrication, nano-science, and nanotechnology.
The transformative goal is to provide the scientific underpinnings of next
generation integrated optical components based on engineered nanomaterials with
extremely high nonlinearities. Research-based curriculum development, web-based
dissemination of research results, journal publications and conference/workshop
presentations, will impact more students including those at the pre-college
level. &lt;br/&gt;Technical description. This project addresses a new way to
create strong nonlinear responses in a quantum engineered system and how to use
it to build an ultra-compact supercontinuum generation device. The nonlinear
optical properties of metal quantum wells will be systematically investigated. A
dynamic quantum electrostatic model will be developed to accurately describe and
predict the nonlinear responses of the metal quantum well systems. The state-of-
the-art quantum plasmonic films will be fabricated at feature size down to 1-3
nm. Based on our theoretical estimation and preliminary experimental results,
the quantum plasmonic systems will lead to the record high third order nonlinear
susceptibility. The proposed quantum plasmonic waveguide-based supercontinuum
generation devices, if successfully demonstrated, would be the first
supercontinuum light source with micrometer footprint, enabling new
opportunities for high-density integration and on-chip applications. Other than
proposing specific individual concept and device, the PI envisions this project
as a paradigm shift in the way a nonlinear material is constructed and
implemented. Due to the large transition matrix elements and the high electron
density in ultrathin metal films, quantum plasmonic structures can be tailored
to possess extremely high nonlinear responses at desired operation frequencies.
The outcome of this research will fill up knowledge void in both fields of
plasmonics and nonlinear optics and pave the way to a new generation of strong
nonlinear materials that may find important applications in integrated nonlinear
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.