* 1907235
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Assessing linkages among roosting ecology, biomechanics, morphological change, and adaptive radiation in bats
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* David Boerma, Boerma, David
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The fellow's research explores how animal anatomy (form),
movement (function), and environment (ecology) change together over the course
of evolution. Although each of these pieces is important individually, learning
how they change in connection with one another sheds light on what sparks the
rapid appearance of new species, periods called adaptive radiations. The
fellow's research uses bats as a model system to explore how these changes are
connected. Bats comprise 20% of all living mammals and live on every continent
except Antarctica. Part of what allows bats to colonize such varied places is
that they evolved diverse roosting habits. The fellow hypothesizes that bats'
ability to develop new roosting habits (ecology) is linked to changes in the
wing skeleton (form) and landing maneuvers (function), and that these factors
worked together to drive the evolution of the many bat species observed today.
This work integrates form, function, and ecology, and sets the stage for future
work that reveals how the many facets of animal biology work together to drive
diversification across the 'tree of life'. Alongside this scientific research,
the fellow will adapt museum exhibits and research into science learning
supplements for incarcerated students who are working toward their high school
equivalency degree, and will serve as a mentor for undergraduate research
experiences at the American Museum of Natural History
(AMNH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow's research addresses three aims to
assess links among roosting ecology, wing morphology, and landing mechanics.
First, the fellow will use micro computed tomography (micro-CT) scans to compare
patterns of wing inertia, which generates the forces that reorient bats' bodies
during landing, across species. The second aim assesses interspecific
differences in hindlimb skeletal geometry associated with the loading regimes
imposed by landing impact forces. Finally, these data will be examined alongside
landing maneuvers using phylogenetic comparative methods to determine whether
there are clade-based links among ecological opportunity (roosting habits),
landing biomechanics, morphology, and diversification rates. Through this
research, the fellow will receive training in comparative morphology and
phylogenetic methods through the use of museum collections at the AMNH. The
fellow will work to broaden participation in science by developing STEM learning
supplements for incarcerated students, mentoring undergraduate researchers, and
by making research products publicly available&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.