* 1907321
* Support of the Doctoral Symposium at the IEEE International Conference on Autonomic Computing (ICAC)
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Salim Hariri, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

Research in cloud and autonomic computing spans a variety of areas, from
distributed systems, computer architecture, middleware services, databases and
data-stores, networks, machine learning, and control theory. The purpose of the
Fifth International Conference on Autonomic Computing (ICAC) is to bring
together researchers and practitioners across these disciplines to address the
multiple facets of cloud and autonomic computing. ICAC is holding a doctoral
symposium during the conference. The doctoral symposium is meant to engage
students attending the symposium with interactions that provide them with
research and career mentoring opportunities. The overall impact that such a
meeting can have on Ph.D. students, both early and late in their studies, can be
significant. The research presentations at the Doctoral Symposium will be made
publicly. This project, thus, serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's
mission: to promote the progress of science; to advance the national health,
prosperity, and welfare; or to secure the national
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable students to increase their interactions
with other researchers, experts from both industry and academia will be invited
to participate in the symposium program and/or deliver keynote talks at the ICAC
doctoral symposium. The primary objectives of the doctoral symposium are to (1)
provide a venue for graduate students to present their research and obtain
feedback from experts in the area; (2) allow Ph.D. students to present their
work at the main conference?s poster session; and (3) mentor the PhD students by
providing career advice from representatives in industry as well as academia.
Furthermore, the ICCAC doctoral symposium will have a special session devoted to
career mentoring for Ph.D. students in attendance. The ICAC organization
committee understands the diversity in the background of the Ph.D. students that
attend the conference - while some will go into industry there will be those who
go into academia. Therefore, the career mentoring session will allow students to
listen and interact with experts in both areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.