* 1907620
* Collaborative Research: Experiment, Theory, and Simulation of Aeroelastic Limit Cycle Oscillations for Energy Harvesting Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Earl Dowell, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 232,995.00

Given the emphasis on carbon-free energy, power system minimization, and
decentralized power generation, the development of vibration-based energy
harvesting technologies has become a topic of great interest over the past 20
years. A typical aeroelastic energy harvesting scheme involves immersing a thin,
elastic structure in a fluid (water or air) flow. Under certain conditions, the
presence of the flow brings about a structural self-excited vibration, known as
flutter, resulting in periodic oscillations. It has been recently shown that,
via affixed piezo-electric materials, electrical energy can be harvested from
these structural oscillations. This sort of energy holds promise as an
alternative energy source, but also brings about mathematical modeling and
experimental implementation challenges. Slender cantilever plates in an axial
flow are particularly prone to the flutter instability, even at low flow speeds.
To effectively and efficiently harvest energy from this system, one must
understand the qualitative features of the resulting limit cycle oscillation.
This is done by formulating appropriate partial differential equation models,
analyzing their mathematical properties, simulating dynamics through scientific
computation, and comparing these results against experimental data. This project
will provide opportunities and support for the training of undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;From a technical point of view, the
analysis described above requires understanding large cantilever deflections
driven by a flow. The models studied must capture the de-stabilizing effects of
the flow as coupled to nonlinear cantilever dynamics. Unlike traditional large
deflection elasticity (based on the structure's ability to stretch), a
cantilever's inextensibility gives rise to the primary nonlinear effects of
interest: nonlocal inertia and nonlinear stiffness. This project derives and
analyzes PDE models for the post-flutter behavior of cantilevered structures in
an axial flow of fluid. Specifically, it: (i) improves cantilever modeling and
makes predictions that will lead to better energy harvesting devices; (ii)
develops a rigorous theory of PDE solutions for a novel elasticity model; (iii)
addresses a gap in the mathematical literature concerning unstable nonlinear
cantilevers; (iv) refines spectral and finite element computational methods for
nonlinear cantilevers; (v) creates a synergy of modeling, theory, computation,
and wind-tunnel experimentation; (vi) provides a clearly formulated, challenging
mathematical problem with a direct and realizable connection to engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.