* 1907144
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Trophic response of marine top predators to decadal changes in food web structure
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Matthew Ramirez, Ramirez, Matthew David
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 172,500.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The World Ocean has experienced unprecedented changes over the
past century as a result of climate change and the rapid expansion of fisheries.
Uncovering the relationships between these coupled environmental stressors and
their impact on the feeding behavior of marine top predators (e.g., marine
mammals, sea turtles) is critical to our understanding of the functioning,
health, resilience, and adaptation of marine ecosystems to environmental
disturbance. This project will apply cutting-edge molecular chemistry techniques
to archived marine mammal and sea turtle tissues from multiple research
collections to examine how foraging strategies and food web structure have
changed since the late 19th century in response to changes in climate and
fishing. Such information can be used to predict how marine predators and the
food webs they control will respond to future ecosystem change in the upcoming
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use amino acid isotope
geochemistry to reconstruct changes in critical parameters of food web
architecture (e.g., trophic position, niche breadth, food web baseline)
supporting common bottlenose dolphins, harbour porpoises, and loggerhead sea
turtles in the western North Atlantic since the late 1800's. Specifically, these
data will be used to test three key hypotheses: 1) do decadal shifts in ocean
productivity associated with major climatic shifts cause expansion/contraction
of marine top predator trophic niches, 2) do declining prey and predator
abundances cause marine top predators to compensate by foraging at lower trophic
levels or expanding their trophic niches, 3) does increased interspecific
competition from the recovery of sympatric species cause trophic niches to
contract. This multi-species approach will resolve conflicting accounts of
trophic response to environmental change. As part of this project, the fellow
will partner with the University of Rhode Island's Inner Space Center (URI-ISC)
to develop short educational videos and interactive programming related to ocean
science and project activities. Using the URI-ISC's unique telepresence
capacity, outreach products and programs will be used to engage the public and
next generation of scientists across multiple platforms (e.g., social media,
K-12 classrooms). This project will also support diversity in research
engagement and training by making use of URI-sponsored programs that broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.