* 1907076
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The impact of transmission mode on symbiont evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Kim Hoang, Hoang, Kim
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Host-microbe
associations are common in nature and the goal of the project is to understand
how microbes evolve to benefit their hosts. For a beneficial microbe (called a
symbiont) to persist in the host population for many generations, it has to be
passed on from parent to offspring (called vertical transmission), or taken up
from the environment between unrelated hosts (called horizontal transmission).
Theory suggests that transmission mode has a critical role in how symbionts will
evolve. However, there has been little research to test this idea. This project
will determine how transmission mode affects symbiont evolution using an
experimental system. Because microbes have considerable influence on their
hosts, understanding how symbionts evolve will also provide insight into the
evolution of hosts themselves. Components of this research will be implemented
at the middle school and undergraduate levels to promote interest in biology in
underrepresented groups. At the middle school level, the fellow will teach
microbe-based modules to refugee girls to increase awareness of microbes
(beneficial and harmful). At the undergraduate level, the fellow will recruit
students from minority-serving programs to participate in a course-based
undergraduate research experience (CURE), where students will conduct their own
research based on the fellow's project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bacterium
Pseudomonas mendocina protects the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans from the
pathogenic bacterium, P. aeruginosa. The fellow will passage P. mendocina
between hosts in the presence or absence of P. aeruginosa while simulating
vertical and horizontal transmission. After 15 passages, the fellow will measure
P. mendocina growth rates and host survival, and assess genomic and
transcriptomic changes in the bacterium. Additionally, the fellow will conduct a
meta-analysis of the current literature to determine whether experimental
findings align with systems in nature. The fellow will receive training in
microbial characterization techniques, sequence analysis, and meta-analysis. The
fellow will also gain teaching and communication skills through establishing a
CURE and implementing science modules at a local middle
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.