* 1907365
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Beyond the Bulk Flow:  Developing More Powerful Analysis Methods to Test Consistency of Large-scale Flows with the Standard Cosmological Model
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Richard Watkins, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 184,602.00

It has long been observed that light from distant galaxies is received on earth
at a different wavelength than that at which it was emitted. This shift in
wavelength, often called redshift, is due to two distinct effects, the Doppler
shift that arises from the motion of galaxies relative to the Milky Way and the
stretching of light that is caused by its traveling through expanding space.
These effects can be separated only if independent measurements of galaxy
distances can be obtained. However, as the number and accuracy of distance
measurements have improved, it appears that the shift due to expansion is
significantly larger than expectations based on much larger scale observations.
Furthermore, studies of the motions of galaxies have revealed large-scale flows
that are also larger than expected. The goal of this project is to develop new
ways of analyzing available redshift and distance measurements in order to
better understand the sources of the conflict between the data and the model. In
particular, the investigators seek to determine if the disagreements are due to
undiscovered problems with the measurements or if they are indeed pointing the
way toward a previously unknown aspect of our Universe. The data analysis
techniques developed here will have broad application and may help advance other
fields, particularly those that rely on noisy data. This project will strengthen
the US science workforce by providing intensive research experiences and
training to undergraduate students in data analysis and statistics, areas of
high demand and of strategic importance to the nation. In addition, a
programming course related to the proposed research will be developed and taught
to secondary school students at Willamette Academy, a college access program for
underrepresented students associated with Willamette
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the number and accuracy of galaxy
distance measurements have improved, they have become increasingly important as
a cosmological probe of the local Universe. However, it has become apparent that
this data is in conflict with observations of the microwave background radiation
and the Standard Cosmological Model. The goal for this proposal is to develop
and apply new statistical methods to analyze collections of redshift and
distance measurements, also known as peculiar velocity catalogs, with the
following goals: (1) to put stronger constraints on cosmological parameters; (2)
to better understand the dynamics of the large-scale structure and the expansion
rate of the Universe; and (3) to test for systematics in this important type of
cosmological data. The proposed research will clarify whether redshift and
distance measurements are actually in conflict with the Standard Model, and if
so, the severity and source of the disagreement. Searching for the causes of the
discrepancies in both the expansion rate determination and the observed motion
of the local volume is important for gaining a more complete understanding of
the Universe. A resolution of these conflicts may lead to new physics or to a
better understanding of some yet-to-be-determined systematics in this important
cosmological probe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.