* 1907791
* The Scaling Relations of Galaxies in the Infrared
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Mark Hemeon-Heyer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2022
* USD 265,692.00

Observations with the new Atacama Large Millimeter-submillimeter Array (ALMA)
facility, and with the next generation James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), will
soon enable measurement of the star formation rate and the total available mass
of gas contained in galaxies at high redshifts, providing critical information
for studies of the growth of galaxies across cosmic time. These two measurements
are made using different regions of the galaxy's spectrum. This work will
determine how the numbers are related, and whether there are meaningful causal
connections. This is essential to understanding how reliably these sorts of
studies can actually derive physical parameters for the observed galaxies. The
project has an integrated educational component: (1) summer research
opportunities for undergraduate students from the surrounding area, exposing
them to cutting-edge research; and (2) research experiences for teachers from
local middle and elementary schools, helping to align them with the new "content
driven" testing standards set by the State of Massachusetts, and with the
requirements of the national Next Generation Science
Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synergy between ALMA and JWST will return
the star formation rate (SFR) and gas mass (M_gas) of galaxies across the full
range of luminosity and physical parameters at high redshifts, thus shedding
light on the efficiency of star formation and the growth of galaxies as a
function of cosmic time. Commonly, the SFR is derived from the "blue" side of
the infrared spectral energy distribution (IR SED) of the dust, while M_gas is
derived from the "red" side of the IR SED. However, the dichotomy between "blue"
and "red" sides is artificial, and IR colors and monochromatic luminosities show
correlations with each other. If there are underlying covariances, then they may
be either helpful or detrimental to the use of the IR SED for deriving physical
parameters. This project will determine such covariances, including their
strengths, and establish whether they are physical (causal correlations) or
trivial (such as some common cause) in nature. Bayesian inference methods
applied to the ALMA and other archives will uncover and investigate covariances,
to (1) investigate the correlation between mid-IR and far-IR/mm colors in a
sample of nearby galaxies; (2) establish how well, and under what assumptions,
physical models of dust emission account for the observed color-color
correlation; and (3) establish whether the IR SED color-color correlation
implies covariance between luminosities. The results will provide prescriptions
for application to high redshift galaxies, specifically, recipes for deriving
unbiased SFRs and M_gas from the IR SED and for extrapolating missing IR SED
data in distant galaxies where issues of completeness, depth, and confusion
become important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.