* 1907777
* CDS&amp;E: A Bayesian Approach to Detecting the Cosmological 21 cm Epoch of Reionization Signal
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Peter Sims, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2023
* USD 376,594.00

Observations of the cosmic dawn, when the first stars and galaxies formed, are
exceedingly challenging, but essential to map the distribution and evolution of
structures during this critical period. This project will develop a new
technique for studying the properties of these first luminous objects.
Extracting information from the data requires precision control of systematic
errors and detailed accounting of uncertainties. Cosmic dawn and the associated
Epoch of Reionization (EoR), when intergalactic hydrogen was re-ionized by
energetic photons from the first luminous sources, are critical turning points
in the universe's history. Compared to existing analyses, this work will more
clearly distinguish real signals from systematic errors, and should provide an
order of magnitude improvement in sensitivity and correspondingly improved
constraints on the astrophysics occurring at that
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the development of
interactive, publicly available, online pedagogical resources for training new
students in 21 cm cosmology. The resources will consist of five to six short
video lectures covering key introductory topics in radio interferometry and 21
cm cosmology. Each video will be accompanied by an interactive exercise using
online software developed by the PI. This award will also support the
continuation of the Research Experiences for Non-Traditional Undergraduates
(RENTU) program at Brown University, which provides in-depth research
experiences to non-traditional students, including first-generation college
students, veterans, and other resumed-education undergraduates, working closely
with them on a case-by-case basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned methods rely
on observations of the faint 21 cm line of neutral hydrogen at cosmic distances.
This work will incorporate critical new capabilities in a Bayesian analysis
pipeline with the level of rigor needed to maximize the scientific returns. The
analysis will be applied to data from the Hydrogen Epoch of Reionization Array
(HERA) and the Murchison Widefield Array (MWA) to produce stringent new limits
on the 21 cm signal and yield new constraints on the physics of the cosmic dawn.
This is particularly important for understanding the transition from the simple,
homogenous early universe revealed by the cosmic microwave background, to the
current universe, filled with galaxies, stars, and
planets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.