* 1907776
* Analysis of Incompressible Flows with Rigid and Free Boundaries
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Huy Nguyen, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 02/28/2022
* USD 173,696.00

Interactions of fluids with boundaries are ubiquitous in nature, science and
engineering, and are of great importance in practical applications ranging from
biology to aerospace, oceanography and geoscience. The boundaries can be rigid
as between an aircraft and the surrounding air or between water and the seabed
or can be free as between water and the air or between water and oil in an oil
reservoir. Despite being widely used in applications, many fundamental issues in
the rigorous mathematical analysis of these interactions remain challenging. The
presence of boundaries, especially free boundaries, makes the underlying partial
differential equations modeling the phenomena highly nonlinear and nonlocal.
This project will further the mathematical understanding of equations in which
fluids interact with either rigid boundaries, free boundaries, or both. The
problems studied in this project are motivated by physics (drop formation and
fluid jets), economics (optimal transport), and engineering (reservoir
engineering). The analytical understanding gained in this work will increase our
understanding of the basic physical phenomena and mathematical models used in
practice. This research will involve graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will study several mathematical
problems of current interest involving the interaction of fluids with rigid or
free boundaries: 1. Well-posedness and global regularity of the Muskat problem
with boundaries of low regularity and large variation. 2. Long-time behavior of
an active vectorial transport equation arising in optimal transport and
convective fluids. 3. Instabilities of small amplitude periodic traveling
gravity waves in shallow water. 4. Finite-time and infinite-time pinch-off
singularities for two models of drop formation. The project will combine tools
from microlocal analysis, harmonic analysis, bifurcation theory, and spectral
theory. Some of the tools and models developed will have applications to other
problems in the theory and computational aspects of partial differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.