* 1907342
* CDS&amp;E:  Development of fast, multi-dimensional Gaussian Processes for Exoplanet discovery and beyond
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Eric Agol, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2023
* USD 471,048.00

All astronomical observations are subject to unwanted "noise:" signals that can
mask the output from the object to be studied. Noise can come from the telescope
and detector, from the atmosphere, from other objects in the sky, or from
intrinsic variations in the object to be studied. The PI will use the technique
known as Gaussian Processing to model and reduce the interference of
astronomical noise to facilitate the study of planets around other stars. These
planets are studied by their "eclipses," or transits, in front of the star. Many
stars, however, vary in their light output, and this can cause a
misinterpretation of the transit data. The method to be developed will help
reduce the noise due to the variability of the star. A graduate student will be
trained, and undergraduate students will be involved in the research. The
computational techniques developed will be applicable to fields beyond
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposer will develop a method for finding
small transiting exoplanets and/or exomoons in the presence of stellar
variability. Stellar brightness variations are correlated across time and
wavelength, and the fast computational method he proposes to develop will be
employed to use these correlations to distinguish between transits and random
dips in stellar brightness. This technique will be extended to account for
outliers and can be applied to other types of exoplanet and astronomical data,
as well as data in other fields. The code written under this proposal will be
made available to the community through open-access
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.