* 1907134
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Connecting Genomic and hormonal mechanisms to ecologically relevant behaviors
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Sara Lipshutz, Lipshutz                Sara           E
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This research
investigates how males and females display outwardly similar behaviors when the
underlying mechanisms for these behaviors are predicted to be different. The
project examines the hormonal and genomic basis of territorial aggression a
behavior that is widespread across the animal kingdom and critical for
reproductive success. Studies of male animals reveal that hormones like
testosterone, as well as genes expressed in the brain, regulate aggression.
However, aggression is also important for females of many species, especially in
birds that compete for limited nesting space. An open question is whether male
and female aggression are controlled by similar or different mechanisms. This
research will survey multiple bird families to examine differences in aggression
between males and females, as well as hormones, gene expression, and genome
evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The independent origin of similar phenotypes
across distantly-related groups is compelling evidence for natural selection,
but the proximate bases of behavioral convergence are poorly understood. This
research evaluates the mechanistic convergence underlying a repeatedly evolved
behavior: cavity-nesting. Both male and female cavity-nesters compete for nest
sites, providing an opportunity to assess the nature and degree of mechanistic
parallelism between males and females. This work will broadly sample genomes
across a phylogeny to quantify positive selection associated with the evolution
of cavity nesting. A comparison of hormonal and neural gene expression for
multiple species pairs with and without cavity nesting will assess whether
convergent selection on the cavity-nesting phenotype predicts male/female
differences in aggression across families. This work tests an emergent
hypothesis that gene sequence variation, neural gene expression, and hormone
levels act independently to bring about convergent behavioral phenotypes. The
project's broader impacts are designed to engage and retain students from
underrepresented groups as they transition from high school to college. The
fellow will pair with high school teachers near Indiana University to design
learning modules on the reproductive stages of cavity-nesting, and engage
students in hands-on research with interactive 'eBirdhouses' to collect
environmental and behavioral data from wild birds. This project provides
training for students in critical thinking, data analysis, and public speaking
skills essential to success in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.