* 1907220
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Transcriptional Regulation and Evolution of the Maize Tapetum
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Daniel Marchant, Marchant                Daniel         B
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2023
* USD 285,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2019. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Daniel Blaine Marchant is "Transcriptional Regulation
and Evolution of the Maize Tapetum". The host institution for the fellowship is
Stanford University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Virginia
Walbot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding anther development is fundamental to
plant biology from both applied and basic science perspectives. As the source of
pollen and male gametes, anthers are a key variable in controlled crop breeding
and hybrid seed production. As of yet, the cues and pathways that permit the
alternation from a non-reproductive somatic cell to a reproductive germinal cell
in plants are poorly understood. The overarching goal of the research is to use
maize anthers and state-of-the-art technologies and genetic resources to address
questions and provide new insights into the cellular and genetic regulation of
anther development and flowering plant reproduction through evolution. Maize is
the ideal primary system for this study because each maize plant has separate
male and female organ systems, hundreds of developmentally synchronous anthers
per plant, and there exists a large collection of male-sterile and female-
fertile mutants. Broader impacts include expanding the organismal and
evolutionary knowledge base of plant scientists by training and mentoring of
students and by building a "Plant Model Systems Living Collection" in which
specimens of the most widely used plant genomics model systems will be housed
and maintained at Stanford University. Public access will be enhanced by the
availability of learning resources such as web-based manuals providing
information on the propagation, natural history and evolution, and anatomy of
each species as well as on methods routinely used in plant research such as
tissue culture and DNA/RNA extraction. Training objectives include acquiring
expertise with new transcriptomic and genomics methods, and bioinformatics
tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The de novo differentiation and development of
somatic cells into reproductive germ cells is of the upmost importance for plant
reproduction as plants do not have established germlines unlike sexual animals.
Understanding the genetic cues of the cell layers that regulate sporogenesis in
anthers is therefore fundamental to plant biology, but also to agriculture
because controlled pollen production underlies hybrid seed production of most
crops. Next-generation sequencing and micro-scale RNA isolation have completely
altered our knowledge of how anther cell layers differentiate in preparation for
meiosis and the cues by which these processes are regulated. This study will
expand upon those studies, delving further into the genetic regulation and
hierarchies of the cell layers throughout anther sporogenesis with a focus on
the tapetum, the cell layer surrounding the germinal cells. State of the art
techniques and resources will be implemented to analyze this specific cell layer
first in maize, then in taxa across vascular plants. Specific aims include: 1)
identifying tapetum-specific and differentially expressed genes and
transcription factors across development in wildtype and tapetum-related male-
sterile genotypes; 2) developing and implementing two new protocols for
investigating the tapetum at the single cell scale to address questions
regarding cellular synchroneity within an anther, the precise developmental
stages of the tapetum, and sub-cellular localization of transcripts in a
comparative techniques framework; and, 3) providing new insights into the
evolutionary conservation of the tapetum genetic hierarchy and tapetum-specific
genes across vascular plants. The results of this research will be disseminated
at the annual International Plant and Animal Genome (PAG) and Maize Genetics
Conferences, and through publications in high profile scientific journals.
Sequence data will be made publicly available through the NCBI Sequence Read
Archive (SRA) and through Gramene and MaizeGDB. In addition, the learning
resources produced for the "Plant Model Systems Living Collection" will be
available online through the Stanford Biology Department
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: anthers, maize, tapetum, development,
meiosis, pollen, sporogenesis, evolution&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.