* 1907654
* Interactions Between Contact Geometry, Floer Theory and Low-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* David Vela-Vick, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2024
* USD 295,645.00

This project is jointly funded by the Topology program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). It centers on questions
lying at the intersection of two fields of mathematics called contact geometry
and low-dimensional topology. Contact structure are geometric objects on certain
spaces known as manifolds that arise naturally in physics through differential
equations, optics, and dynamics. Pioneering work of Eliashberg first showed that
contact structures play an essential role in determining geometric and
topological properties of three- and four-dimensional manifolds. Contact
geometry has since entered a renaissance after featuring prominently in the
resolution of several long-standing problems in low-dimensional topology. It is
in this context that this project broadly seeks to better our understanding of
how characteristics of contact structures determine either geometric properties
of the spaces they live on, or influence powerful invariants used in their
study. The project will have immediate impact in several fields, such as: low-
dimensional topology, symplectic and contact topology, dynamics, and
mathematical physics. The PI will also devote time to helping mentor graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars as they transition to being independent
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recall that contact structures fall into one
of two categories: tight or overtwisted. Understanding which three-manifolds
support tight contact structures and the number of tight contact structures
supported by a given three-manifold are the paramount goals of modern contact
geometry. Accordingly, a primary goal of this project is to develop effective
and computable invariants capable of determining tightness and distinguishing
contact structures. Since the inception of these invariants, strong evidence has
steadily built suggesting deep connections between contact structures on three-
manifolds and their associated Floer-theoretic invariants. For instance, each of
the various Floer homologies support an invariants which are capable of
detecting tightness and distinguishing contact structures. An important goal of
this project is to develop and explore refinements of these invariants which are
simultaneously more effective in detecting tightness, and are more easily
computable. In a parallel direction, according to work on the PI and others,
much of the formal algebraic structure underpinning Floer theory appears to
mirror natural geometric characteristics and constructions involving contact
structures. In turn, another key goal of this project is to clarify connections
and correspondences between the algebraic structure of Floer-theoretic
invariants and natural contact geometric phenomena and
constructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.