* 1907845
* AF: Small: Approximating Characteristic Polynomial of Matroids
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Shayan Gharan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Randomized algorithms represent an elegant and sometimes only known approach for
solving some intractably hard real-life problems. The notion of probability
distribution over a set of objects is essential to many randomized algorithms.
For example, Google?s PageRank approach to ranking search results in effect
defines a probability distribution over the set of webpages. A large class of
randomized algorithms rely on generating samples from some desired probability
distribution over possible inputs. Markov Chains have been one the most
interesting, prominent and useful structures because of their ability to
generate and draw samples from desired probability distributions. This project
is about developing and improving Markov-Chain-based algorithms for several
fundamental problems using a new mathematical technique called ?Geometry of
Polynomials?. The results from this project will have applications in a number
of areas of science and technology such as machine learning, statistical
physics, and quantum mechanics. The PI intends to implement algorithms that he
will study in this project and make them available to researchers. This proposal
includes integration of research and teaching by means of new graduate courses
to introduce new techniques in this field to students in mathematics and
engineering departments. Although grounded in theoretical computer science, the
project will also attract many graduate students in probability theory,
combinatorics, statistics, and statistical physics who are interested in the
analysis of Markov chains. Furthermore, the PI plans to train strong
undergraduate and graduate students with diverse gender and
ethnicity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over the last few decades researchers have
developed several techniques to bound the mixing time of Markov chains. In most
cases, these techniques are "local?, and they fail to bound the mixing time when
the underlying combinatorial structure is complex. So, there is a need for new
families of ``global'' techniques that can overcome barriers that have failed
over the years to yield to classical methods. The main purpose of this project
is to investigate the hidden power of a new "global" machinery based on high-
dimensional expanders and the field of geometry of polynomials. High-dimensional
expanders originated in mathematics and are a natural generalization of expander
graphs. They have proved to be useful in complexity theory, and coding theory.
Recently, high dimensional expanders were exploited by the PI and collaborators
as a new tool in the analysis of Markov chains for sampling bases of matroids.
In this project the researcher and his team plan to further investigate this new
tool and see if it can be used at other frontiers of the field of approximate
counting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.