* 1907555
* Advancing Stochastic Analysis of Field-Scale Transport Parameters using Hydrogeophysics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Christopher Lowry, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,515.00

Groundwater constitutes a significant component of fresh water supplies in the
United States. With changing climate, the dependence on groundwater is only
expected to grow, especially in areas with limited surface water supplies.
Because of their susceptibility to contamination, assertive management and
cleanup efforts of groundwater systems require proper understanding of how
contaminants move in these systems. Field-scale prediction of contaminants
transport in complex groundwater systems is a long-standing research challenge.
This project combines numerical modeling of contaminant transport with
geophysical methods to advance understanding and enhance the ability to monitor
and predict field-scale contaminant transport in highly complex groundwater
systems. The project also contributes to the development of a diverse scientific
workforce and benefits society by supporting an early career faculty member and
postdoctoral researcher, providing research opportunities to undergraduate
students, engaging students from underrepresented groups in STEM, and exposing
middle-school students to geoscience education and
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proper management of groundwater systems and
mitigation of health risks posed by contaminated aquifers requires an
understanding of field-scale solute migration, particularly small-scale
transport processes in highly heterogeneous aquifers. The clasic advection-
dispersion model, commonly used to predict solute migration, often fails to
reproduce field measurements due to the lack of knowledge and uncertainty of
solute transport parameters (STPs). Traditional well-based sampling methods
employed to gain insights into field-scale transport parameters provide
spatially limited information. Their invasive nature may also disturb the
natural small-scale transport behavior that needs to be understood.
Hydrogeophysics provides opportunities to rapidly characterize spatially
continuous, field-scale solute plume migration for quantitative evaluation of
transport parameters using minimally-invasive methods. Hydrogeophysical
estimation requires prior information about the spatial distribution of the
target solute plume for computational stability. The conventional prior
constraints applied in hydrogeophysics, however, lack information about the
physics of the target transport process (e.g., advection-dispersion) that is
driving the evolution of the contaminant plume, resulting in inaccurate
estimation of the transport parameters. Given the complex heterogeneity and
uncertainty in hydrogeological systems, stochastic methods are well suited for
solute transport prediction in these systems. Standard stochastic sampling
methods can, however, become computationally intractable in spatially-
distributed, high-dimensional hydrological problems. The goal of this project is
to develop and test novel stochastic estimation strategies that: 1) incorporates
prior physics-based constraints of the solute transport process (i.e., accounts
for multiple scales of plume dispersion and complexity) to improve velocity,
plume-dispersion, and mass estimations; and 2) performs stochastic estimation in
the reduced-hydrologic-process parameter space to improve computational
efficiency and enable field-scale characterization of small-scale transport
processes in highly heterogeneous aquifers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.