* 1907941
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Representing and Learning Visualization Design Knowledge
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jessica Hullman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

This project contributes new methods and software tools for creating data-driven
visualizations that improve the clarity and effectiveness of visual analysis and
communication of data. Many visualization design guidelines, like "avoid highly
saturated colors", or "start bars in a bar chart at 0", stem from empirical
studies of how well people can read visualizations of various types. However,
these guidelines are often stated informally in books or articles. In designing
a visualization, an author may have to make decisions that prioritize one design
guideline over another, yet the informal nature of such principles does not
provide sufficient guidance for how to do this. Even when visualization
researchers and system designers represent design guidelines in more formal
"knowledge bases" that an authoring system can use to guide visualization
authors towards more effective graphs, the guidelines are based on a person
carefully summarizing the empirical results, an error-prone process. This
project addresses these challenges to formulating and applying visualization
design knowledge by creating new methods to identify, aggregate, edit, test, and
search visualization design knowledge. This research will also address gaps in
existing visualization design knowledge, applying novel methods to formulate and
assess design guidelines for creating effective "multiple-view" visualizations
(such as analysis dashboards or sequential presentations), visualizing very
large datasets, and visually expressing uncertainty or error in data. We will
create knowledge bases containing guidelines for these types of visualizations
as well as an authoring tool to help authors manage competing design
considerations between single and multiple views when designing visualizations
like dashboards. All experimental results, knowledge bases, and authoring tools
developed in this research will be made freely and publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these goals, this project develops a set
of methods for identifying and evaluating visualization design guidelines from
empirical research on visualization perception and interpretation. To do this,
the team will develop ways to re-express existing results from relevant
experimental literature on graphical perception and cognition as constraints,
and create new methods and tools for directly eliciting design guidelines from
visualization experts such as skilled designers or researchers. The project will
also produce automated methods for generating visualizations and collecting
task-specific visualization judgments in order to learn appropriate priority
weights for a given set of design constraints. By developing representations and
models for capturing empirical results that can account for the uncertainty that
is inherent in results from human subjects experiments, the project stands to
synthesize and clarify existing empirical knowledge about visualization design.
The research will also advance the state of the art in visualization design
knowledge by contributing fundamental methods for (1) identifying and learning
guidelines for large dataset visualizations, multiple view visualizations like
dashboards, and uncertainty visualizations, and (2) exploring effective
interface designs for browsing, editing, and testing visualization knowledge
bases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.