* 1907197
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The role of RNA editing in  thermal acclimation of the octopus nervous system.
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Matthew Birk, Birk                    Matthew        A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The objective
of this study is to better understand how neurons (the cells that perform the
communication in our nervous system) acclimate to changes in environmental
temperature. Proper nervous system function is dependent on many temperature-
sensitive processes. Currently, it is not well understood how the nervous system
of cold-blooded animals acclimates to temperature changes. Most studies on this
topic have examined either how proteins or DNA changes in response to
temperature change. However, this study will investigate how RNA changes in
response to temperature, and will use the octopus as a model system to do so.
Octopuses are able to edit a large proportion of their RNAs via a process called
"RNA editing" to produce new proteins. However, it remains unclear how this is
accomplished. Few examples of altered protein function through RNA editing have
been documented in any animal, and none as a result of temperature acclimation.
The findings from this study will help determine whether RNA editing is an
important mechanism for acclimation in the octopus nervous system to rapid
temperature fluctuations. In addition to this research, the fellow will promote
greater inclusion of underrepresented groups in research at the Marine
Biological Laboratory and host methods workshops at the University of Puerto
Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will determine the magnitude and
temporal dynamics of temperature-sensitive RNA editing in the octopus. The
proposed experiments examine how quickly recoding events can change in response
to acute temperature fluctuations at both the RNA and protein levels. Additional
experiments will examine temperature-sensitive amino acid substitutions in
kinesin and synaptotagmin, two important proteins for neuronal function, and ask
whether they alter protein function to provide temperature compensation. The
fellow seeks to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in biology at
the Marine Biological Laboratory with a 3-point plan. Through a role on the MBL
Diversity Committee, the fellow will 1) broaden career development opportunities
for minorities already present at the MBL, 2) promote enrollment and funding
opportunities at minority-serving institutions for world-renown MBL courses, and
3) train minority undergraduate students in molecular biology and approaches to
whole organism physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.