* 1907278
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Temperature, Metabolism, and Mitochondrial Evolution in a Diverse Collection of Budding Yeast
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,05/31/2023
* John Wolters, Wolters                 John           F
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. All complex life relies on the function of multiple distinct
sets of DNA contained in each cell. Mitochondria, the compartment of the cell
responsible for energy production and multiple other functions, contain a
separate genome encoding critically important genes. Differences between
individuals in their mitochondrial DNA have consequences on organismal function,
but little is known about how these changes contribute to the evolution of new
traits. The fellow will leverage the power of a collection of diverse yeast
species to build the largest dataset of mitochondrial genomes available for any
single group of species and determine how variation in mitochondrial DNA
contributes to two key innovations that differ among yeasts: the ability to grow
at different temperature extremes and the ability to ferment sugars even in the
presence of oxygen. The project will significantly advance our understanding of
how mitochondrial genomes adapt and change with their environment. The fellow
will develop an evolution education outreach initiative to provide learning
resources to homeschooling communities in
Wisconsin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitochondrial DNA variation contributes to
complex phenotypes in diverse organisms but mitochondrial evolution remains
poorly understood. The fellow proposes to use genomic resources generated
through the Y1000+ Project and the USDA strain collection to test hypotheses of
mitochondrial genome evolution in over 1,000 diverse budding yeast species
spanning 400 million years of evolution. The fellow will generate the largest
collection of mitochondrial genomes currently available for any eukaryotic
subphylum by creating and annotating de novo assemblies. Mitochondrial sequences
will be used to test two hypotheses: 1) whether mitochondrial variation
contributes to the expansion of yeast species into novel thermal environments,
and 2) whether the evolution of aerobic fermentation has led to reduced
purifying selection on mitochondrial genes. Mitochondrial genome variation will
be associated with phenotypic data from laboratory testing of temperature
preferences and metabolic traits for each species. The proposed research will
provide significant training to the fellow through meetings with the Sponsor and
Y1000+ Project collaborators, peer and near-peer mentoring activities with lab
members, and writing funding applications with the Sponsor's guidance. The
fellow will develop an outreach program to local homeschooling communities in
Wisconsin that will serve as a framework for future outreach. The fellow will
survey homeschooling communities, workshop best practices for outreach together
with parents, and provide suggestions and lesson plans for incorporating
evolution into the homeschooling curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.