* 1907156
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  The evolution and function of fish surfaces and lateral lines
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Dylan Wainwright, Wainwright, Dylan Kenji
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 195,500.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The fellow will complete research to understand the evolution
and function of fish scales by studying broad patterns of fish scale evolution,
the loss and re-evolution of scales, and the structure and function of the
lateral line canal (part of the lateral line system, which fishes use to sense
water movement around them). Overall, this three-part project will help show how
scales have evolved in fishes and how they function in different ways
(protection, hydrodynamics, anti-parasite), thus illuminating the currently
limited understanding of this important feature of fishes. In addition, this
research has the potential to produce knowledge that can be useful for designing
surfaces that increase hydrodynamic and aerodynamic efficiency. The project will
foster the education of high school students and undergrads by teaching them
both research and professional skills. The fellow will work with museums to
design interactive outreach activities and perform lectures to visiting groups
at the Yale Peabody Museum with the goal of making science and scientific
careers more accessible, especially for underserved
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will occur in three parts. The first will
be a study of broad patterns of fish scale evolution using profilometry
techniques to image fish surface topography. This research will generate
understanding of the diversity of fish surfaces and it will help connect fish
surface structure to function. The second part of this research will study scale
loss in Antarctic icefishes, as well as scale loss and the re-evolution of
scales in catfishes, using both images of fish surfaces and genetic data. This
project will aid in understanding the function of scales and how the repeated
evolution of a trait can occur. The third part of this research will examine the
diversity, structure, and function of the lateral line canal of fishes using
computed-tomography scanning and physical modeling. This work will directly
address the knowledge gap regarding how form relates to function in lateral line
scales, thus providing crucial knowledge about this sensory system and
background for efforts designing biomimetic flow sensors. The fellow will be
trained in cutting-edge biological methods to expand their research abilities
and will also participate in pedagogical activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.