* 1907214
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Can community assembly theory explain assembly and reassembly in dryland ecosystems?
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Mandy Slate, Slate, Mandy
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Understanding
how natural communities are structured is a fundamental question in ecology,
with important implications for conservation. According to ecological theory,
the number of species, and abundance of each species in a community is affected
by how species' traits, such as size and growth rate, interact with the
environment. This project investigates how precipitation and biological soil
crusts (biocrusts are communities of moss, lichen, cyanobacteria and other biota
that cover soil surfaces among vascular plants in drylands) influence plant
species growing in dryland communities. The research will test ecological theory
to determine the factors that influence native and invasive species plant
establishment in dryland ecosystems. Throughout this project, the fellow will
partner with established programs, focused on increasing the representation of
underrepresented groups in science, to train, mentor, and provide independent
research experiences for students during the academic year and in summer
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the proposed work will test the
ability of using community assembly theory to explain the assembly of native
plant communities and predict exotic plant invasions by conducting parallel
field experiments in disparate drylands and quantifying relationships between
plant traits at the seed and seedling stage and recruitment success while
manipulating rainfall and biocrust filters. Understanding how rainfall patterns
and biocrusts influence plant establishment will inform directed community
reassembly for restoration purposes. Outreach activities include collaboration
with the Doris Duke Conservation Scholars program to mentor a diverse cohort of
students dedicated to conservation. The fellow will also pair with four existing
programs at CU Boulder to provide one-on-one mentoring for undergraduate
students from disadvantaged groups and develop research-based educational
material for K-12 students to enhance the early exposure of pre-college students
to environmental biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.