* 1907337
* CHS: Small: Pattern Understanding and Computational Modeling for Textiles
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Jennifer Mankoff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2022
* USD 516,000.00

Textile production is a rich domain of fabrication, influenced by generations of
creativity. However, the lack of digital design tools creates a gap between the
community's creativity and modern manufacturing techniques. The opportunity to
learn from massive online repositories of patterns shared by creators could
provide access to a novel source of creative ideation. This project will develop
new techniques to understand and encode hand-produced patterns in all their
complexity, and support modifying them in ways that are machine- or hand-
producible. This in turn could help to support customization and personalization
of patterns to meet the needs of specific contexts from soft robotics to
accessibility to patterns that fit all body shapes. The database of digitized
designs developed during this work will serve as a resource for future work
empirically analyzing the space of designs that online communities have
developed, and support applying deep learning techniques in new design tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will establish the domain-specific languages
and tools necessary to represent, learn from, manipulate, verify, and
automatically fabricate hand-produced textile patterns and support the eventual
goal of digitizing directly from this rich set of online data. The first task is
to define a high-level domain specific language as well as a lower-level graph-
based model that represents the connections between stitches and components of a
garment, a parser and compiler for translating between well formed patterns and
this graph representation, and tools to verify pattern correctness for machine
and/or hand production. The second task is to develop a hybrid human/machine
method for parsing the plethora of patterns currently available on online
databases. Visualization tools will be developed based on physical simulation at
the strand level to allow users to understand, modify, and verify their
patterns. Finally, this research will explore new generative design techniques
to support modification of pattern texture and shape as well as construction of
novel shapes or additions of shaped elements to existing garments. These will be
accomplished by developing optimization techniques with objectives on the gross
shape and fine texture, over the discrete space of stitches, and under
manufacturability constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.