* 1907936
* FET: Small: Collaborative Research: Efficient and Robust Characterization of Quantum Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Anastasios Kyrillidis, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 470,000.00

Advances in quantum information and algorithms enable solutions that are beyond
the reach of conventional technologies, with applications in many-body quantum
physics, chemistry, cryptography, communication, and machine learning. While
prototypes for quantum computers are being built, these are still prone to
errors: reducing the noise to a tolerable and controllable level faces technical
hurdles. To be able to scale-up to a full-fledged quantum computer, it is
imperative to characterize, verify, and rigorously certify the behavior of
current and near-future prototypes. The latter task incurs a heavy burden in
data acquisition, processing and storage that leads to a pressing need for
efficient and noise-robust characterization and verification protocols to test
current quantum devices. The work done by members of this research team on novel
optimization theory and algorithms, compressed sensing, and verification
techniques have direct applications to this problem. The project will
investigate and propose novel, highly-efficient, and robust methodologies to
characterize, verify, and certify the behavior of quantum systems
implementations, for better acquisition and processing of quantum information.
The research will affect positively on how non-convex algorithms could be used
in modern data science applications. Key broader outcomes of this proposal will
be the establishment of an academic-industry collaboration (with the mentorship
of two students in the process), and the introduction of quantum computing
courses to Rice University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
benchmarking and testing quantum states and processes, through efficient, noise-
robust and provable quantum state tomography, as well as novel validation and
certification tools for quantum computing. This research proposes to investigate
new theoretical and practical approaches, via the following three paths: i) By
using provable methods for distributing non-convex computations and optimization
for the task of large-scale quantum state tomography. The proposed method
complements the setting of compressed sensing quantum state tomography, where
only a few measurements --compared to full tomography-- are available from a
low-rank (highly-pure) quantum state and will be used in settings that are
beyond the reach of state-of-the-art approaches. ii) By robustifying state-of-
the-art validation methods using noise-robust optimization and techniques. The
proposed research involves new, customized non-convex algorithms for the case
where measurements are contaminated with non-homogeneous noise. iii) By
designing efficient and noise-robust schemes for validating and certifying
experimentally-relevant quantum operations. This project will study schemes to
validate gates and error models behavior, which in turn will help certify the
quality of the basic physical operations. The results of this proposal will be
publicly available as an integrated part of an open-source software framework,
in order to enhance reproducibility on available quantum information
processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.