* 1907558
* 2019 Catchment Science in the Age of Big Data GRC/GRS, Andover, NH, June 23-28, 2019
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2019,09/30/2019
* Richard Hooper, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 09/30/2019
* USD 49,650.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Catchment Science was conceived on the
idea of improving the understanding of interaction among hydrology, biology and
geochemistry in catchments (also known as watersheds), which are hydrologic
drainage areas that act as systems and encompass interconnected physical,
chemical, and biological processes that determine the composition, regime, and
value of water. No other hydrologic science meeting is focused on this goal. The
Catchment Science GRC, has taken place biennially since 1991 and continues to
represent a unique opportunity for scientists from academic institutions and
government agencies from around the world in this field. The GRC on Catchment
Science and the associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS, for early career
scientists and students) includes members from broad ranging disciplines but
maintains a focus on interactions among hydrology, biology and geochemistry in
catchment science. The conference will identify new research opportunities and
define new research questions in catchment science from an integrative,
multidisciplinary standpoint. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Conference on
Catchment Science is a biennial event that draws an international audience and
mixes established researchers with new investigators. This year's conference
theme is "Transcending the Uniqueness of Place in the Age of Big Data" and will
examine how process research and large-scale, high resolution modeling can be
used to advance scientific understanding. Unraveling catchment functions and
transferring knowledge to other sites requires an integrated physical, chemical,
and biological perspective. The Gordon Research Conference and the Gordon
Research Seminar on Catchment Science are designed with a format that favors
discussion, interaction, and a focus on cutting edge, interdisciplinary science.
The conference fosters exchange among hydrologists, ecologists, engineers, soil
scientists, and biogeochemists. The conference will enable catchment scientists
from different disciplines to share and learn from one another in order to
identify opportunities for research and scientific advancement. The conference
will host a pre-conference Graduate Research Seminar where young investigators
can discuss their work and gain valuable one-on-one council from investigators
at a more advanced career stage. The Graduate Research Seminar provides
opportunities for the exchange of ideas among early career investigators and the
opportunity to build relationships with peers that will form the next generation
of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.