* 1907389
* The 6th International Conference on Clinical and Engineering Frontiers in Pediatric and Congenital Heart Disease; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; May 9-11, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Keefe Manning, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2020
* USD 20,781.00

This award provides support for the travel of two invited speakers from
underrepresented groups and twelve students and young investigators to attend
the 6th International Conference on Clinical and Engineering Frontiers in
Pediatric and Congenital Heart Disease, to be held in Philadelphia, PA, from May
9-11, 2019. The meeting will bring together global leaders in both the clinical
and engineering study of congenital heart disease along with the next generation
of researchers needed to address this important challenge. The conference will
focus on disseminating the current state of the art with respect to advances in
fundamental engineering and science that impact the understanding of both the
pathophysiology and treatment of congenital heart disease. In addition,
significant time will be spent identifying the gaps in knowledge that require
new advancements in engineering in order to develop solutions in the future.
Engineering and medical students from the region will also be encouraged to
attend in order to better understand how engineers and clinicians can work
together to address these challenges through advances in both fundamental
engineering and clinical science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will
bring together clinical and fundamental researchers to exchange knowledge and
identify areas that are key targets for future research. Award funds will be
used to support young investigators and students who will be able to present
their research to an audience of leaders in the field. This will support the
professional development and career advancement of these individuals. In
addition, the award will support two underrepresented assistant professors to
present invited talks. These individuals, who are developing leaders in the
field, will serve as mentors and role models to other individuals from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.