* 1907160
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019:  Restoring tropical ecosystems using the wealth of information in rare plant collections
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Leland Werden, Werden                  Leland         K
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Rapid human alteration of global processes and the degradation
of ecosystems worldwide have led to a sixth mass-extinction event. To counteract
these outcomes, botanical gardens and arboreta are leading the charge in the
conservation and reintroduction of threatened and endangered plant species.
Achieving these goals is challenging and determining how reintroduction outcomes
are influenced by responses of threatened and endangered plants to environmental
conditions at reintroduction sites could greatly improve conservation practice.
However, there is still lack a basic understanding of the characteristics of
threatened and endangered plants necessary to undertake these efforts. To
address this, the fellow will focus on using the wealth of information on
threatened and endangered plant species contained in living botanical
collections to understand plant reintroduction outcomes, a novel use of these
underutilized resources. To connect with the broader community the fellow will
mentor undergraduate students underrepresented in the biological sciences and
develop an education module on threatened and endangered plant conservation for
K-12 students and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to determine the effects of environmental filtering on tropical
threatened and endangered woody plant reintroductions. Many studies have focused
on the importance of environmental filters in structuring plant communities, but
most are limited in their ability to do so directly because they do not exclude
competition. The fellow will use Hawaiian threatened and endangered
reintroductions, where competition is excluded, as a model system to test the
effects of environmental filtering on plant performance. Using this approach,
and data from living threatened and endangered plant collections, the fellow
will address the following questions: (Q1) How do the range of functional
strategies possessed by Hawaiian threatened and endangered plant species differ
from common invasive species? (Q2) What factors underlie threatened and
endangered plant reintroduction outcomes? (Q3) How can trait multidimensionality
inform the design of effective threatened and endangered plant reintroductions?
This project will lead to a more thorough understanding of how species' trait
syndromes mediate performance along abiotic gradients, while improving
threatened and endangered plant reintroductions worldwide. These activities will
significantly expand the fellow's expertise by providing training in the use of
modeling approaches to determine how trait multidimensionality drives community
assembly. Additionally, the fellow will develop a hands-on training workshop for
undergraduate and graduate students focused on integrating plant functional
traits into restoration and reintroduction projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.