* 1907855
* III: Small: Adopting Machine Learning Techniques for Big Spatial and Spatio-temporal Data and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mohamed Mokbel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Motivated by the ubiquity and magnitude of spatial and location data collected
from myriad of devices, including, cell phones, GPS-enabled vehicles, and
satellites, this award aims to take advantage of such data to enhance the
scalability, accuracy, and usability of various artificial intelligence and
machine learning techniques. This will advance the state-of-the-art of these
techniques not only to accommodate more applications where spatial data is
predominant (e.g., transportation, meteorology, and agriculture), but also to
current applications that deal with spatial data (e.g., census, knowledge-base
construction).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award adopts machine learning
techniques for big spatial and spatio-temporal data and applications in two
orthogonal, but related, directions. First, injecting the spatial awareness
inside machine learning techniques and applications, which would result in a
higher accuracy for such applications. Second, taking advantage of the recent
advances in machine learning techniques to boost the usability, scalability, and
accuracy of long lasting spatial and spatio-temporal data analysis techniques.
Towards its goal, this award exploits three main research topics: (1) Developing
the concept and building Spatial Markov Logic Network (SMLN) by injecting the
spatial awareness inside Markov Logic Network. (2) Leveraging the developed SMLN
to build the first open-source system for a spatially-aware knowledge base
construction system. (3) Leveraging the developed SMLN to increase the accuracy,
scalability, and usability of several long lasting spatial analysis problems,
including spatial autologistic regression, spatial classification, and Bayesian
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.