* 1907617
* Numerical Modeling of Superluminous Supernovae and Unusual Astronomical Transients
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Emmanouil Chatzopoulos, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 05/31/2023
* USD 440,897.00

The advent of deep, wide-field, high-cadence astronomy surveys has ushered in a
new, dynamical view of the transient Universe, allowing astronomers to better
observe and understand the deaths of stars, and leading to the discovery of
exotic, luminous transient phenomena. Among the most important new discoveries
is a new class of superluminous supernovae; stellar explosions reaching
luminosities up to 10 - 1000 times higher than the already very bright typical
supernovae, and exhibiting striking diversity in their observed properties.
These findings have ignited multiple efforts in theoretical modeling, aiming to
understand the physical mechanisms involved. A research team led by Louisiana
State University will run state-of-the-art numerical simulations at world-class
supercomputing facilities in order to better understand these super-bright
events. They will study often-overlooked aspects of radiation transport physics
that are important in these phenomena, and make specific predictions that can be
directly compared with observations. In order to improve the education
environment in Louisiana and beyond, the principal investigator will work
closely with a diverse body of K-12, undergraduate and graduate students to
advance knowledge of numerical tools and data analysis methods, with an emphasis
on the basic research tools that are used extensively in industry, specifically
in fields such as data science, thereby enhancing the students' skills and
competitiveness in the job market and in careers within and beyond academia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, state-of-the-art numerical tools will be
utilized, together with data from modern transient searches, to attempt to
answer a number of important questions about superluminous events by
simultaneously modeling the observed light curves and spectra of these events.
The most significant questions include: What mechanism, or combination of
mechanisms, powers the hydrogen-poor class of superluminous supernovae? What is
the role of episodic, pre-supernova mass-loss and circumstellar interaction in
determining the radiative properties of supernovae? What is the main source of
the observed diversity in luminous transients? What are the progenitor systems
of unusual transient phenomena and peculiar supernovae? This project is jointly
funded by the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.