* 1907937
* AF: Small: Cuts, Connectivity and Partitioning in Graphs, Hypergraphs and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Chandra Chekuri, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Graphs and networks are ubiquitous in computer science, artificial intelligence,
and social sciences. Many real-life applications, such as reliability in
communication networks and clustering in social networks, can be modeled as
partitioning problems in graphs and related structures. For example, finding the
minimum number of base stations in a wireless network whose disruption will
disconnect communication between two given agents, and finding groups of people
in a social network that have strong ties amongst themselves when compared to
outsiders, can both be modeled as partitioning problems. This project aims to
design new efficient algorithms for fundamental partitioning problems in
structures that generalize graphs. The project will drive the integration of
generalized graph models in several courses currently taught by the PIs in
Computer Science and Industrial Engineering. Lecture notes from these courses
and codes of algorithms developed as part of this project will be made publicly
available. The project will support two or more PhD students. The PIs are
working with students from under-represented groups and will continue to make
efforts to recruit additional graduate and undergraduate students to diversify
the population of researchers in theoretical computer science. The PIs plan to
organize the Midwest Theory Day at their institution in the near future to bring
together a broad cross-section of researchers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cuts, connectivity and partitioning problems in
graphs are a central topic in combinatorial optimization and theoretical
computer science. While undirected graphs have been extensively studied
previously, the primary goal of this project is to address these problems in
more complex structures including directed graphs, hypergraphs, and submodular
set functions. The complexity status of several problems in these richer models
is open. The PIs will investigate polynomial-time solvability, structural
results such as sparsification, approximation algorithms, improved running
times, and the development of deterministic algorithms where only randomized
algorithms are currently known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.