* 1907698
* Collaborative Research: Supersubstorms--Their Driving and Responses in the Magnetosphere, Ionosphere, and Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Yukitoshi Nishimura, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 196,499.00

Supersubstorms are events that release extreme amounts of energy in the Earth's
magnetosphere. When these space weather storms occur, they drive unique
responses throughout the outer layers of the atmosphere - including the
magnetosphere, ionosphere, and thermosphere. This work will study the properties
of the solar wind, magnetosphere, and ionosphere during supersubstorms and
determine how they differ from weaker storms. Understanding supersubstorms is
important in preparing for extreme space weather events, which can cause
disruptions in high frequency communications and degradation and damage to
satellite systems. This research will also support early career scientists and
results will be incorporated into public outreach events and undergraduate
classes at Boston University (BU) and University of California-Los Angeles
(UCLA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of the project is to determine
solar wind, magnetosphere and ionosphere conditions during supersubstorms, and
their differences from typical substorms. Specifically: (1) What are solar wind
driving conditions of supersubstorms and preconditions in magnetosphere-
ionosphere-thermosphere (M-I-T) coupling? (2) What are M-I-T responses to
supersubstorms? (3) What are similarities and differences in M-I-T responses
during supersubstorms and during typical substorms and storms? Since extreme
events are not common enough for a statistical study, this work is based on
analyses of multiple events with favorable space-ground conjunctions. Solar wind
observations (from ACE, WIND, ARTEMIS, Geotail and Cluster) will be used to
characterize solar wind conditions. Magnetosphere observations (from THEMIS,
Cluster, RBSP, GOES) will quantify nightside magnetospheric responses near
midnight. Auroral imagers will specify location, size, timing and duration of
events. Other ionosphere and thermosphere observations will be used to quantify
strength of precipitation, currents and neutral winds. Those properties will be
compared to typical substorms and storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.