* 1907537
* SATC: EDU: Network Design for Security using Protocol Trust Boundary Observations
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Deniz Gurkan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 320,446.00

"Network security" is a typical core course in master's and bachelor's level
curricula in electrical/computer engineering or computer science or technology.
This project makes a novel attempt to relate "Network Security" to "Software
Systems Security", where a solid educational foundation has been using threat
modeling with effective tools and associated defense and mitigation techniques.
This novel approach enables network security education to use the same
principles that apply to information systems security. Namely, by viewing each
network system as a collection of software systems, this project will enable the
use of techniques developed for Software Systems Security education for Network
Security education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to
create novel instructional material to teach network security from the
perspective of a built-in security posture within the network design process,
with a focus on the creation of protocol behavior knowledge modules with a trust
boundary analysis enhanced through hands-on lab experiments, instantaneous
feedback, reflections on learnings, as well as a comprehensive project component
for application of the gained knowledge. The instructional material is composed
of lecture modules, documentation, lab modules with network topologies, an
extension mechanism for other instructors to create new network models, and a
hands-on lab system that is based on the Jupyter Notebooks, a web-based
interactive computing platform supportive of diverse learning styles. The lab
material includes exercises that load within the Jupyter Notebooks and are auto-
graded through the lab system for immediate feedback on learnings of specific
concepts. The question descriptors are also open source and available for the
adopting instructors to tailor to their own learning objectives in specific
offerings of the instructional material. The instructional material has a
broader impact in attracting and retaining underrepresented minorities and
female students to the field by providing equitable access mechanisms along with
multiple forms of delivery of the concepts in modern
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.