* 1907895
* Supporting Students' Science Content Knowledge through Project-Based Inquiry
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Erin Krupa, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2022
* USD 449,081.00

The Project-Based Inquiry (PBI) Global initiative will address STEM learning
through classroom implementation at two project partner schools in North
Carolina, one urban and the other rural, with culturally diverse student
populations. Both are innovative public high schools implementing the Early
College High School model, preparing diverse students from populations
underrepresented in STEM fields for college success. Because of the synergistic
interaction of theory and practice, the project will produce substantial
advances in the development of improved inquiry-based learning materials and
research on the impact of these materials on students and teachers. The project
offers high school students the opportunity to be immersed in science content
through engaging in globally-relevant learner-centered activities. The following
three research questions will be addressed: 1) How does inquiry through the PBI
Global process support student science content knowledge? 2) How can students'
motivation and engagement be characterized after participating in the PBI Global
process? 3) To what degree do teachers' attitudes toward inquiry-based
pedagogies change as a result of PBI Global professional
development?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project-Based Inquiry (PBI) Global responds to
the need for research-informed and field-tested products with iterative
development and implementation of a globally relevant, inquiry-based STEM
curriculum. The project focuses on developing 9th grade student physical,
biological, and environmental science content knowledge and science and
engineering practices through the topics of global water and sanitation issues.
Factors influencing student motivation and engagement, as well as teacher
attitudes toward inquiry-based pedagogies will be investigated. The project will
use a Design-Based Research (DBR) approach to develop and refine instructional
materials and teacher professional development for the existing
interdisciplinary PBI Global initiative. A mixed-methods research convergent
parallel design will be used to explore the effects of the classroom
implementation on student and teacher outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.