* 1907311
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2019: Host-Microbiome Ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Joseph Madison, Madison, Joseph
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2019, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. This project aims to understand the historical significance of
host-associated microbes (microbes that live inside another organism. These
include bacteria, protozoa, and fungi. By using museum collections of
amphibians, the fellow will examine host-associated gut microbes over time in
two regions of the United States. Amphibian museum specimens are especially
useful in this regard because of the way in which these specimens were
preserved. These specimens preserved fluids, which provide a snapshot of the
host-associated microbes at the time of collection. This work will have
important impacts on host-associated microbe ecology and evolution.
Additionally, the proposed work will involve the participation of Native
American students from reservations in South Dakota to expand scientific
interest and careers among this underrepresented group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is hypothesized that microbial gut communities will vary in diversity and
function both within and between amphibian assemblages over spatiotemporal
gradients. Such changes may also precede disease related declines of the
associated hosts, such as chytridiomycosis in amphibians. These hypotheses will
be tested by utilizing recently developed techniques for isolation and
purification of degraded DNA. Shotgun metagenomic sequencing will be used for
generating host-associated gut metagenome data. Sequence-based taxonomic and
functional analysis will be completed using a variety of bioinformatics and
machine-learning software on high-performance computing resources. By utilizing
museum specimens and their associated locality information, the fellow will also
explicate changes in host-associated microbiomes of amphibian assemblages in
response to differential land-use and land-cover (LULC) in the Midwest and
Northeast United States from the 1880s to present. Statistical mixed-effects
models will be implemented for evaluating changes in host-associated microbial
metagenomes and will include the integration of publicly available LULC
datasets. The project will therefore further the training of the fellow in GIS
for integration into microbial ecology research, and also promote the mentoring
of students from underrepresented groups in using museum collections for
answering questions pertaining to microbial ecology and
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.