* 1908287
* NSF-BSF: RI: Small: Learning to plan safely
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Brendan Juba, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 419,877.00

Robots and autonomous vehicles, in order to achieve the goals they are given,
create plans that specify what actions to take. A major impediment to this kind
of automated planning is that it requires a description of the environment in
which the robot or autonomous vehicle operates, of sufficient fidelity to
accurately predict the outcome of those actions. Such accurate descriptions of
an environment are difficult to write by hand, and so machine learning
techniques have been proposed to automatically construct such descriptions from
observations of the environment. These methods to-date have generally not
provided any guarantees for the accuracy of the learned description. This leaves
open the possibility that the actions of the robot or autonomous vehicle could
have unintended consequences. In particular, its actions could violate portions
of the specified objectives that were intended to ensure its operation is safe.
This project will develop methods for learning descriptions of environments that
enable the automated planning methods to guarantee that the resulting plan meets
the specified objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates how a
planning agent can improve its model of the world by using examples of plan
executions to learn the effects of actions and when those actions should be
taken. The goal is for the agent to either guarantee that its operation is safe
or to detect that the requested operation is impossible to guarantee. The
research team will develop algorithms that use the provided observations to
build a partial, approximate model of the environment and a meta-model that
enables control of the safety and effectiveness of plans produced using the
models. The team will then develop automated planning algorithms that use these
learned models to produce plans with the desired guarantees. The project
combines model-based and data-driven methods to generate "safe" plans. When safe
plans cannot be guaranteed, the project aims to quantify the probability that a
generated plan is "approximately safe" using concepts from probably
approximately correct (PAC) learning theory. The project will establish when it
is possible to guarantee that plans will succeed, and will furthermore determine
the effect of tolerating a small probability of failure in formulating plans for
a broader range of circumstances. This research is expected to increase range of
domains in which automated planning can be applied, including more situations in
which world models are difficult to obtain and safety is a
requirement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.