* 1908495
* FET: Small: AlignMEM: Fast and Efficient DNA Sequence Alignment in Non-Volatile Magnetic RAM
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Deliang Fan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2019
* USD 491,298.00

The state-of-the-art DNA sequencing technologies could generate Terabytes of DNA
sequence data in a single run, and their throughput is expected to increase 3-5
times each year in the coming years. In order to apply these big DNA-data into
follow-up complex disease diagnostics/prognostics, such as cancer risk
assessment, tailor patient treatment, and prenatal testing, they must be first
aligned to a 3.2-billion-length human reference genome. However, the existing
software tools for this purpose may need hours or days to align such large
amount of DNA sequence data even with very powerful computing systems of today
due to the 'memory wall' challenge in state-of-the-art computing architecture
that describes the speed mismatch between memory units and computing units. To
this end this, project leverages innovations from non-volatile nano-magnet based
Magnetic Random Access Memory (MRAM) technology and in-memory computing
architecture. If successful, it can achieve up to two orders magnitude higher
computing performance, speed and energy efficiency for next-generation DNA
sequence analysis system, which enables large-scale fast genomic data analytics
to support research on various disease studies and biomedical applications. This
project will develop new undergraduate/graduate level course modules on in-
memory computing architecture and bioinformatics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will follow two main research tracks. The first one explores how to
leverage the intrinsic non-volatile MRAM device property to efficiently develop
ultra-parallel, reconfigurable in-memory logic required by DNA alignment
computation and its big DNA-data Processing-in-Memory (PIM) accelerator
architecture. The second research track will investigate how to develop fast DNA
alignment-in-memory algorithm based on Burrows-Wheeler Transformation to match
with the proposed MRAM based PIM platform and its large-scale genomic analysis
application in disease phenotype prediction. Alignments generated will be used
to estimate gene expression, and identify single nucleotide mutation events for
patient samples, leading to molecular signatures for disease risk
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.