* 1908570
* WoU-MMA: Collaborative Research: All-Sky Automated Survey for -Supernovae in the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Christopher Kochanek, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2024
* USD 392,500.00

Gravitation Waves (GW) have recently been detected with LIGO/VIRGO and high
energy neutrino events by IceCube. The era of monitoring this emission in two of
the three (electromagnetic is the third) "windows" is now open. The All-Sky
Automated Survey for Supernovae (ASAS-SN) uses robotically operated telescopes
at globally distributed observing sites to survey the visible sky on faster than
a daily cadence and is ideal for discovering, identifying and monitoring
electromagnetic emission from the two other "windows". The coordination of
monitoring events in two or more "windows" will accelerate progress in our
understanding of the cosmos in fundamentally new ways. The ASAS-SN program will
continue to provide critical training for the next generation time-domain
astronomers and postdocs by their participation in the research sponsored by
this grant. A Citizen Science" project will be undertaken to classify the
1,000,000 variable stars present in the ASAS-SN data. An ASAS-AN inspired
planetarium show will be developed initially for the OSU Planetarium and later,
distributed to other planetaria. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This grant supports the
operation of the ASAS-SN survey. With robotically controlled telescopes
distributed in both hemispheres it maps the visible sky on a daily basis, making
it ideal for the study of variable optical phenomena such as Galactic novae,
galactic transients, Supernovae, variable stars. The data is made available to
the astronomical community and the public shortly after observation. It has
already accumulated data over several years and will continue with its present
operations. With the detection of Gravitational Waves by LIGO/VIRGO and high
energy neutrinos by IceCube, and followed by ASAS-SN's detecting, and localizing
the electromagnetic counterpart and distributing its location to the
astronomical community, ASAS-SN will make an invaluable contribution to
obtaining the multiwavelength data needed to interpret the physical mechanisms
giving rise to events in several "windows" and will lead to their
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.