* 1908804
* AF: Small: Comprehensive Groebner, Parametric GCD Computations and Real Geometric Reasoning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Deepak Kapur, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 316,000.00

Mathematical modeling of physical phenomena and cyber-physical systems and
prediction from their behavior are hallmarks of scientific investigation.
Checking validity of the modeling process is a critical component of this
analytical approach. Polynomials are often one of the simplest tools employed in
this endeavor. In order to model variations in the size of components and
exogenous changes, variables in polynomials are typically classified into
parameters and non-parameters. A prime and simple example is that of a quadratic
equation a* square(x) + b * x + c, which behaves very differently for different
values of its parameters a, b and c. It has equal solutions under certain
parameter values, real solutions under other values and complex solutions or no
solution at all under different parameter values. Structural properties of
models are expressed using parameters since for different parameters, model can
behave significantly different. It becomes critical to develop algorithms that
can identify different classes of parameter values for which a model behaves
significantly different. Such analysis will benefit many diverse applications
including robotics, kinematics, modeling, computer vision, drug design based on
molecular modeling and chemical relations, genetic pathways, and numerous cyber
physical systems integrating control, hardware and software. The project has all
of the theoretical, implementation and application components. The fundamental
nature of problems investigated in this project and their application in many
domain are likely to appeal to a broad set of students with diverse backgrounds
especially from under-represented groups, both graduate and undergraduate. The
material generated from this project will be integrated into courses on
automated reasoning, mathematical modeling and cyber-physical systems that the
researchers at the University of New Mexico (UNM) are teaching. The challenges
offered and numerous benefits seen for the national laboratories in New Mexico
and society at large by engaging in these investigations will attract
participation and offer different career opportunities to the UNM students. This
project is jointly funded by Algorithmic Foundations in Computing and
Communications Foundations and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve algorithmic
development research in solving parametric multivariate polynomial systems
symbolically and real geometry reasoning. The main tool used is that of
comprehensive Groebner basis computations and their use in many basic primitive
used in other symbolic computation algorithms including parametric greatest
common division of polynomials. These algorithms will serve as a basis for the
development of a pragmatic, incomplete, approximate quantifier elimination
approach over the complex numbers and the reals with the goal of producing
meaningful and useful output for applications. Unlike Tarski's method and
related algorithms based on Collins' Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposition (CAD),
comprehensive Groebner basis computations will be used for polynomial
equalities. Results about Positivstellensatz for inequalities using the sum of
squares approach and real root counting based on quadratic forms will be
explored. Techniques for Groebner basis computations will be adapted for
polynomial inequalities to develop heuristics to decide non-negativity of
polynomials. Since these problems are of very high computational complexity,
their relevance in practical applications calls for developing special
heuristics specific to application problems. The research team's experience in
theorem proving and its application will be exploited to develop a software
tool. Heuristics will be explored to make these implementations
efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.