* 1908231
* Miniaturized Frequency Combs for Precision Radial Velocity Characterization of Exoplanets
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kerry Vahala, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 06/30/2024
* USD 798,000.00

This effort is to develop small, low power, robust spectral rulers called
frequency combs that astronomers can use to help measure the motion of stars. In
doing so, they can identify planets orbiting those stars and gain information
about the mass of the planets. This research enables tantalizing discoveries
about the existence and nature of other planets, ultimately helping us to search
for other worlds like our own.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is to advance
the instrumental capabilities for Precision Radial Velocity (PRV) observations
of exoplanet-hosting stars by creating broad, octave-spanning comb spectra in
the 0.8 micron to greater than 2 micron region at GHz repetition rates through
soliton formation in silica microresonators. This will be accomplished by
balancing Raman and dispersive wave effects in the microresonators, and using
pulsed excitation of the microcomb to improve pumping efficiency. The resulting
combs will be used as low power, compact calibration sources on high-resolution
spectrographs installed at ground-based observatories. Advances in PRV
instrumentation can enable the identification of Earth-sized planets in the
Habitable Zones of some of the nearest stars to the
sun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.