* 1908760
* Invigorating Statistics Teacher Education Through Professional Online Learning (InSTEP)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Hollylynne Lee, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,044,905.00

Implementing meaningful statistics education in middle and high schools has been
a persistent challenge in the United States. Statistics and data science are
critical domains for STEM careers and the general data literacy of the
citizenry. This project seeks to strengthen the teaching of statistics and data
science in grades 6-12 through the design and implementation of an online
professional learning environment for teachers. The professional learning
environment aims to support in-service teachers in developing stronger content
knowledge related to statistics, and knowledge of how to effectively teach
statistics in their classrooms. The project will also evaluate a model of
professional development that integrates personalized online learning and
microcredentialing (earning small-scale certifications) to better understand its
effectiveness in supporting teacher learning. The project will draw from
previous work to assemble online modules that engage teachers in doing high-
quality statistics and data science tasks, the analysis of video of teachers'
and students' work with those tasks, learning a pedagogical framework for
teachers to implement the tasks, and exploring guidelines for identifying and
developing high-quality statistics and data science tasks. The project will
study teacher learning through the use of these modules, and the pathways that
teachers choose through them to understand the effectiveness of the
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on previous work by the
investigators to develop research-based teacher professional development modules
that support learning about statistics and statistics education in grades 6-12.
Materials currently developed include a series of microcredentials with design
features consistent with research on effective teacher professional development.
They include opportunities for teachers to engage with statistics content
appropriate to the target grade levels they teach, active learning opportunities
that engage them with teachers in similar contexts, and a coherent focus that
builds on the knowledge and experience teachers bring to the table. The project
will take place in iterative phases, beginning with focus groups of middle and
high school teachers and district leaders based on first drafts of the
materials. This will be followed by cognitive interviews with teachers who
engage in the microcredential ecosystem which will inform modifications to the
system. Following this phase, cohorts of teachers (25 in the first cohort, 75 in
the second) will participate in scaffolded professional development engagement
with the materials, and will be assessed with respect to changes in their
knowledge and practice. The project will assess changes in teacher knowledge
using reliable and valid measures of statistics knowledge and practice. Data
will be collected from the online platform regarding teacher engagement and
usage to better understand usage and pathways through the materials. The
professional learning platform will be made available as a free and open online
source at the close of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.