* 1908982
* Understanding Liquid Phase Tandem Catalysis on Zeolite Encapsulated Metal Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Raul Lobo, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Biomass is becoming an increasingly important source of energy for the renewable
manufacturing of fuels and chemicals. Biomass feedstocks are complex, however,
and their conversion to high-value fuel and chemical products relies heavily on
catalysis to accelerate chemical reactions and promote the formation of desired
products. The project will explore novel catalyst designs that are capable of
tandem catalysis, that is, catalysts structured such that they can carry out
multiple reaction steps in a specific order in a single catalytic reactor.
Tandem catalysis is more efficient and involves lower capital costs than
traditional processes based on sequential reactors, which often carry the need
for costly separation steps between reactors. To date, most research related to
tandem catalysis has been done on a case-by-case basis targeting specific fuels
or chemical products. This study focuses on developing generalized design
guidelines that will promote faster and wider-scale adoption of tandem catalysis
throughout the chemical manufacturing and fuel refining industries. The work
will contribute to U.S. leadership in chemical and fuels manufacturing in areas
as diverse as specialty chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and platform fuels and
commodity chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the proposed
work is to develop design principles for zeolite encapsulated metal (M@zeolite)
catalysts to enable selective liquid phase tandem reactions, which include: 1)
synthesize and characterize M@zeolite catalysts with controlled site density and
distribution; 2) understand the solvent effect and the confinement effect in
M@zeolite catalysts on rates and selectivities; and 3) establish correlations of
the architecture, site distribution, and local environment of active sites with
performance in tandem reactions. The project will leverage a novel cationic
polymer assisted synthetic strategy to prepare M@zeolite catalysts, and
characterize their properties and density of active sites with liquid phase
techniques recently developed in the investigator's laboratory. In particular,
the distribution of acid sites in the zeolite crystals of M@zeolite will be
determined. The study will elucidate solvent and confinement effects on model
liquid phase reactions over M@zeolite via a combination of kinetic and
spectroscopic investigations by determining intrinsic activation energies. One-
pot tandem reactions to upgrade furfural to C8 oxygenates/hydrocarbons, as well
as pentanoic acid, will be employed as model reactions to investigate the impact
of the density and distribution of acid sites in the zeolite crystal of
M@zeolite on tandem catalytic processes and catalyst deactivation. On the
educational front, the investigator will develop a program to introduce the
basics of 3D printing technology to high school and undergraduate students as a
hands-on activity to stimulate excitement about STEM related career
opportunities, especially for students from underrepresented
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.