* 1908299
* III: Small: Modeling Multi-Level Connectivity of Brain Dynamics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mingzhou Ding, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 823,000.00

The temporal dynamics of blood flows through the network of cerebral arteries
and veins provides a window into the health of the human brain. Since the brain
is vulnerable to disrupted blood supply, brain dynamics serves as a crucial
indicator for many kinds of neurological diseases such as stroke, brain cancer,
and Alzheimer's disease. Existing efforts at characterizing brain dynamics have
predominantly centered on 'isolated' models in which data from single-voxel,
single-modality, and single-subject are characterized. However, the brain is a
vast network, naturally connected on structural and functional levels, and
multimodal imaging provides complementary information on this natural
connectivity. Thus, the current isolated models are deemed not capable of
offering the platform necessary to enable many of the potential advancements in
understanding, diagnosing, and treating neurological and cognitive diseases,
leaving a critical gap between the current computational modeling capabilities
and the needs in brain dynamics analysis. This project aims to bridge this gap
by exploiting multi-scale structural (voxel, vasculature, tissue) connectivity
and multi-modal (anatomical, angiography, perfusion) connectivity to develop an
integrated connective computational paradigm for characterizing and
understanding brain dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach consists of
three thrusts: (1) multi-scale structural connectivity modeling to quantify
brain dynamics beyond a single voxel; (2) multimodal dynamic dictionary learning
for mining hidden complementary information; and (3) multicenter evaluation to
assess the efficacy of the proposed models at three nationally renowned
healthcare systems. Successful project completion would potentially transform
the rapidly evolving field of brain dynamics modeling, facilitate basic
neuroscience discovery and enable comprehensive identification of neurovascular
diseases. Aiming to broaden its impact this project will also implement
educational initiatives to expose students, middle school teachers, and medical
professionals to 'CS for All,' to foster interests in STEM and cross-
disciplinary careers, and to promote research on the convergence of computer
science and computational thinking for brain health and
neuromedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.