* 1908723
* Collaborative Research: The Coeval Degenerates Survey
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jennifer van Saders, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 253,353.00

The lowest mass stars in the Milky Way galaxy, K and M type stars ("cool
dwarfs") are the most abundant, long-lived stars in the galaxy. It is important
for astronomers to be able to precisely measure their ages in order to help
answer the questions: "What is the fossil record of the assembly of our galaxy
from the first stars to the present?" and "How diverse are planetary systems?"
Cool dwarfs are sufficiently long-lived that they carry a record of star
formation and chemical evolution over the entire history of the galaxy.
Furthermore, Earth-sized transiting planets in the habitable zones of M dwarfs
are easier to detect than planets orbiting Sun-like stars, but the ages of their
host stars are much more difficult to measure. A research collaboration between
the University of Hawai'i and Boston University will develop stellar rotation-
based tools to infer precise ages for old (&gt;4 billion year-old) K and M type
stars. They will do this by studying wide binary star systems containing both a
white dwarf (WD) star and a star still on the main sequence (MS) of stellar
evolution. Rotation can be measured in the main-sequence star, and an
independent age of both stars can be inferred using the white dwarf. The
investigators will also directly engage high-school students in scientific
research through the HISTAR program at the University of Hawai'i. Students will
have the opportunity to experience ownership over an individual stellar system,
while working to contribute to the broader goal of building a timeline of
galactic events and planetary system evolution. Students will work with data
obtained on the summits of Hawaii's mountains, and interact with colleagues at
Boston University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spin-down of stars with time is a
promising age-dating tool, but can only be used if the relationship between age
and rotation can be properly calibrated. Currently, a primary limitation is the
lack of empirical anchors of known age for these old, low-mass stars. This
project will leverage wide WD+MS binaries to provide rotation and age
calibrators. Total white dwarf ages are the combination of the time spent
cooling as a dead core and the progenitor system's hydrogen and helium burning
lifetimes. Both quantities are readily inferred from existing models and
initial-final mass relations. These binaries provide the leverage to extend
period-age relations out to the age of the galactic disk. Gaia DR2 has enabled
the identification over one thousand bright (G &lt; 15 mag), nearby (&lt; 200
pc) WD+MS systems widely separated enough to have never interacted. First, the
researchers will use ground-based archival light curves to measure rotation
periods of the main-sequence companions and spectroscopically characterize the
white dwarfs to determine total system ages. In total, it will develop a sample
of &gt;50-100 calibration systems. Second, this proposal will explore systematic
uncertainties in the ability of white dwarfs to deliver reliable old ages by
studying coeval pairs of wide WD+WD binaries. Finally, it will confront existing
models for stellar spin down with empirical anchors, and develop the first
calibrated period-age relation for old (&gt;4 Gyr), low-mass (&lt;0.8 solar-
mass) stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.