* 1908991
* CHS: Small: Emotion-Aware Internet-of-Things Based on Analysis of Speech and Physiological Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Christian Poellabauer, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2021
* USD 529,763.00

The Internet of Things describes a network of devices capable of connecting
hundreds of billions of devices, and then sensing and communicating information
required for a wide range of uses such as healthcare, vehicular systems, and
industrial environments. As one of the most natural ways of communication,
speech will increasingly be used as the primary form of interaction between
humans and Internet of Things devices. In recent years, research has shown that
there are clear links between the emotional and mental state of an individual
and certain patterns in the individual's speech. If these patterns are detected
in a timely fashion, it is possible to build emotion-aware Internet of Things
solutions. This could be used to adapt a system to better meet the needs of the
user, to prevent human error, to detect and prevent potentially malicious user
activities, and to initiate medical interventions. Therefore, the overarching
goal of this project is to advance speech-based emotion analysis to enable the
design of such emotion-aware Internet of Things solutions. The project will also
enrich the team's ongoing outreach and educational goals, including mentorship
of minority and high-school students, revision of existing and development of
new courses aligned with the research challenges in the project, and tight
integration of research activities and undergraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical challenges in the project are
organized into three main thrusts. First, the project will develop and evaluate
multi-modal emotion detection systems, where speech analysis is coupled with
other physiological metrics such as heart rate, galvanic skin response, or skin
temperature, to more accurately determine an individual's emotional state.
Second, the work will apply the concept of topic modeling to perform context-
aware analysis of speech data, which will also assist in differentiating short-
term emotions (i.e., the current mood of an individual) from long-term emotions
(e.g., depression). Topic modeling is an increasingly popular technique to
learn, recognize, and extract the topics of spoken commands or conversations,
providing additional context information for more accurate emotion analysis. The
primary outcomes of the first two thrusts will be new insights into the design
and development of emotion-aware systems. However, to achieve this goal, a
comprehensive database containing speech and physiological data (annotated with
the emotional states of the users) will be required, and therefore, the third
thrust of the project will build such a database. When completed, this database
will contain speech samples and other data from over 500 individuals and the
database will be made available to the general scientific community to advance
research beyond the team's institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.