* 1908144
* OAC Core: Small: Collaborative Research: Scalable Run-Time for Highly Parallel, Heterogeneous Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Marc Snir, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Supercomputing has become an essential tool in many scientific fields, including
advances in engineering and medicine, and contributes to national security.
Progress in many areas depends on continued improvements in the performance of
supercomputers and their usability. Communication between processes is a
critical component of this effort and is the target of this project. This
project departs from the traditional communication protocols. Rather, the
project focuses on providing middle ground solutions between hardware and
software. This approach potentially reduces communication overheads and better
matches the functionality of the communication library to the capabilities of
modern communication adapters and also improves the match between the
requirements of modern parallel computing frameworks and applications. By
improving the communication capabilities of computational platforms, this
project will promote faster and more flexible communication capabilities and
will improve the time to completion of scientific applications. It, therefore,
increases the scientific throughput of existing and future cyberinfrastructure
platforms. The research and educational outcomes of this project are closely
related, resulting in highly trained new generations of researchers and
engineers leading to a more efficient and globally competent workforce.
Therefore, this project aligns with the NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance national prosperity and welfare through science, and
serves the national interest.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project brings together
a multidisciplinary team and aims at breaking away from the limitation of
standards such as Message Passing Interface and pointing the way for handling
the needs of future computational frameworks and high-end systems. To this end
the project (1) designs and implements a communication library with new
communication primitives to enable fast coordination with no serial bottleneck,
to manage irregular, fine grain communication, and to provide new efficient
synchronization mechanisms; (2) demonstrates the value of this library by using
it to accelerate multiple task-based runtimes (Legion, PaRSEC) and communication
libraries (MPI and GasNET); (3) demonstrates the value of hardware support by
porting key components to a programmable NIC; and (4) delivers improvements and
extensions to mainstream communication libraries to provide the new
functionality. This work puts a special emphasis on emerging programming models,
such as Legion or PaRSEC, and on emerging application domains, such as graph
analytics. It aims at an orthogonal design where different mechanisms for
associating producer buffer with consumer buffer can be composed with different
mechanisms for synchronizing producer and consumer; and where mechanisms can be
specialized so as to allow efficient hardware support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.