* 1908665
* Stochastic Analysis and Numerics for Large Scale Dynamical Systems, with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Jin Ma, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 430,000.00

The increasing complexity of banking systems and other large-scale networks
subject to random effects, incomplete or partial observations, and systemic
risk, put increasing demands for new and efficient mathematical tools for their
analysis. This award addresses three projects in the stochastic and
computational analysis of "large-scale" dynamical systems, in the sense that
they are set in spaces of very high dimensions or involve the interactions of a
large number of participating agents in the system. The first project will focus
on the development of efficient numerical schemes for partial differential
equations (PDEs) with a large number of spatial dimensions. These schemes could
have a significant impact on computation-oriented financial instruments, such as
model-based trading algorithms involving very-large portfolios. The second
project and third projects study the structures of large financial systems that
are interacting in a centralized (mean-field) and non-centralized (network)
manner, respectively. The results will provide tools for the measurement and
management of systemic risk, particularly default contagion for large scale
interbank lending markets, both for individual investors and for regulators. The
award will also result in the involvement and training of graduate students and
dissemination through journal publications and conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project will develop efficient Monte-Carlo
methods for high-dimensional PDEs and path-dependent PDEs (PPDEs). These schemes
are expected to be efficient when the dimension of the equations is allowed to
be in the hundreds or higher, hence essentially breaking the notorious "curse of
dimensionality" that has been baffling the numerical analysts and computer
scientists for decades. The second project explore various theoretical issues as
well as several practical problems in stochastic game/control theory and
quantitative finance under the general framework of master equations and their
variations. This project will utilize several recently developed technical
tools, including the time consistency principle and the dynamic utility
approach. The third project on dynamic systemic risk investigates a complex
network in which the contagion effect among banks are described in a time-
consistent, and non-centralized manner. By considering the state space of
probability measures, the dynamical movements of networks can be described by
measure-valued SDEs, while the systemic risk is characterized by certain master
equations. All projects in the proposed research have direct or indirect
connections to applied fields, especially to stochastic finance/actuarial
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.