* 1908530
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Explaining Unsupervised Learning:  Combinatorial Optimization Formulations, Methods and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Sekharipuram Ravi, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 234,999.00

Clustering is a common machine learning and data mining technique which takes a
collection of instances/records/things and divides them into groups. It is used
in a large variety of domains including social networks (to find communities),
biology (to create taxonomies) and neuroscience (to find regions of interest in
the brain). There are many clustering algorithms already in existence, but these
algorithms do not always explain the clustering. This award addresses the
problem of describing the clustering algorithm results to a variety of
stakeholders including data scientists, domain scientists and the general
public. Explaining the results of these algorithms will allow them to be better
understood by stakeholders and allow their use in challenging and sensitive
domains where transparency is required. Explanations are given in an initiative
form using easy to understand auxiliary information such as tags. This project
will consist of three inter-twined tasks. The first will develop easy to
understand mechanisms to explain a clustering, whilst the second will allow a
human to interact with the explanation by asking queries about it. Finally the
third task will attach measure of stability, trust and correctness to the
explanations generated from task one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The area of
unsupervised learning is immensely popular due to the lack of need for labeled
data and there exist many algorithms that can work on a variety of data types:
images, graphs, documents, spatial and temporal data. Many domains have a
preferred/well-accepted clustering algorithm. However, most algorithms provide
just a grouping of the instances/objects into clusters with limited description.
The work on describing and/or explaining a solution has gained popularity in the
supervised learning context but is under-studied in the unsupervised context.
This award explores these novel explanation problems through discrete
combinatorial optimization formulations. Such formulations help in developing
explanations requiring interpretable (hence discrete) results, best possible
explanations (not any plausible explanation) and in enforcing complex
constraints to make explanations match human expectations. This research will
leverage much work in theoretical computer science and use tools from
declarative paradigms such as ILP solvers and constraint programming languages.
Such tools allow for easy modifications of formulations, a desirable trait as
different domains may need different variations in explanation. The usefulness
of the techniques will be demonstrated through their applications to several
domains including social networks and genomic data and evaluated by two domain
experts in the area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.