* 1908125
* AF: Small: The Polymorphic Gateway between Structure and Algorithms: Beyond CSP Dichotomy
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Venkatesan Guruswami, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 06/30/2022
* USD 415,997.00

Computational problems are ubiquitous and exhibit a diverse range of behaviors
in terms of how quickly and effectively they can be solved. One of the broad
intellectual challenges driving research in the theory of computation is the
following: What underlying mathematical structure (or lack thereof) in a
computational problem leads to an efficient algorithm for solving it (or
dictates its intractability)? Algorithms are everywhere in today's world, and
understanding their power and limitations is important both for foundational
reasons as well as the myriad applications that efficient algorithms empower.
Given the vast landscape of problems and possible clever algorithms to solve
them, it is simplisic to hope to explain the underpinnings of the
easiness/hardness of all problems with a single theory. However, recent progress
has led to elegant theories that fully explain the computational complexity of
rich classes of problems, notably constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) and
their variants. In this setting, an efficient algorithm exists precisely when
there are non-trivial operations called polymorphisms under which the solution
space is closed (this can be interpreted as a discrete analog of convexity that
is typically at the heart of tractability of continuous optimization problems).
Inspired by the success story for constraint satisfaction, the project will
investigate the existence of polymorphic principles in broader contexts ---
namely, whether "interesting" ways to combine solutions to get new solutions
lead to efficient algorithms. The project will enable a cross-fertilization of
ideas between the approximation algorithms and optimization literature and the
powerful algebraic methods used to study CSPs, and foster enhanced
collaborations between these research communities. Due to its balanced focus on
exploratory directions and concrete problems, the project is well-suited for
investigation by students, and will actively engage and train graduate as well
as undergraduate students. The accompanying educational plan will distill
suitable segments of the interplay between polymorphisms and algorithms for
inclusion in the theory CS curriculum at various levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
a specific thrust, the project will investigate the complexity of promise
versions of CSPs, where the algorithm is allowed to find an assignment
satisfying relaxed versions of the constraints defining the CSP. The promise CSP
framework is very general and captures a rich variety of problems, most notably
approximate (hyper)-graph coloring and variants. While polymorphisms of CSPs are
closed under composition (and therefore a rich family can be built from a single
non-trivial polymorphism), polymorphisms inherently lose this closure under
composition in the promise setting. As a result, the study of promise CSPs calls
for significant new ideas on both the algorithms and hardness sides. In
particular, the research will undertake a combination of two highly successful
methodologies, the algebraic approach for CSPs and the probabilistically
checkable proofs (PCP) based theory for approximation. On the algorithmic front,
the research will uncover new algorithms in the presence of rich enough families
of polymorphisms. The project will also investigate polymorphic gateways between
structure and algorithms in broader contexts, including in fast exponential
algorithms where partial polymorphisms govern the (exponential) runtime of
algorithms for NP-hard CSPs. The research will forge new connections with
diverse topics including optimization, fixed-parameter tractability, fine-
grained complexity, judgement aggregation, PCP, extremal combinatorics, and
universal algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.