* 1908594
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Stream-Based Active Mining at Scale: Non-Linear Non-Submodular Maximization
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2019,09/30/2023
* My Thai, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The past decades have witnessed enormous transformations of intelligent data
analysis in the realm of datasets at an unprecedented scale. Analysis of big
data is computationally demanding, resource hungry, and much more complex. With
recent emerging applications, most of the studied objective functions have been
shown to be non-submodular or non-linear. Additionally, with the presence of
dynamics in billion-scale datasets, such as items are arriving in an online
fashion, scalable and stream-based adaptive algorithms which can quickly update
solutions instead of recalculating from scratch must be investigated. All of the
aforementioned issues call for a scalable and stream-based active mining
techniques to cope with enormous applications of non-submodular maximization in
the era of big data. With the society's growing dependence on the cyberspace and
computer technologies, the premium placed on the intelligent big data analysis
for many emerging applications. Therefore, the success of this project has a
high impact in almost any field that needs lightweight and near-optimal big data
analysis. The findings of this project will also enrich the research on network
science, graph theory, optimization, and big data analysis. In addition to
creating new courses, undergrad and high school students will be involved in
hands-on activities over the experimental platform. Outreach events targeted at
under-represented groups and K-1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a
theoretical framework together with highly scalable approximation algorithms and
tight theoretical performance bound guarantees for the class of non-submodular
and non-linear optimization. In particular, the project lays the foundation for
the novel data mining techniques, suitable to the new era of big data with
emerging applications, as well as advance the research front of stochastic and
stream-based algorithm designs, with several key innovations: 1) Rigorous
mathematical techniques to analyze and design highly scalable approximation
algorithms to the class of non-monotonic, non-submodular maximization, which
underlies many emerging applications. 2) Attempt a new research direction by
bridging the non-linear optimization and the combinatorial optimization, thereby
bringing the new angles for the study of non-submodular optimization as well as
getting deeper understanding of the problem structures. 3) Novel stream-based
active mining at scale for multiple applications, focused on the two general
models which unify many optimization problems in the domain of online social
networks and privacy. It also provides a novel theoretical framework for
adaptive non-submodular maximization, which has not been studied in the
literature. 4) Extensive evaluation through a combination of various tools and
methods, including the real-world datasets and applications that will bridge the
gap between theory and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.