* 1908756
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: When Small Changes Have Big Impact: Improving Network Reliability and Security via Low-Rate Coordination
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Joerg Kliewer, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 249,999.00

The last decade has seen the emergence of a wide variety of networked
communication systems, affecting nearly every aspect of our society. In
particular, there is a growing trend towards distributed and multiuser
applications, simultaneously with an exponential increase in data use per
capita. To support this data revolution, further technological advances beyond
emerging wireless technologies such as 5G are required to increase the bit-
carrying capacity of the existing network infrastructure. Despite recent
advances in network communication, such as cooperative and opportunistic
communication and multiple access techniques to improve network capacity, the
design of communication systems is still mostly based on the so called
separation principle, in which communication across point-to-point channels is
done independently of the surrounding network. While having the advantage of
simplicity, this separation principle ignores approaches that could bring even
better performance. This project looks for small changes to the design of
communication networks that can have a disproportionately large impact on the
network's reliability and security. Thus, the gains from moving beyond
separation can be obtained at low cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the
project explores the use of coordination, in which a small amount of data is
shared among devices so that they can jointly optimize their behavior. This use
of a small amount of coordination breaks the separation paradigm, but only a
little bit, so that the existing networking infrastructure can remain mostly
intact. Coordination techniques are explored both in terms of the theoretical,
fundamental limits, as well as practical approaches toward achieving them. The
project is divided into three interrelated thrusts. The first thrust focuses on
improving network reliability via low-rate coordination in networks composed of
mutually trustworthy nodes. A key aspect of this work is the edge removal
problem, which constitutes the mathematical foundation for the power of low-rate
coordination, and is intimately related to many important questions in the study
of the fundamental limits of communication networks. The second thrust
investigates networks that contain either channel fading or malicious
adversaries. In the presence of such intrusions, coordination can significantly
benefit the network?s ability to work around them. The third thrust introduces a
new divide-and-conquer framework for coordination in communication networks
wherein nodes agree upon a network factorization into small blocks and perform
simple coding within each block. This new architecture outperforms naive
separation without introducing debilitating
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.