* 1908643
* FET: Small: DNA-based Neural Networks That Learn From Their Environment
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Lulu Qian, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,998.00

The fundamental advantage of DNA circuits, in comparison to electronic circuits,
is their capability to detect and act on information in a molecular environment.
A significant challenge in engineered molecular systems, DNA circuits included,
is embedded learning and adaptive behavior, which is proven to be powerful and
pervasive in biology and is promised to open up many doors in molecular
technologies. Currently, once built, a DNA circuit always has a fixed function
for how to respond to the environment, which means the same input will always
trigger the same output. Some DNA circuits are reconfigurable, for example DNA
neural networks, but only in the sense that a human user can choose to mix
different molecules with desired concentrations for making circuits that perform
different tasks. Much effort has been devoted to the design of DNA circuits with
embedded learning capabilities. However, successful experimental demonstration
has so far been lacking. In this project, the team of researchers will establish
new circuit architectures for self-reconfigurable DNA neural networks, and show
that a molecular circuit can improve how well it performs a task in a test tube
without human intervention. This kind of self-improvement through learning, both
supervised and unsupervised, will allow synthetic molecular circuits to gain the
adaptive power previously only seen in biology, laying out the foundation for
future applications in smart medicine and materials. Moreover, the results will
provide experimental evidence for a pure chemical system to spontaneously
undergo self-improvement, which will support the hypothesis for learning to
guide and effectively accelerate evolution at the origins of life. The
scientific understanding will be incorporated into open online software tools,
making it accessible to general public and promoting the applications of
information-processing molecular circuits. Design principles and wet-lab
constructions of DNA neural networks will be introduced into the classroom, and
course materials will be shared outside of the researchers' home institution.
Students and postdocs will be engaged in interdisciplinary research, with an
emphasis to involve more women in science. Lab tours will be provided to local
college students, including underrepresented groups. Communications with general
public will be facilitated by public talks, news stories, and artistic
illustrations and animations of the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The function
of winner-take-all DNA neural networks depends on the concentrations of the
weight molecules, which encode the memories that an input pattern is compared
with for classifying the pattern. In this project, the weight molecules are
designed to be initially inactive, and an appropriate collection of them will
become activated when a training pattern and a label strand (indicating which
class the pattern is) are simultaneously present in supervised learning. The
weight-activation process will be implemented using allosteric toehold strand
displacement reactions. Over the course of learning, different sets of input
strands representing different training patterns will be sequentially added to
the test tube that contains a DNA neural network. Each set of input strands will
trigger a response of the neural network to adjust its weights and thus improve
its capability for recognizing similar patterns. In unsupervised learning, the
DNA neural networks are capable of restoring desired concentrations of circuit
components after each round of computation and adjusting the concentrations of
active weight molecules based on the circuit output rather than a given class
label. The DNA neural networks will be trained and tested using a well-defined
and understood task, handwritten digit recognition, to evaluate the complexity
and diversity of molecular patterns that a DNA neural network is capable of
learning and processing. A software tool will be developed for the design and
analysis of DNA neural networks with learning
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.