* 1908237
* CEDAR: Global and Seasonal Occurrence and Characteristics of Mesospheric Bores
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Steven Smith, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 06/30/2023
* USD 268,200.00

This award is an experimental effort to characterize rare but strong
disturbances in the Earth's atmosphere that are often visible to the naked eye
as large bands of faint optical emission called airglow that extend from horizon
to horizon. These disturbances are atmospheric waves that are known as
mesospheric bores. These waves are characterized by an extensive propagating
"step-like" frontal region of enhanced or depleted airglow followed a train of
waves. Mesospheric bores exhibit large brightness amplitudes (typically &gt;10%)
and can transport large amounts of energy and momentum through the mesosphere-
lower-thermosphere (MLT) region. The wave dynamics significantly affects the
large-scale temperature and circulation structure of the MLT and higher
atmospheric regions. Understanding the full scope of wave effects on the MLT
region is important for obtaining a complete physical picture of atmospheric
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will utilize the data from eight
existing ground-based optical imaging systems, together with a suite of co-
located multi-diagnostic instrumentation and satellite data, to investigate the
global and seasonal occurrence characteristics of mesospheric bores and other
frontal gravity waves in the MLT region. The effort will:&lt;br/&gt;1) conduct a
global survey and characterization of these waves and an estimate of the
momentum flux contributing to the MLT using the Boston University all-sky imager
network, and&lt;br/&gt;2) utilize co-located ground-based multi-diagnostic
measurements and satellite measurements to supplement the imager data in order
to fully characterize both the propagation environment and the gravity wave
propagation modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.