* 1908166
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Structured Methods for Multi-Task Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/16/2018,07/31/2020
* Shuiwang Ji, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2020
* USD 178,564.00

The ability of human to learn from and transfer knowledge across related
learning tasks enables us to grasp complex concepts from only a few examples.
For instance, a three-year old child is able to discriminate chairs from tables
without having been exposed to hundreds of different examples. In contrast,
computer learning programs typically require training on a large number of
examples in order to achieve similar levels of recognition. This prompts the
study of multi-task learning in which multiple related tasks are learned
simultaneously, thereby facilitating inter-task knowledge transfer. However,
most multi-task learning studies are restricted to problems with well-defined
tasks and structures. This project aims at developing algorithms and tools
(including open source software) to attack problems that are not traditionally
treated, but can potentially be reformulated and solved more effectively by
multi-task learning. This allows a broad class of challenging machine learning
problems to benefit from multi-task learning techniques. This project also
develops a new curriculum that incorporates the proposed research into
classroom. In addition, this project will allow the PIs to continue the ongoing
efforts of actively recruiting and advising students from under-represented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, this project focuses on an
innovative, integrated research and education plan that includes the following
components: (1) providing principled guidelines for reformulating problems into
the multi-task learning formalism; (2) developing robust and clustered multi-
task learning models to identify and prevent false interactions among unrelated
tasks; (3) developing sparsity-inducing multi-task learning models to capture
richly structured task interactions; (4) developing high-order multi-task
learning models to capture task relatedness from interactions between features;
and (5) investigating computational algorithms and theoretical properties of
multi-task learning. The outcome of this project includes the capabilities of
reformulating diverse machine learning problems into the multi-task learning
framework and providing radically new ways to attack challenging problems that
cannot be solved effectively by traditional methods. The systematic study of
multi-task learning in this project is expected to generate novel
reformulations, structured mathematical models, efficient optimization
algorithms, and principled theoretical analyses, which will lead to significant
practical and theoretical advances in multi-task learning.