* 1908658
* CNS Core: Small: Interpretable Multi-Modal Neural Network Pruning for Edge Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yan Yan, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 532,000.00

Deep artificial neural network technology has been widely used to solve many
challenging tasks in computer vision, natural language processing, speech
recognition, and more. Most of today's deep learning algorithms are designed for
high performance servers and running in the cloud. As the edge devices (e.g.,
mobile phones and smart watches) become more capable and the advantages of on-
device artificial intelligence (AI) (e.g. protecting privacy, working without a
network, processing data locally in real-time) become more evident, bringing AI
to the edge will be inevitable. However, the limited resources (e.g.,
computation, memory, and battery) of edge devices bring a whole new level of
challenges: (1) On-device AI must keep the model size small without sacrificing
accuracy; (2) On-device AI must keep the power usage low; (3) Future on-device
AI should enable efficient processing and analysis on multi-modal data (e.g.,
video, audio, and text); and (4) On-device AI should be interpretable and
reproducible. This project aims to address these challenges by (1) exploring
innovative machine learning algorithms (e.g., multi-task learning) for multi-
modal data analysis; (2) exploring multi-modal pruning algorithms (reducing the
neural network size without compromising accuracy) that can be applied on edge
devices; (3) investigating and explaining how pruning works and using the
derived theory to guide further pruning optimization; and (4) improving the
energy efficiency of on-device AI algorithms and developing energy-aware
scheduling algorithms for on-device AI apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
outcomes of this project directly benefit mobile users by accelerating the
deployment of efficient AI algorithms on edge devices. Texas State University is
a large Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), which provides a unique platform to
engage underrepresented students in science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) research. We will enlist the Texas State University Houston-Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation Scholars Program and the Women in Science
and Engineering Program to enhance the research and education experiences of
underrepresented students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.