* 1908084
* Fourteenth International Congress on Mathematical Education (ICME14) Travel Grant
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Gail Burrill, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 02/29/2024
* USD 293,385.00

This project will support the participation of 53 US K-12 mathematics teachers,
graduate students, community college/university mathematicians, mathematics
teacher educators, and mathematics education researchers to attend the
Fourteenth International Congress for Mathematical Education (ICME-14) to be
held in Shanghai, China July 9-16, 2020. While mathematics education in the
United States has its own culture and expectations, the work and conversations
of mathematics educators across the world might contribute to our understanding
of issues facing our community today such as curriculum development, the use of
technology, strategies for reaching all students, teacher education and
professional development. The questions we have as a nation about our own
mathematics education might be informed and enlightened by international
conversations with others confronting similar issues. A research team led by
Sharon McCrone, University of New Hampshire, will prepare a 2020 Fact Book on US
mathematics education, building on reports for prior ICMEs. The travel grant
will increase the number and diversity of the US mathematics education community
attending the international congress, which will enable a broader representation
from the US to benefit from interaction with the world's leading mathematics
educators. This project is supported by the Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12), which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
a careful selection process, experts in the field will identify travel
recipients most likely to benefit from attending ICME-14 and well-positioned to
disseminate insights from their experience. Fostering understanding of
international issues and practices among educators and researchers in the US may
enhance their capacity to take an informed, global perspective in their work,
which, in turn, may benefit their local communities. Digital media will allow
educators and classrooms to make and maintain contact across the world, enabling
ICME-14 grantees to maintain connections initiated at the meeting and have an
impact on large numbers of school children and teachers, both preservice and
practicing, in the US. At ICME-14 these educators will engage in learning about
the "state of the art" with respect to research and practice in mathematics
education from a wide variety of perspectives and will be able to discuss common
challenges in teaching and learning mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.