* 1908630
* Developing and Validating Early Assessments of College Readiness: Differential Effects for Underrepresented Groups, Optimal Timing of Assessments, and STEM-specific Indicators
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Gregory Palardy, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 115,776.00

One third of all college freshmen are academically unprepared for entry-level
college coursework and require remedial course. That figure is much higher at
many colleges. The problem is more acute in STEM disciplines, particularly among
students from underrepresented ethnic groups and low socioeconomic status
families. This purpose of this project is to develop and validate a range of
assessments with a focus on academic preparedness for higher education. The team
will explore relevant qualities of assessments such as their differential
predictive validity to ensure they are appropriate for underrepresented groups,
the optimal grade level to begin assessing readiness, and measures that are most
appropriate for predicting STEM-specific readiness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use two recent and complementary large-scale, nationally
representative federal databases: the High School Longitudinal Study of 2009 and
the Education Longitudinal Study of 2002. Factor analysis will be used to
develop composite variables of college readiness and multilevel regression will
be used to develop predictive models on a range of college outcomes to test the
predictive validity of composite and individual predictors. The models will be
extended to conduct multiple group analyses to test for differential prediction
for students from underrepresented groups. The project intends to promote 1) the
use of a wider range of assessments of academic preparedness, 2) the use of
measures that are more sensitive for assessing college readiness from
underrepresented groups and among STEM majors, 3) earlier assessment using
indicators and models with predictive validity and 4) progress monitoring of
college readiness by providing a detailed example of how that can be developed
and implemented. Findings will also raise student, parental, teacher, and other
school personnel awareness of the range of factors relevant for preparing
students for college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools
(RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.