* 1908502
* RUI: Continuation of Support for Short-range Tests of Gravity at Humboldt State University
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Charles Hoyle, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 95,999.00

Humboldt State University (HSU) is a federally-recognized Hispanic Serving
Institution in a predominantly rural area of Northern California, and the
Gravitational Physics Laboratory (GPL) is the only dedicated hands-on physics
research laboratory in the Department of Physics and Astronomy. This award
supports research in gravitation at very small ranges of the scale of the width
of a human hair. Tests on the Inverse-Square Law (ISL) are conducted with
tabletop experiments, looking for deviations that may indicate new physics. This
award ensures the continuation of physics research at HSU and that its
undergraduates, many of whom are first-generation college students and members
of underrepresented groups in STEM fields, gain valuable research skills
necessary for the pursuit of graduate studies or careers in industry.
Undergraduates will also be sent to perform research at the University of
Washington through a collaboration formed with a gravity research group there.
Finally, tests of gravity are of great interest to research in diverse fields
ranging from astrophysics and cosmology to particle physics and precision
measurement science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports high-precision
experiments that will test the Weak Equivalence Principle (WEP) of General
Relativity and the gravitational ISL at unprecedented levels. The WEP will be
tested at the millimeter scale and the ISL will be probed over sub-millimeter
distances with unmatched sensitivity down to approximately 25 microns. Both
tests use a novel parallel-plate torsion pendulum and attractor mass design. In
recent years the study of the gravitational interaction at short (sub-
millimeter) distance scales has gained much attention due in a large part to
unification scenarios arising in string or M theory that require more than three
spatial dimensions, some of which could be macroscopic. Short-range tests of
gravity and the WEP also investigate possible proposed mechanisms that attempt
to explain the accelerated expansion of the universe, generally attributed to
Dark Energy. Finally, such tests present the possibility to search for
hypothetical new interactions due to exotic particles or other phenomena. Many
scenarios concerning these effects predict a violation of the WEP and/or ISL at
short distances. Since 1999, experimental limits have improved dramatically so
that the ISL has proven valid over distances down to approximately 55 microns. A
dedicated test of the WEP, however, has not been performed below the millimeter
scale. The funding of this project will allow the completion of the ongoing
initial tests of the WEP and ISL with test mass separations at the sub-
millimeter scale (with test mass separation approaching 100 microns for the ISL
test).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.