* 1908590
* Collaborative research: WoU-MMA:   Electrodynamics of Magnetospheric Interactions in Merging Neutron Star Binaries
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Maxim Lyutikov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 270,628.00

The detection of gravitational waves from the merger of two neutron stars in
August 2017 was a seminal event for astrophysics. This amalgamation of two
extremely dense former stars was associated with a short gamma-ray burst (GRB),
making it clear that a merger provides the central engine of the short-duration
class of this extraordinarily bright type of astrophysical explosion. In order
to better understand how a neutron star merger produces a short GRB, a research
collaboration between Purdue University and Princeton University will carry out
theoretical and numerical investigations of the merger, with a particular focus
on the earliest possible electromagnetic radiation from the merger, the
precursor light produced as the neutron stars spiral toward each other before
the main event. The researchers will perform simulations of the interacting
magnetic fields of merging neutron stars, estimating the power, angular pattern
and broadband emission mechanisms, from possible coherent radio waves to X-rays.
The project combines research in broad areas of high energy astrophysics and
plasma physics. The project addresses diverse problems in multi-messenger
astrophysics related to gravitational wave astronomy, interaction of ultra-
strong magnetic fields and acceleration of sub-atomic particles. The results of
the investigation will also help formulate the strategies for searching for
possible merger precursor emission. The research will include involvement of
undergraduate students at both universities and an outreach program including
animated movies of the interactions being studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most
likely scenario to generate precursor emission is the electromagnetic
interaction of two neutron stars via the creation of inductive electric fields
through the relative motion of magnetized plasma within the common neutron star
magnetosphere. It is expected that merger times, at least millions of years
after the formation of the second neutron star, are sufficiently long that, at
the time of the merger, each magnetosphere is likely to be dead on its own. As
the stars spiral in, the magnetospheres can be revived due to the relative
orbital motion. The main goal of the project is to study this orbital revival of
the common magnetospheres by employing the pulsar magnetosphere paradigm: the
generation of the inductive electric field due to the motion of magnetized
plasma and ensuing vacuum breakdown. The researchers will consider the formation
of gaps: regions with high electric field along magnetic field lines, and
reconnection layers in the orbital-modulated common magnetosphere of interacting
neutron stars. Spins and orbital motion of the neutron stars may generate
conditions favorable for dynamo action within the common magnetosphere, which
will amplify the magnetic field. The team will also study the generation of high
brightness coherent radio emission via the production of a plasma maser. This
project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.