* 1908947
* Nonlinear Waves in Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* John Hunter, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Fluids, such as air or water, support many different kinds of waves. For
example, sound waves propagate through compressible fluids, water waves
propagate on the surface of an ocean, and large-scale atmospheric waves affect
the earth's weather and climate. At sufficiently low intensities, waves are
modeled by linear systems of equations, which are relatively well-understood;
but at higher intensities, the equations become nonlinear. Nonlinearity
introduces fundamental mathematical difficulties and leads to new physical
phenomena, such as the shock waves generated by supersonic aircraft, the
solitons (particle-like waves) that propagate on shallow water, and nonlinear
wave interactions that generate additional waves. The aim of this project is to
study the dynamics of waves in fluids and uncover new nonlinear phenomena in the
context of specific physical applications. This award will also provide support
for the involvement of one graduate student in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the mathematical modeling and
analysis of nonlinear wave propagation in a variety of fluid systems. It focuses
on the asymptotic analysis of nonlinear, nondispersive and dispersive waves,
including waves that propagate on boundaries, free surfaces, or interfaces. A
unifying framework is provided by Hamiltonian dynamics, which is an essential
structure for the waves considered in the proposed research. Physical
applications include waves on vorticity discontinuities in incompressible
fluids, temperature fronts in surface quasi-geostrophic flows, current-vortex
sheets in plasmas, shock wave reflection, and the resonant interaction of sound
and entropy waves. A number of these problems lead to common mathematical
themes, such as degenerate dispersive shocks, normal form transformations for
quasilinear wave equations, and the formation and propagation of
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.