* 1908825
* Reasoning Language for Teaching Secondary Algebra
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Cody Patterson, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 12/31/2019
* USD 444,474.00

Decades of research have demonstrated that stronger mathematics classroom
discourse, along with the use and connection of multiple mathematical
representations, correlates positively with gains in student learning. This
relationship is particularly salient in algebra, where diversifying the
representations available to students can provide important supports for the
development of conceptual understanding. The Reasoning Language for Teaching
Secondary Algebra (ReLaTe-SA) project proposes to study the teaching and
learning of algebra in grades 7-9, with a specific focus on the ways in which
classroom language explicitly describes properties of and relationships among
algebraic objects. The project seeks to investigate the bi-directional
relationship between reasoning-rich algebraic discourse and the mathematical
meanings students hold for core algebraic concepts such as equations, the
equation-solving process, and functions. With a focus on the teacher, ReLaTe-SA
will analyze classroom narratives about algebraic concepts and procedures and
provide an 80-hour professional development program designed to support teachers
in developing stronger explanations of algebraic objects, their properties, and
their relationships.

The ReLaTe-SA project will investigate three aspects of teacher discourse
practice related to algebra. First, the project will study the discourse and
discourse routines that teachers use to explain algebraic objects, their
properties, and their relationships. This will be accomplished through the
development and deployment of an assessment called the Survey of Algebraic
Language and Reasoning to identify teachers' discursive routines and narratives
in the context of algebra. The instrument asks teachers to interpret student
work and explanations by describing the student's mathematical reasoning and
underlying mathematical understandings. Second, the project will support
potential growth in teachers' algebraic discourse practices through an 80-hour
professional development intervention focused on discourse in algebra. The
impact of this intervention will be measured by changes to teachers' response
patterns on the Survey of Algebraic Language and Reasoning, analyses of
teachers' work within the professional development, and the analysis of
classroom observations after the professional development has concluded. Third,
the project will seek to understand the ways in which teachers develop lessons
that explicitly focus on the development of students' algebraic reasoning and
discourse. This goal will be realized through analyses of the tasks, plans, and
implementations of mathematics lessons in participating teachers' classrooms.
Three cohorts of 12 teachers each will be recruited for the project. Based on
the results of this exploratory project, the team intends to follow up with a
larger-scale study of the professional development and its impact on the
teaching and learning of algebra.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.