* 1908351
* Designing and Researching a Program for Preparing Teachers as Facilitators of Computational Making Activities in Classroom and Informal Learning Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Ricarose Roque, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 10/31/2023
* USD 449,994.00

This project will study a model of pre-service teacher preparation that is
designed to to increase teachers' and students' skills and confidence with
computational thinking and develop teachers as designers of inclusive learning
environments to promote computational thinking. The project will build teachers'
recognition of diverse family learning and cultural resources. The project will
engage elementary (grades K-5) pre-service teachers (who are concurrently
involved in school-based teacher preparation programs) as facilitators in an
existing family technology program called Family Creative Learning (FCL). This
program is embedded in the Denver Public Library (DPL) network of makerspaces.
The project will study pre-service elementary teachers' computational thinking
and facilitation practices and its impact on children's learning across informal
and classroom settings where pre-service teachers concurrently conduct their
field work. The project team will develop research-based resources, tools, and
activities that help to cultivate these key facilitation practices. These
practices will include how to develop trust and relationships, to deepen
participation and interests, and to ask questions that encourage inquiry. These
resources will be useful for teacher preparation and for staff at informal
learning organizations with making and tinkering spaces promoting STEM learning,
specifically computational thinking. The project will disseminate resources
through current relationships with PBS Kids and through networks of educators
such as MakerEd, Connected Learning Alliance, and technology education networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research: (1) what features of pre-
service teachers' experiences preparing for and facilitating the FCL program at
DPL supports or limits their development of facilitation practices and
computational thinking; (2) study how teachers and participants learn and
develop in their joint engagement with computational thinking through making;
(3) examine how teachers carry over and influence student's learning in their
fieldwork within classroom settings. The project team will use ethnographic
methods to develop comparative case studies of pre-service teachers' development
and the impact on student learning across formal and informal learning settings.
These methods include observation, interviews, and artifact collection to
closely document what supports new facilitators to engage in facilitation
practices of computational thinking activities and its consequential impact on
student and family learning. An external advisory board with relevant expertise
will provide iterative feedback and assess the project's progress in meeting its
goals. The project results have implications for teaching practices across
formal and informal learning spaces that aim to engage diverse participants in
interest-driven, peer-supported, and project-based STEM learning
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.