* 1908313
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Reasoning about dependencies and information flow in dynamic code
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Saumya Debray, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 515,265.00

This project aims to investigate software whose code can change during its
execution. Such code is ubiquitous in modern systems. For example, all modern
web browsers contain a component, known as a JIT compiler, that creates or
modifies code during execution. Reasoning about relationships between the code
that carries out the runtime modifications, and the code that is created or
modified as a result, is important for a number of software security
applications. For example, bugs in a JIT compiler can result in vulnerabilities
that can be exploited by hackers. Currently, such reasoning is performed
manually. Because of the size and complexity of software that uses code that is
created or modified during execution, such manual reasoning is difficult, slow,
tedious, and error-prone. This project aims to develop concepts, techniques, and
tools to automate this process and make it faster and easier to reason about and
understand the behavior of such software. Potential benefits of the project
include improved software security and training undergraduate and graduate
students, including members of underrepresented minorities, in advanced research
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on developing concepts,
techniques, and algorithms for reasoning about code that can be created or
modified at runtime ("dynamic code") that are not predicated on specific
technologies or implementation artifacts, and will articulate clearly any
underlying assumptions. Its research activities will focus on the following
topics: (1) identification of suitable representations for the computational
structure of dynamic code so as to make it possible to reason about end-to-end
information flow, i.e.,information flow between the code that performs dynamic
code modification and the code that is modified as a result; (2) identification
of appropriate notions of dependency that can adequately capture end-to-end
information flow in dynamic code; extension of analyses developed for static
code to work on dynamic code in a natural way. (3) the evaluation of these ideas
to determine how well they work in practice in the context of real-world
applications such as bug localization in JIT
compilers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.