* 1908070
* III: Small: A Submodular Framework for Scalable Graph Matching with Performance Guarantees
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Nikolaos Sidiropoulos, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 456,742.00

Graphs are a natural and convenient abstraction for modeling structures arising
in a broad spectrum of science and engineering disciplines. In many
applications, a key problem is to align a pair of graphs (or "embed" one into
the other). This is known as graph matching, and it frequently emerges in
machine vision (e.g., landmark matching), learning (knowledge graphs), and graph
mining; computational biology (protein-protein interactions); social sciences
(social / organizational networks); and electronic circuit layout verification,
to name a few areas. Graph matching is a computationally demanding problem, yet
modern applications easily generate graphs with millions of vertices. In that
regime, there is a pressing need for approximation algorithms which are both
theoretically sound and highly scalable. This project considers graph matching
from a fresh perspective -- through the lens of submodular optimization. The
proposed research will yield exciting new theoretical and methodological
insights that will also inform other walks of combinatorial optimization and its
applications. In parallel with the research activities, the PIs will contribute
to state-wide efforts to broaden participation in computing, via guest lectures
in introductory engineering courses, and teaming up with a nonprofit that trains
K-12 teachers to empower them to teach coding and computational
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing graph matching approximations based on
relaxing the combinatorial constraints either do not scale well, or fail to
provide performance guarantees (except in special cases). None of these directly
tackles the combinatorial nature of the problem; the conventional wisdom being
that the difficulty stems from the constraints, not the cost function. In
preliminary work, the PIs have established that graph matching can be
equivalently reformulated as minimizing a submodular function over the
intersection of a pair of partition matroids. Using this preliminary result as a
stepping stone, this project is focused on designing successive submodular
approximation algorithms that feature both theoretical performance guarantees
and scalability; hard and soft graph matching (via continuous extension);
validation using real-world data; and leveraging the practical insights gained
through validation to close the loop and drive further methodological and
algorithmic developments. Breaking from the mold, the approach embraces
combinatorial optimization using a judicious combination of discrete and
continuous optimization tools which promises to go a long way towards improving
the state-of-art for this fundamental problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.