* 1908889
* Learning Trajectories as a Complete Early Mathematics Intervention: Achieving Efficacies of Economies at Scale
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Julie Sarama, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 4,575,683.00

U.S. proficiency in mathematics continues to be low and early math performance
is a powerful predictor of long-term academic success and employability.
However, relatively few early childhood degree programs have any curriculum
requirements focused on key mathematics topics. Thus, teacher professional
development programs offer a viable and promising method for supporting and
improving teachers' instructional approaches to mathematics and thus, improving
student math outcomes. The purpose of this project is to test the efficacy of
the Learning and Teaching with Learning Trajectories (LT2) program with the goal
of improving mathematics teaching and thereby increasing young students' math
learning. LT2 is a professional development tool and a curriculum resource
intended for teachers to be used to support early math instruction. The LT2
program modules uniquely include the mathematical learning goal, the
developmental progression, and relevant instructional activities. All three
aspects are critical for high-quality and coherent mathematics instruction in
the early grades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the following
research questions: 1) What are the medium-range effects of LT2 on student
achievement and the achievement gap? 2) What are the short- and long-term
effects of LT2 on teacher instructional approach, beliefs, and quality? and 3)
How cost effective is the LT2 intervention relative to the original Building
Blocks intervention? To address the research questions, this project will
conduct a multisite cluster randomized experimental design, with 90 schools
randomly assigned within school districts to either experimental or control
groups. Outcome measures for the approximately 250 Kindergarten classrooms
across these districts will include the Research-based Elementary Math
Assessment, observations of instructional quality, a questionnaire focused on
teacher beliefs and practices, in addition to school level administrative data.
Data will be analyzed using multi-level regression models to determine the
effect of the Learning Trajectories intervention on student learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.