* 1908137
* Collaborative Research: The Last Gasp - Shutting Down Massive Galaxies at z~0.6
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Desika Narayanan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2023
* USD 135,740.00

This project will study distant galaxies in the midst of shutting down their
last burst of star formation and metamorphosing from spiral galaxies - like the
Milky Way - into round and dead elliptical galaxies. Although this process is
common, as most large galaxies are ellipticals while young galaxies are spirals,
it is poorly understood. This project will use the detailed properties of newly
transformed galaxies in stars and gas to test formation models. The broader
impacts will support underrepresented minority students transition to graduate
school through bridge programs at Princeton University and the University of
Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work assesses possible quenching
mechanisms using a unique sample of intermediate-redshift massive post-starburst
galaxies. These galaxies have recently quenched their major star-forming episode
- yet they are sufficiently nearby that multi-wavelength observations can
illuminate their detailed, spatially resolved stellar properties and molecular
gas reservoirs. By combining the resolved kinematics, distribution of stellar
ages, remaining gas content, and visual morphologies of this statistical sample
of recently quenched massive galaxies and comparing with the timescales and
stochasticity of quenching within the SIMBA cosmological simulations, this
project will determine the dominant quenching mechanism(s) driving the
transformation of blue star forming, rotating, disk galaxies into red-and-dead,
kinematically hot, spheroids. In addition, the team will extend a proven program
to broaden and strengthen support of post-baccalaureate students at Princeton
and the University of Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.