* 1908843
* SHF: Small: A Hybrid NVM based Computing Architecture for Machine Learning Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yu Wang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2023
* USD 497,576.00

Today, enterprises are increasingly looking inward at their huge stores of
under-processed or throwaway data, treating them as resources to be mined. As
such, an emergent field called memory-intensive computing has ignited interest
among industry and academia, largely driven by various emerging non-volatile
memory technologies (NVMs). Machine Learning (ML) applications are being
targeted by memory-intensive computing, leveraging unique properties of ML
applications to improve their distributed performance by orders of magnitude. It
is therefore highly desirable for ML applications executing in such memory
intensive computing environments to be efficient, flexible and scalable. ML
applications crunch a lot of data from disk drives, increasing latency due to
disk access delays. This project explores and designs new techniques that let ML
applications fully exploit the benefits of persistence for intermediate data in
NVMs, which significantly reduces disk I/Os and hence data processing times.
This project also involves curriculum development, and provides more avenues to
bring women, minority, and underrepresented students into research and graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on an open challenge for
memory intensive computing systems how to offer ML applications with high
efficiency, low cost and more flexibility, especially under the heterogeneous
environment. This project proposes a hybrid NVM based computing architecture
with effective data sharing and communication strategy to optimize file
management, resource allocation and data communication for ML applications. This
research centers on two key designs: 1) a new file and data management system
based on the hybrid NVM pool consisting of Byte and Block addressable devices;
2) an efficient data sharing and communication management among memories to
guarantee data consistency in the hybrid NVM memory
pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.