* 1908389
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: A Rational Reconstruction of the Julia Type System
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Jan Vitek, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2022
* USD 247,222.00

Julia is an up-and-coming language in scientific computing. Julia straddles the
line between being general-purpose and being domain-specific, and the line
between being statically typed versus being dynamically typed. Despite being
only six years old, Julia has been downloaded over 2 million times and has had
nearly 2,000 packages developed by its community. The novelty of this project is
to develop some of the foundations of the Julia type system which have not been
formalized to date. The project's impacts are to provide a well-grounded
specification to the language so that the specification can be used by
programmers to reason about their code, and by tool developers to write program
analysis and transformation software for the Julia
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Julia supports dynamic typing. Programs can be
written without any type annotations as they would be written in, say, Python.
Yet, Julia's grammar of types and its subtyping system is reminiscent of what
one would expect of a modern statically typed language with an original
combination of structural subtyping, invariant nominal generics, union types,
existential types, covariant tuples, distributivity, and singleton types, as
well as the, so-called, diagonal rule. This complex system is used to determine
the run-time behavior of Julia programs. Specifically it is used to determine,
for a given multimethod, which of its implementations is applicable. To make
this determination, Julia compares the run-time types of arguments with the
static types of the parameters of various overloadings. This means that the
algorithmic behavior of Julia's type system is central to the language's
semantics, performance, and usage. Yet Julia uses features, such as iterated
unions, for which the research community has not yet developed adequate
algorithms. As such, Julia's type system is currently specified by a reference
implementation in C, one that has been made complex after years of balancing
performance trade-offs with the need to patch bug reports filed by the
language's users. The project, therefore, aims to perform experiments and
studies to determine what the underlying intent of the implementation is,
formalize that intent axiomatically as a type system, and then develop and
verify the key algorithms for implementing the core of the Julia
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.