* 1908933
* Collaborative Research:  EDGES-3: Validating and Refining Global 21cm Measurements of Cosmic Dawn
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Judd Bowman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2024
* USD 598,771.00

Astronomers are searching for signs of the first stars and galaxies that formed
in the universe. This period in cosmic history is called the Epoch of
Reionization (EoR). The Experiment to Detect the Global EoR Signature (EDGES) is
an ongoing project to study this early period. In 2018, EDGES reported the
first-ever detection of evidence of light from the first stars. These stars
where shining 180 million years after the Big Bang, when the universe was merely
one percent of its current age. The EDGES project uses radio observations to
probe the early universe. This project will build a new radio antenna and
receiver for EDGES. The instrument will be used to confirm previously reported
evidence. Students from the diverse community of Arizona State University will
help to build the instrument and analyze its data. This experience will help to
prepare them for future careers and give them a unique research
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observing the formation of the first stars,
galaxies, and black holes over 13.5 billion years ago is the next frontier in
observational cosmology. After the first stars formed, they produced a
background of ultra-violet photons that affected the surrounding hydrogen gas,
enabling the gas to be detected in absorption against the cosmic microwave
background. In early 2018 this research team reported the first evidence for
detection of this signal, but the amplitude was twice the predicted level and
the timing of the signal was earlier than expected. This project will develop a
new radio antenna and receiver that will improve on previous performance by a
factor of three, enabling a verification of the previous detection and detailed
characterization of the signal. The project will engage students from Arizona
State University to build the instrument and analyze its data, preparing them
for future careers. The research team will disseminate technical advances in
radio instrumentation through technical memos and journal
articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.