* 1908338
* Magnetized Double-diffusive Convection in Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Pascale Garaud, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 320,789.00

Convection is the process by which heat is transferred by the bulk flow of fluid
from one region to another. It is important in the Earth's atmosphere, in the
oceans, in molten regions within the Earth, and inside stars. Double diffusive
convection (DDC) occurs when convection is driven by two different density
gradients in the fluid, each of which has a different rate of diffusion. An
example is within the ocean, where heat and salt gradients drive convection at
different rates. DDC could play an important role in stellar interiors. This
team will study DDC in stars using numerical simulations, with an emphasis on
the effect of magnetic fields on diffusion. The principal investigator will
advise students as part of her project. She is also involved each year in
running or participating in summer graduate training programs. As part of the
project, she plans to run a Kavli Summer Program in Astrophysics on the topic of
Mixing in Stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will continue its recent
progress in characterizing the transport properties (for heat and chemical
species primarily) of double-diffusive instabilities using numerical
simulations. They will continue to investigate the effect of other processes,
such as rotation and shear, and start to look into the effect of magnetic
fields. Magnetic fields are very common in stars, but little work has been done
to study their effect on other instabilities (beyond basic linear stability
calculations). This group has shown that vertical magnetic fields can increase
transport by fingering convection by orders of magnitude (contrary to linear
work that had suggested it would decrease transport), with important
consequences for mixing in red giant branch stars and white dwarfs. They will
determine whether similar effects are possible for inclined fields and also
study the interaction of magnetic fields with semiconvection, and they will
characterize the dynamo properties of both fingering and oscillatory DDC, with
and without rotation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.