* 1908552
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative Research: Transient characteristics and interference modeling for millimeter-wave communications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Mai Vu, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 249,232.00

Millimeter-wave (mmWave) communication is a promising solution to the current
global shortage of bandwidth created by the rapidly growing demand for mobile
data. While channel modeling and propagation characteristics for mmWave
transmissions are fairly well understood, transient channel characteristics
including how the hand of a human blocks antennas in a handset requires new,
detailed research. Further, the impact and nature of interference in the face of
mmWave directional beamforming are yet to be well explored. The key aspects of
this proposal dealing with transient channel characterization and interference
modeling will directly contribute to the realization of mmWave communications,
which is envisioned not only for traditional fixed infrastructure cellular
services but also for emerging, more prevalent, new service modes including
unlicensed/licensed and mobile usage such as on buses, trains and cars, and peer
to peer communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal advances
understanding in several fundamental aspects of mmWave communications. First,
the proposal characterizes transient physical effects in mmWave channels such as
fading due to human hand, head and body placement when holding phones. This
characterization will be carried out with extensive measurements using
directional antennas and novel modeling methodology employing finite-state
Markov models. These transient channel models will then be integrated into the
open-source measurement-based channel simulation platform NYUSIM, which
generates realistic mmWave channel impulse responses under a wide range of
practical settings. Second, the proposal provides analytical models of the
interference distribution in a mmWave cellular system employing beamforming,
including explicit probability density functions for the interference power at
each receiving antenna element and interference correlation between different
antenna elements as well as correlation between interference signals and
intended signals. These distributions are parameterized and heavy-tailed in
order to capture the large fluctuation in mmWave signals due to strong shadowing
and a high probability of NLOS propagation in typical mmWave applications of
dense environments. The interference models are verified by comparing with a
system simulation using stochastic geometry to model locations of users and base
stations and using NUYSIM to generate realistic mmWave channels among all nodes.
The proposed research integrates measurement, modeling, theory, and analysis to
advance fundamental understanding of mmWave communications, providing a means
towards designing and evaluating mmWave communication
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.