* 1908850
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Modeling the Ecological Dynamics of Online Organizations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Benjamin Mako Hill, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2024
* USD 303,858.00

This project will advance scientific understanding of large scale virtual
organizations through the elaboration and empirical validation of a theory of
ecological dynamics of online communities. The work will build on recent
research in social computing on interdependence between online communities that
suggests that ecological analyses can provide not only novel scientific
understandings, but also viable strategies for managing online communities. It
will contribute knowledge of the environmental preconditions of successful
collaboration to the study of social computing systems. It will also contribute
to organizational sociology and complex systems science by adapting and applying
theories and models from these areas into a novel domain that is rich in
detailed communication and behavioral data. The theory and empirical analyses
developed in this research will provide system designers, voluntary
organizations, movements, and community leaders with practical knowledge of how
they can account for environmental conditions in their decision making
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be structured around three
linked projects answering fundamental ecological questions: How is the growth
and survival of individual online communities shaped by activity within their
environments? How do communities interact with each other in ways that are
beneficial or harmful to their success? How can communities strategically build
and discover opportunities for growth and productivity in their environments?
This approach will be applied to three popular online platforms for voluntary
organization and open collaboration: Wikia, Reddit, and Stack Exchange. For each
platform, predictions will be derived from ecological theory about how
communities' success relates to the presence, absence, and behavior of other
communities and to variation in external resources in the form of users and
underlying interest in topics. These predictions will be tested empirically
using large scale statistical analyses of longitudinal digital trace data drawn
from the platforms. Finally, these results will be synthesized into a cohesive
theory of ecology for online communities. In the course of this work, the team
will also design, build, and publish software and unique research datasets for
other researchers to use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.