* 1908549
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative Research: Scalable Penetration Test Generation for Automotive Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Sandip Ray, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 254,936.00

This project develops a comprehensive framework for security validation of
modern automotive systems. With increasing autonomy, automotive systems are
evolving into very complex distributed systems. They contain more than a hundred
electronic control units (ECU), a heterogeneous collection of sensors and
actuators, several in-vehicle communication networks, and several hundred
megabytes of software. Currently security validation of these systems depends
primarily on human expertise to identify vulnerabilities in design and
implementation. Clearly this does not scale to large complex systems. The
project addresses this problem by introducing automated penetration testing
methods capable of handling the exploding automotive system complexities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops technology for systematic analysis
of diverse safety, security, and reliability requirements in current and
emergent vehicles. It enables early comprehension of conflict, trade-offs, and
potential internal inconsistencies among the different requirements. The
framework includes: (1) an adaptive virtual prototyping infrastructure that
enables smooth integration of ECU, sensor, and actuator models; and (2) a
concolic testing facility to generate penetration tests automatically for
targeted adversary models. The analysis techniques developed in the research
cross-cut hardware, software, and physical (sensory and actuarial) artifacts.
The framework brings together currently disparate research in security, machine
intelligence, and decision science. This project promises transformative
technical and societal impacts through drastically improved safety, security,
and reliability of diverse cyber-physical systems in general and automotive
systems in particular. Research results will be integrated into graduate and
undergraduate courses. A new workshop will be introduced to bring together
experts in automotive safety, security, and reliability, and cross-cutting
areas. Hands-on training modules for undergraduate and high school students will
be developed using automotive simulator platforms. Participation of
underrepresented students in the project will be actively encouraged. Industry
connections will be used and actively pursued for technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All artifacts and data generated during the
course of this project will be made publicly available, enabling the broader
community to reproduce and extend research results. This includes all software
and tools developed, architecture and platform models, and any experimental data
supporting the research conclusions. A public repository has been set up at the
URL https://github.com/RaySandip/AutoSec19.git for this dissemination, and will
be maintained for at least three years beyond the award period. Backup copies of
the data is expected to be retained indefinitely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.