* 1908431
* Science Coordinators Advancing a Framework For Outstanding Leadership Development
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Julie Luft, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,370,197.00

Current priorities in formal science education include building strong
professional learning communities that foster ongoing professional growth among
teachers, teacher leaders, and school administrators. This project responds to
these priorities by developing and testing a professional development program
designed for school district science coordinators. Though these science
coordinators typically have some degree of responsibility for supporting science
teachers in their school districts, most individuals appointed to these
leadership positions have little or no formal preparation for the role. The
range of duties assigned to science coordinators varies greatly from district to
district, but duties typically include mentoring teachers, selecting curriculum
materials, overseeing science supplies and classroom safety, and advocating for
science program improvements. The professional development model being designed
and developed by this project will be tested by examining impacts of
participating science coordinators on science teachers and their students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this four-year exploratory study is to
determine if a specialized professional development program for district science
coordinators can facilitate their growth as instructional leaders and the
instructional practices of science teachers of their school districts. More
specifically, the project will pursue answers to two research questions: 1) How,
if at all, does the professional development model impact the knowledge,
practices, and work of the science coordinators? and 2) How, if at all, do
participating science coordinators impact the practices of science teachers who
are implementing the Next Generation Science Standards? A design-based research
approach will be employed to develop a two-year professional development model
having 80 hours of programming during the first year, and 30 hours during the
second year. Programming will include a blend of face-to-face and online
meetings and modules. The mixed-methods research plan will compare teaching and
learning outcomes within three groups: 1) The treatment groups consisting of
science coordinators who participated in the professional development program,
and the science teachers with whom they work, 2) A comparison group of science
coordinators who did not participate in the professional development program and
the teachers with whom they work, and 3) A comparison group consisting of
science teachers who do not have direct access to a science coordinator.
Quantitative data will be gathered through use of instruments that measure how
science coordinators develop their knowledge and practices, and how they modify
their perspectives as leaders. Observations of the classroom practices of
teachers will also be documented. The qualitative research component will
include interviews, examination of artifacts, and focus
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.