* 1908972
* WoU-MMA, Collaborative Research: Searches After Gravitational Waves Using Arizona's Observatories
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* David Sand, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 178,902.00

The recent detection of Gravitational Waves and light from a neutron star merger
opens up the era of multimessenger astrophysics with direct evidence for the
origin of short gamma ray bursts, heavy element production, and relativistic
outflows launched from the mergers of compact collapsed objects (neutron stars
and black holes). This new discovery space will be optimized by increasing the
detection rate and monitoring of the electromagnetic (EM) counterparts of GW and
high energy neutrino events in the northern hemisphere. This will be
accomplished by rapidly locating the position of this emission using the
Catalina Sky Survey after an alert, informing the astronomical community of its
location and immediately bringing on-line the Searches After Gravitational-waves
Using Arizona's Observatories (SAGURAO) network of telescopes &lt;br/&gt; (
6.5mMMT, 2x8 m LBT, as well as the 10 m Keck in Hawaii and others) to monitor
these events with deep imaging and integral field unit (IFU) spectroscopy. A set
of algorithms to prioritize EM counterpart candidates for follow-up observation
and a website to provide a centralized location to organize candidates in real
time to disseminate the information to the scientific community will be
developed to insure coordination of resources for this research. The PIs will
partnership with Harold Washington University in Chicago to mentor two
underrepresented minority community college students by providing them with a
two year summer course on astronomical research to develop their STEM
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant addresses the needs of the WoU-MMA
program in the northern hemisphere. It will organize the astronomical
observational resources in Arizona to detect and localize the optical
electromagnetic window for the observation of gravitational waves and neutron
star mergers. After being informed of an event by Ligo/Virgo or IceCube, the
Catalina Sky Survey will be used to discover and quickly localize the optical
counterpart and immediately send out an alert to the astronomical community.
This will be followed by observations using the Searches After Gravitational-
waves Using Arizona's Observatories (SAGURAO) PIs consortium of telescope
facilities in Arizona and Hawaii as well as other facilities to image and
spectroscopically study the optical counterparts and their environments. A set
of algorithms to prioritize EM counterpart candidates for follow-up observation
and a website to provide a centralized location to organize candidates in real
time and disseminate the information to the scientific community will be
developed to insure coordination of resources for this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the
Universe Big-Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.