* 1908566
* CNS Core: Small: Scaling the IoT with Constellation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jon Weissman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 516,000.00

This project aims to realize a vision of the Internet-of-Things (IoT) that is
ubiquitous and accessible to all. Today, the IoT is siloed with a few niche
applications containing smart devices that do not interoperate across vendors.
The goal of this project, Constellation, is to create the software needed to
allow embedded IoT devices to be easily discovered, shared, managed, connected,
and protected to enable the IoT to scale. Constellation contains a new
programming language that allows programmers to easily specify semantic intent
allowing the system to locate the best devices, handle failures, resolve
conflicts, and meet performance goals. Constellation relies on the presence of
edge computing nodes located near the IoT devices that form a web of computation
and communication services needed to realize this vision.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IoT revolution is at its infancy yet the impact on
society is already evident. Self-driving cars promise convenience, smart meters
promise energy savings, and smart homes promise safety. Yet the IoT is
fragmented, siloed, and isolated. To realize the vision of a smart campus, smart
city, and beyond, requires that the IoT be interconnected across these silos to
enable new applications that promote greater safety, energy savings,
productivity, and wellness. That is the ultimate goal of Constellation. The
growth of the IoT envisioned in this proposal will also require partnership with
industry thus stimulating the creation of new frontiers of innovation that lead
to job creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.