* 1908030
* Collaborative Research: Building students' data literacy through the co-design of curriculum by mathematics and art teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Megan Silander, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2022
* USD 126,702.00

The aim of this project is to enact and study a process in which middle school
teachers of mathematics and visual arts co-design and teach activities that
combine math and art to teach data science. Many existing efforts to promote
data literacy are grounded in mathematical concepts of central tendency and
variation, and typically are narrowly focused in single subject domains. Taking
an art-based perspective on data science has the potential to promote student
relevance, accessibility, engagement, reasoning, and meaning-making with data
science. Moreover, visualization technology has advanced to a degree that the
relation between the information in data and visual aesthetic can be leveraged
easily. To explore the opportunity this offers, research on this project will
examine how to equip teachers to develop such interdisciplinary pedagogical
approaches to cultivate their students' data literacy. This exploratory project
will provide support for 12 teachers during summer workshops and during the
school year as these teachers implement their co-designed units in their
classrooms. The work addresses the following questions: (1) How do we support
effective co-design of data literacy units among art teachers, mathematics
teachers, and researchers? (2) How are teachers able to use the unit materials
in their classrooms to engage students in data literacy? And (3) How does an
art-based approach support students' data literacy? Answers to these questions
will build an understanding of how to support interdisciplinary curriculum
design collaborations among researchers and teachers. They will also show how
art-integrated, maker-oriented activities can support middle school learners'
data literacy development; and how to design technologies that are accessible
and powerful to teachers and learners in these interdisciplinary environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through summer workshops and year-round design
collaborations, the project will iteratively design, test and refine four units
for middle school classrooms, including activities, tools, and assessments, to
promote students' data literacy. Data will be collected from co-design sessions
as well as classroom-enactments, and will include observations, video/audio
recordings, student- and teacher-generated artifacts, and pre and post
assessments of students' knowledge and self-efficacy. Mixed methods analyses of
these data, and syntheses of findings across participants, classroom enactments,
and project years, will explore effective ways to support co-design among art
teachers, mathematics teachers, and researchers; and the impact of art-
integrated activities on students' data literacy. This project will reach 12
teachers and their students across 6 New York city schools. By building capacity
and knowledge about how to initiate and sustain teachers' interdisciplinary
curriculum collaborations, the project will have broader impact. Refined project
materials, including pedagogical approaches, toolkits and adaptable classroom
activities, will be disseminated to facilitate classroom adoption by other
educators who wish to undertake similar art-integrated data literacy curriculum
design collaborations, and will thus ultimately broaden participation in data
science among diverse youth within and beyond New York
City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.