* 1908284
* Closing in on the Cosmic Dawn: Quasar Growth and Reionization History at Redshift Seven
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Xiaohui Fan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 369,977.00

Distant luminous quasars directly probe the birth of the earliest supermassive
black holes and the end of cosmic dark ages through cosmic reionization. We will
conduct a multi-wavelength survey of a sample of about 30 quasars at distances
exceeding 13 billion light years. This dataset will allow us to study how the
young galaxies and quasars ended the cosmic dark ages about one billion years
after the big bang, and how early black hole growth interacted with early galaxy
formation. This project will also partner with the Flandrau Science Center &amp;
Planetarium at the University of Arizona to develop a summer program called
Black Hole Week that will have broad impacts in education and outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Luminous quasars at high redshift provide direct probes of
the evolution of supermassive black holes and the intergalactic medium at early
cosmic time. This project will carry out a spectroscopy survey of about 30
quasars at redshift seven in optical and far-infrared wavelengths. This survey
will map the history of reionization at its most active phase, and provide a
first census of the relation between rapid black hole growth and galaxy assembly
during the reionization era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.