* 1908605
* III: Small: DataWorld: Externalizing Hidden Data Flows for Situated Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Niklas Elmqvist, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Understanding data from everyday life could help professionals, policymakers,
and citizens make our society better, fairer, and more efficient. For example,
imagine hunting for a house by walking through the neighborhood in which you
want to live and discovering facts about the area from social media, census
data, and nearby schools. Alternatively, imagine an architect showing her
clients a new office building in its actual location in the city with the
wandering sun, ebb and flow of crowds, and waves of car traffic as a backdrop.
However, most of collected information cannot be accessed and integrated based
on geographical space. This project will investigate how to bridge data and the
world from where it was collected by adding visualizations that will make the
underlying data visible in the real world by using Augmented Reality (AR). This
will help people use the massive troves of data on the internet by literally
putting it at their fingertips as part of the world around them. The project
will be deployed on a university campus to help students, faculty, and visitors
tune in to its "heartbeat" of events, alerts, and historical background.
Finally, the project will also engage students in refining and contributing to
the database, help attract underrepresented students to computing careers, and
build a community of researchers interested in the combination of data and
geographical place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, this project
will build a framework called DataWorld for creating situated data streams and
externalizing them using AR technology. In effect, this will blend the real
world with the hidden world of data. This framework will both combine existing
data from a wide variety of sources, such as social media, public databases, and
popular websites, as well as enable grassroot contributions from DataWorld
users. This framework will then be applied to three separate themes. (1) Public
safety, where information about crime, emergencies, and current events can help
users. (2) History awareness, where the situated data streams will be used to
reveal the footsteps of those who came before us, such as placing old newspaper
stories in their geographical context, highlighting the struggles -- large and
small -- of the civil rights movement, and showing urban development in situ
over time. (3) Civic awareness, where the situated data streams can disseminate
information about current events, promote sustainability and environmentally-
conscious behavior, and facilitate crowdsourced data collection at a grassroots
level, fostering a form of "virtual" geocaching where data can be hidden in the
world. These applications will not only provide new techniques and frameworks
that contribute to our knowledge of situated data, data visualization, and
Augmented Reality, but will be deployed in practice using the University of
Maryland campus as a testbed. The project will generate one or several DataWorld
apps, both for handheld devices as well as head-mounted displays, that will
enable both contributing grassroot data to the DataWorld platform as well as
viewing the data in situ. At the end of the project, an anonymized version of
the DataWorld database will be published. Finally, educational material, source
code, and documentation will also be released as open source during the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.