* 1908634
* Engineering Polyatomic Molecules with Optical Cycling Centers for Quantum Science Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Svetlana Kotochigova, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Laser cooling and trapping of atoms has revolutionized atomic and molecular
physics and led to breakthroughs in several disciplines of science and
technology. The advances enabled a novel generation of atomic clocks, simulation
of exotic phases of matter, the development of highly-sensitive sensors, and
atom-based quantum information science. Laser cooling of atoms has also made
possible the assembly of ultracold, sub microkelvin diatomic molecular samples
that are sufficiently dense for quantum degeneracy effects to be important.
These molecules are confined by electric and magnetic fields as well as optical
traps or tweezers, where they are isolated from their environment and can be
carefully studied. Achieving similar control with larger polyatomic molecules
remains challenging. Such molecules have more complex electronic, vibrational,
and bending motion into which energy can be inadvertently transferred. It is
then far from obvious whether there exist polyatomic molecules with a nearly-
closed optical cycling transition needed for successful laser cooling. These
transitions can then repeatedly scatter photons so that the molecular center-of-
mass motion can be cooled below a milli-Kelvin or less equivalent kinetic
energy. A list of promising applications unique to polyatomic molecules does
exist. This includes performing precision spectroscopy to test the Standard
Model of particle physics, and, excitingly, the promise of quantum control of
chemical reactions as each ultracold molecule can be prepared in a unique
vibrational state. As the de-Broglie wavelength of the molecules is much larger
than the range of intermolecular forces, the dynamics of the breaking and making
chemical bonds promises to be even more interesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will improve understanding of the electronic and vibrational structure
of the "relatively-simple" triatomic molecules M-OH, where the metal-cation M is
an alkaline-earth or rare-earth atom. They have a usable optical cycling
transition located on the metal cation. The researchers will then study the
effect of replacing the hydrogen atom in M-OH by a larger ligand or chains of
molecules. Adding alkaline-earth or rare-earth atoms with their cycling
transitions to prospective polyatomic molecules is another research direction.
In either approach the valence electron of the metal-cation should not be
significantly disturbed, and optical cycling and cooling might remain possible.
The ultimate dream is to design polyatomic molecules with more than one optical
cycling center. &lt;br/&gt;Scientifically, the research will advance
understanding of metal-ligand couplings and elucidate the role of molecular
complexity on the diagonal character of Franck-Condon factors, the quantitative
measure for the quality of optical cycling transitions. The shape of potential
energy surfaces will be characterized for atomic geometries, where all atoms are
close to each other and, when feasible, where one of more atoms has dissociated
and is far away. The researchers will locate their minima, saddle points as well
as conical intersections, where two potential surfaces of the same electron
symmetry touch. Renner-Teller effects will also be studied for the M-OH trimer
near linear geometries. This work is jointly supported by the Theoretical
Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics Program and the Quantum Information
Science Program within the Division of Physics, as well as by the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the Division of
Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.