* 1908926
* Workshop: Transforming Civil &amp; Environmental Engineering Curriculum: Big Data, Machine Learning, and AI Innovations Impact on CEE Education; Alexandria, Virginia; 10 December 2
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2018,04/30/2020
* Lucio Soibelman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 04/30/2020
* USD 55,000.00

Over the last several years, research and development on Machine Learning, Big
Data, and Artificial Intelligence has demonstrated many opportunities for
creating novel concepts, applications, tools and systems with lasting and
transformative impacts on nearly every industry and economic sector. As Civil
and Environmental Engineers adopt new computer technologies, computerized data
are becoming more and more available. There exist numerous opportunities to
exploit and extract knowledge from this vast amount of data through the
development of frameworks and algorithms that support the acquisition, modeling,
management, and analysis of such diverse infrastructure-oriented data. With
sensors everywhere, the field of Civil and Environmental Engineering is
undergoing transformative changes in the physical and natural systems we live in
and travel through. The massive (big) data generated from these sensors presents
tremendous opportunities for a wide range of possibilities that could only be
imagined before. Consequently, Civil and Environmental engineers who have
traditionally relied upon small data (generated through experiments, surveys,
and labs etc.) face novel challenges in utilizing the newly-generated big data
to fully exploit opportunities. This workshop will convene a diverse group of
participants from universities, industry and stakeholders in civil and
environmental engineering, computer science, machine learning, data analytics
and artificial intelligence to chart a course of action to enable the
transformation of Civil and Environmental Engineering (CEE) curricula and fully
prepare the CEE community for both the opportunities and challenges brought by
sensors everywhere, internet of things devices, and the massive amount of
resulting data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will seek to deliver the
following specific impacts to CEE departments and to the research community: (1)
Provide insight into the current availability of expertise on big data, machine
learning, and artificial intelligence within Civil and Environmental Engineering
departments; (2) Enhance understanding of the emerging educational needs for
different areas of expertise within Civil and Environmental Engineering related
to big data, data analytics, machine learning, and artificial intelligence; (3)
Guide Civil and Environmental Engineering departments in aligning their
curriculum with current needs for the profession; (4) Provide the leadership and
guidance for the future development of machine learning, big data, and
artificial intelligence tutorial modules specifically aligned to Civil and
Environmental Engineering curriculum needs. At a broader level, it is intended
that the workshop output will serve as a beacon for bringing advanced computing
techniques to Civil and Environmental Engineering, as well as other Engineering
disciplines, supporting novel curriculum development. The workshop will provide
a roadmap and the leadership for the development of the required tools that will
enhance the capabilities of future engineering graduates enhancing
competitiveness of the engineering profession and improving engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.