* 1908422
* Building the Giants: Cluster Formation and Galaxy Evolution over the Last 12 Billion years
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Lori Lubin, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 532,635.00

As we look out in space, we see back in time as well. This project will use
survey data of distant galaxies to identify young galaxy clusters in the early
universe. They will compare the properties of these early clusters with the
properties of nearby galaxy clusters in the later universe. These to catalogs of
clusters will be combined with theoretical modeling of the growth of galaxy
clusters in order to link early clusters to their descendant across cosmic time
and to chart cluster formation and its effect on galaxy evolution. This project
will also support the mentoring of undergraduates in astronomy
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use existing data from the VIMOS
Ultra-Deep Survey to identify protoclusters in overdensities of high-redshift (2
&lt; z &lt; 5) galaxies. Low redshift clusters (z ~ 1) will be identified using
data from the Observations of Redshift Evolution Survey. In both surveys,
clusters will be identified using a novel Monte Carlo approach to Voronoi
Tessellation techniques. A magnitude-limited survey of five VUDS protoclusters
using DIEMOS will increase the number of spectroscopically identified member
galaxies. Theoretical modeling from the Millennium Run will connect the high-
redshift protoclusters with the low-redshift clusters of the ORELSE
survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.