* 1908195
* Hyperbolic-Parabolic Balance Laws with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Yanni Zeng, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 151,361.00

This project aims to study a general system of partial differential equations
called hyperbolic-parabolic balance laws, with two specific applications in
mind: one in bio-medicine and another in gas dynamics. There is a variety of
gas-dynamic phenomena that can be described mathematically by hyperbolic-
parabolic balance laws. The swirl of complicated gas flows surrounding a space
vehicle reentering the Earth's atmosphere is probably one of the most
spectacular examples for which these balance laws serve as a (simplified)
mathematical description. The second application motivating this research is
chemotaxis, the movement of micro-organisms in response to a chemical stimulus.
The mechanism of chemotaxis is ubiquitous in biology and medicine, from
migration of bacteria or leukocytes to cancer metastasis. Arising from the
physical world, the parabolic-hyperbolic systems do not fit exactly into the
traditional classification in the theory of partial different equations, and the
solutions' behavior is governed by both hyperbolicity and parabolicity, plus a
chemical reaction. Integrated into the research activities of the project there
is an educational component. It includes curriculum development of hand-on
modeling of real-world problems by partial differential equations, one-on-one
research mentorship to undergraduate students, and direct participation of
research by Ph.D. students. The project encourages the participation of students
at all levels, especially students from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two principal mathematical
objectives. The first objective is to study the stability of equilibrium
solutions. This is to understand how an initial perturbation, such as inaccuracy
in measurement, propagates into the solution. The project team is particularly
interested in the wave pattern formed by perturbation at long time. The research
unifies the theories on hyperbolic balance laws and hyperbolic-parabolic
conservation laws in this regard. It has direct application to gas flows in
translational and vibrational non-equilibrium. The second objective is to study
another model system, Keller-Segel-Fisher/KPP system, beyond the application of
the above general theory. It is a chemotaxis model that has logarithmic
sensitivity and logistic growth. Here the logarithmic sensitivity is to account
for Fechner's law: Subjective sensation is proportional to the logarithm of the
stimulus intensity. An important practical problem is what happens if the
chemical signal is near void at one end of the domain. This is equivalent to the
logarithmic function is near its singular point. In the project, we carry out an
in-depth investigation into such a situation. The goals are existence of
solution global in time, large time behavior, and possibly large data solutions
or strong wave solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Applied Mathematics Program of the Division of Mathematical Sciences and by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.