* 1908711
* RI: Small: Exploring Rationale behind Visual Understanding: Combining Attention and Reasoning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Qi Zhao, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 285,029.00

Recent progress in deep learning has resulted in models that show significant
performance gains in computer vision tasks. This project aims to bridge the
current gap between the increasing performance in intelligent systems and the
lack of understanding in the complex task-solving process. With the overarching
goal of understanding and modeling the process, this project studies two
intertwined mechanisms heavily involved in task-solving -- attention and
reasoning -- and develops a sound framework to integrate the two. It will serve
as a critical step forward to untangling the process of solving a visual task
and alleviating the black-box problem in machine learning. The research will
build attention and reasoning capabilities into machines, thus empowering
applications in a broad spectrum of artificial intelligence tasks including
medical diagnosis and treatment, robotics, and education. The principal
investigator will organize workshops and seminars, and make project results
publicly available. The project also aims at integrated research and education
with a focus on increased diversity, through K-12 outreach activities, student
mentoring, and curriculum development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on both dataset and model development, as well as enabling new methods for
network visualization, interpretation, and diagnosis. More specifically, the
project develops: (1) a new dataset with human eye movements and textual
explanations, to understand critical factors that contribute to task
performance; (2) a framework where models devised in the framework make a first
step to demonstrate the process of task-solving by showing attention and
reasoning capabilities; and (3) a novel layer-wise network diagnosis method
considering both performance and interpretability of each network layer.
Addressing these questions will not only boost model performance but open the
black-box of the decision-making process of a visual task as well as the
structure of the deep neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.