* 1908510
* III: Small: A primal-dual framework for data-mining applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Evimaria Terzi, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,999.00

The proliferation of mobile devices and social networks has enabled the
collection of a wide-range of information related to users' activities. The
collected information can be represented as a network capturing the inter-
connections between users and the nodes in the network are enriched with extra
information resulting from users' activities. Examples of such networks include
activity and landmark road networks where the nodes are intersections and the
edges are road segments. Every node in an activity network is associated with
some type of activity such as geotagged tweets or photos uploaded from the
node's vicinity. In landmark networks, nodes are associated with points of
interests such as museums, restaurants, and landmarks. A fundamental task
arising in the analysis of such networks is to find a set of connected nodes
that are close-by in the network and are also associated with high levels of
activity. For example, such an analysis can be used to identify the interests of
neighborhoods as well as interesting facts about population dynamics. Analogous
problems arise in social and collaboration networks, expertise management
systems, and team formation. The networks are often massive and thus solving
these optimization tasks requires algorithms that are very efficient and allow
for a richer and more informative analysis of the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project models the optimization problems arising in the aforementioned
applications as prize-collecting network design problems: given a graph with
connection costs associated with the edges and prizes associated with the nodes,
the goal is to find a connected subgraph that has small connection cost as well
as high prize. To allow for a richer analysis, the project considers more
complex set prize functions that incorporate interactions between nodes and
different ways of combining the connection cost and the prize in the objective.
The approach is to design algorithms for each class of problems using a template
primal-dual framework motivated by the classical algorithm for the prize-
collecting Steiner tree problem. Different instantiations of the set prizes
require the re-design of specific components of this template algorithm and thus
lead to new algorithmic research directions. An important goal is to exploit the
structure of the prize functions arising in applications in order to obtain
algorithms are very efficient and scalable, in addition to achieving provable
approximation guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.