* 1908308
* NSF-BSF:CIF: Small:  A Unified View of Estimation and Information Relationships for Networks and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The emerging internet of things (IoT) paradigm is predicted to support extremely
large networks with a massive number of devices. Given the importance that IoT
device are expected to play in the future communication infrastructure, it is
important to understand the fundamental limits of performance of such large
networks. Classically the performance limits of communications networks are
studied by using a framework of information theory -- a science put forth by the
pioneering engineer and scientist Claude Shannon. The goal of this research is
to expand the set of tools needed for the analysis of future communication
networks. Specifically, the aim is to bring necessary tools from estimation
theory---a branch of statistics dealing with the recovery of noisy data. The
proposed work will advance knowledge by developing a unified view of
communication networks through the lens of information and estimation theories.
In summary, the successful completion of the project is expected to contribute
new mathematical and engineering tools, fundamentally new perspectives and
models, in order to enable efficient design of the next generation of
communication infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A specific goal of this
research is to study information flow over large networks by using a network
transform that maps a problem of information flow over an arbitrary network to a
well-structured estimation theoretic problem. In other words, instead of
analyzing the problem in the classical information theoretic domain, the
proposed transform offers a new estimation theoretic domain for analyzing
performance of communication networks. The key attractive feature of the
proposed network transform is that the underlying estimation theoretic
optimization problem is a tractable one. By providing new insights and tools for
studying optimal information flow over the networks via estimation theoretic
techniques, this research has the potential not only to advance theory but also
to improve latency, energy efficiency and robustness of emerging IoT
applications. This project is a collaborative effort between researchers in the
US and Israel, with funding for Israeli researchers provided by the Bi-National
Science Foundation (BSF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.