* 1908793
* SHF: Small: Characterizing and Optimizing 3D NAND Flash
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Inexpensive, reliable and large storage capacities are desirable in almost all
application domains of national importance. For example, applications such as
climate prediction, nuclear simulation and computational chemistry manipulate
enormous datasets. A specific type of storage products, called NAND Flash, are
suitable candidates for storing such large datasets given their performance,
reliability and power efficiency advantages over traditional disk drives, and
thus have seen widespread adoption recently. However, with continuous increase
in dataset sizes, conventional NAND products available in the market are
experiencing difficulty in coping with high performance and high reliability
demands. 3D NAND flash is the newest architectural enhancement in the flash
world to address this scalability problem, by enabling flash-memory cells to be
stacked vertically in multiple layers. Despite the promise of 3D NAND flash, its
fundamental characteristics and internal structures are not well understood as
of today, from both the workload behavior and resource utilization perspectives.
Yet architectural, firmware and system software level problems and potential
opportunities have largely been ignored, which this project seeks to address.
The outcome of this project is expected to enhance the design and utilization of
3D NAND storage in many big data application domains. The educational and
outreach components of this project includes (1) a new graduate level course on
advanced storage system concepts; (2) engaging undergraduates from Penn State's
Schreyer Honors College in the research activities; (3) involving students from
the Integrated Undergraduate/Graduate (IUG) program at Penn State to interest
them in this topic, for possible graduate study in this project; and (4)
organizing summer camps for high school girls and high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project conducts an in-depth
study of 3D NAND flash memory (in particular solid state devices built using
them), with the intent of identifying the workload and resource utilization
characteristics of 3D NAND flash, implementing and evaluating a set of
architectural, firmware and system software level optimizations targeting 3D
NAND flash architectures as well as 2D/3D NAND flash hybrids. The project
consists of four tasks: (1) performing a thorough exploration of various
architectural optimizations specific to 3D NAND flash; (2) investigating
firmware-level optimizations such as long read latency mitigation, as well as
various reliability and lifetime enhancement techniques; (3) conducting an in-
depth study of system software level issues such as file system-level request
scheduling; and (4) performing a detailed experimental evaluation of the
optimizations using different types of application workloads and an in-house 3D
NAND simulation infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.