* 1908937
* Developing the Science Comprehensive Online Learning Platform for Rural School Science Teacher Development
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Earl Legleiter, Fort Hays State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2023
* USD 476,015.00

Rural school districts in the US face unique challenges: isolation in small farm
communities, significant distances between communities, minimal funding, and low
teacher salaries. They also serve high numbers of diverse and low-income
students, who deserve equitable access to high quality science learning
opportunities. Effective online professional development (PD) is needed for
teachers working in isolated rural communities where high quality face-to-face
PD may be economically impractical for districts to offer. This project will
develop, evaluate, and compare the effectiveness of newly-designed online
learning platform with traditional face-to-face PD in supporting rural high
school science teachers' implementation of an existing biology curriculum
aligned with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). The online learning
platform will be modeled after successful face-to-face PD features: (1) job-
embedded - learning occurs within the context of teachers' classroom
instruction, (2) collaborative - teachers share experiences in implementing new
practices, and (3) content-specific - teachers develop disciplinary content and
instructional practices that support students' understanding of science. Once
developed and refined, the online PD platform can be used broadly across other
contexts and content areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period, this
project will develop, evaluate, and then compare an online PD platform for
supporting rural science teachers in implementing the Towards High School
Biology (THSB) curriculum with a traditional face-to-face PD. In year one, the
research team will iteratively develop the online platform and adapt the already
developed face-to-face PD for implementing THSB to an online format. Utilizing
Curator, a social learning platform developed by HT2Labs, project researchers
will embed teacher learning that is situated with their own classroom contexts,
is asynchronously and synchronously collaborative, and is focused on the THSB
curriculum content. In years two and three, forty eight rural middle-school
science educators will be recruited from southwest Kansas and randomly assigned
to online PD (treatment) or face-to-face PD (comparison). Using mixed
methodology, the project will examine if differences exist between the
conditions in regards to teacher content knowledge, teacher self-efficacy in
using new practices, teacher classroom practices, and student learning outcomes.
It is hypothesized that there should be no differences between conditions in
fostering successful implementation of evidence-based science practices and
student outcomes, demonstrating the success of an online modality to support
deep conceptual change in teachers' instructional practices. Furthermore,
lessons learned in developing and investigating a science comprehensive online
learning platform can inform application to other disciplinary content (e.g.,
physics, chemistry, Earth and space sciences) and across other grade level and
school contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.