* 1908304
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Effective Formal Reasoning for Mobile Malware
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Isil Dillig, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Since their inception a decade ago, smartphones have become the pillars of our
digital life, storing security-sensitive information ranging from medical and
banking data to our entire electronic communication history. Due to our
increasing reliance on mobile applications in daily life, there has been a
steady increase in both the number and sophistication of mobile malware samples.
This project's impacts are to make it easier for users and organizations to
identify malicious applications and thereby prevent people from around the globe
from becoming victims of mobile malware. The project's novelties are to develop
advanced program analysis and natural language processing techniques to identify
salient characteristics of different malware families and use them to detect
previously unknown malware instances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's
technical effort is focused on several fronts. The first is matching of "anti-
protocols", which are sequences of abstract events characterizing malicious
behavior. The investigators will explore approaches for identifying anti-
protocols and matching them both exactly and approximately against apps. Second,
since malware instances typically disguise themselves through behavioral
obfuscation, the project will investigate new techniques for reasoning precisely
and accurately about obfuscated mobile applications. Finally, detecting malware
may require identifying inconsistencies with behavior that might be specified in
natural language. The investigators develop techniques for characterizing the
alignment between a program's stated operation and its formally-analyzed
fingerprint in order to spot unexpected, possibly malicious
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.