* 1908807
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative Research: The Interplay of Markets and Security in 5G Shared Spectrum Services
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Randall Berry, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Efficient and secure use of shared spectrum is critical to support the demands
from emerging 5G wireless applications that have potential benefits across
society. This project is addressing these by considering intertwined economic
and security issues in 5G wireless networks that use more flexible spectrum
access paradigms, such as the recently finalized rules for the 3.5 GHz Citizens
Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) band. These new paradigms will result in new
market structures for providing wireless services. However, this expanded
flexibility can also lead to an increase in the security vulnerabilities of
wireless systems. These two issues are inherently coupled. For example, the
emerging market structures can impact the security a firm can offer to its
customers and the firm's willingness to develop and deploy technology to improve
on this. Moreover, in many spectrum sharing paradigms there may be different
types of interacting firms such as service providers, database operators, etc.
The economic and technological interactions among these firms will dictate the
resulting security level given to end-users. Such interactions are not well
understood in general. The goal of this project is to develop a deeper
understanding of the interactions between security and markets in emerging
spectrum sharing paradigms, including characterizing the cost and incentives of
deploying security mechanisms in market environments. Thus, the project is
expected to reduce economic uncertainties tied to security issues in shared
spectrum bands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is combining ideas from
wireless networking, cyber-security and network economics in ways that have not
been previously explored in the context of shared spectrum. Specific problems
areas being addressed include (1) studying how wireless service providers should
price and provision "security-as-a-service"; (2) understanding the market
interactions of multiple wireless service providers and how different spectrum
sharing approaches impact the competition and security investment incentives of
the providers; (3) evaluating the impact of spatial interferences and their
knock-on economic and security effects. The theoretical insights are
complemented with an evaluation plan that leverages simulations and available
data sets to ensure their robustness and applicability. Other broader impacts
being pursued include: (1) engaging undergraduate and under-represented
students; (2) developing wireless security labs; and (3) organizing workshop and
tutorial sessions on the project's topic at leading conferences, to inform
stakeholders from government, industry, and academia and foster
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.