* 1908123
* Optics of Interstellar Dust: New Methods and Applications
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Bruce Draine, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2023
* USD 225,314.00

Astronomers rely primarily on observations of electromagnetic radiation -- light
-- to study objects ranging from stars to galaxies to quasars. Dust grains in
interstellar space absorb and scatter this light. The same dust grains also
radiate at long (infrared) wavelengths, and this infrared radiation is
observable. Dust grains affect the appearance of astronomical objects from X-ray
to sub-millimeter wavelengths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand what we see,
we must know how the scattering and absorption properties of dust grains depend
on their composition, size, and shape. In addition, absorption and scattering of
light can produce strong forces and torques on grains. For example, light from
our Sun can repel dust grains approaching the solar system. Sunlight can also
cause grains with irregular shapes to spin fast enough for centrifugal stresses
to disrupt the grain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because dust grains have irregular
shapes, calculating scattering and absorption is a challenging mathematical
problem. The investigator aims to improve methods for computing scattering and
absorption for grains with complicated shapes. One emphasis will be on the
important case where the grain itself is small compared to the wavelength of the
radiation (as in the infrared). A second emphasis will be on developing and
implementing much faster methods for computing the forces and torques acting on
the grain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These improved methods will be implemented in
new versions of the publicly-available open-source code DDSCAT which the
investigator developed and supports. The new version of DDSCAT will be used to
compute a "library" of scattering and absorption cross sections. This will be
done for a sample of grain shapes and compositions, and for a wide range of
wavelengths. The library will be available on-line to other researchers. The
library will include cross sections needed to calculate scattering and
absorption, as well as data needed to calculate forces and torques acting on
grains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cross-section library will be used to develop
and test models for the interstellar dust population. One popular model
envisions typical interstellar grains as loose aggregates. The library will be
used to see whether this model is compatible with existing observational
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.