* 1908560
* Towards Safer and Resilient Batteries via Active Diagnostics and Fault-tolerant Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Satadru Dey, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 11/30/2020
* USD 370,691.00

Recent battery failure incidents of Boeing 787 Dreamliner, Tesla Model S and
Samsung Galaxy Note 7 strongly emphasize the need for smarter battery safety
solutions. This project aims to enhance battery safety by developing a novel
real-time diagnostics framework. The proposed framework intends to provide
battery safety solutions by designing real-time algorithms that diagnose and
control various battery faults. Besides enhancing the safety of battery-powered
systems such as electric aircrafts, medical equipment, and consumer electronics,
safer batteries will accelerate penetration of electrified vehicles and
renewable energy systems, leading to environmental benefits, energy security,
and economic stability. The results of this project will also advance the
understanding of real-time battery failures, providing insights to the battery
scientists/designers to create better batteries. The theoretical
control/diagnostics tools developed for the project can be readily extended to
other multi-physics systems such as fuel cells, buildings, and micro electro-
mechanical systems. The results will be disseminated through principal
investigator's course and publications, enhancing the knowledge of next
generation technological workforce in automotive/energy sectors. Finally, this
project will create collaborative/mentoring opportunities with the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory, non-PhD granting institutions such as the Community
College of Denver, and underrepresented student &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to develop battery safety solutions by designing multi-
physics model-based real-time algorithms that (i) diagnose electrochemical,
mechanical, electrical and thermal faults at early stages, and (ii) take
corrective control action to minimize the fault effect/propagation. These
algorithms will add fault-tolerance to battery management systems, besides
maximizing energy utilization, cycle life and reliability. From real-time
diagnosis and control viewpoint, this project will address two key issues in
batteries: lack of measurements (weak observability) and limited actuation. The
following research tasks will be performed: (i) multi-physics-based battery
fault modeling, (ii) analysis to determine ability to diagnose faults, (iii)
distinguishing faults from modeling and measurement uncertainties, (iv) real-
time detection, isolation and estimation of faults, and (v) real-time control of
fault propagation. These research tasks will produce the following tools: (i)
offline tools for analysis to determine ability to diagnose faults, and (ii)
online algorithms for fault diagnostics and fault-tolerant control. Such
tools/algorithms will be developed utilizing a combination of decentralized and
interconnected systems theory, multi-objective optimal control theory, and data-
driven uncertainty modeling techniques. The performance of the algorithms will
be validated and quantified on real-world battery failure
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.