* 1908115
* CHS: Small: Understanding the Percept of Soft Objects for Designing Naturalistic Touch Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Gregory Gerling, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 508,000.00

How can we replicate the sensation of touching a "soft" object such as a plum
(fruit), or another's hand, or tissue during surgery? This is the central
research question addressed in this project. How we feel an object's
"compliance", that is, its rigidity or softness, is an important piece of
information needed for building high fidelity touch interfaces. In addition to
applications in entertainment and personal productivity, such interfaces could
enable surgeons to distinguish gallbladder and prostate tissue and ducts from
fat and bone, small children to feel a parent's hand, and consumers to inspect
and compare products, clothing, and work pieces. This project seeks to
understand how the touch interface provided by a finger pad must deform in space
and time to adequately convey a natural sense of compliance. Proper control of
the skin's deformation will inform the design of touch-enabled displays that
feel natural and are mechanically efficient, rapidly configurable, and
responsive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the connection between
time-dependent cues at the finger pad surface and the percept of compliance, or
softness. The central hypothesis is that time-dependent cues, or information in
the rate of change of skin deformation over a spatial field, govern the encoding
of compliance. With that information, this project aims to reproduce these skin
deformation cues with a dynamic display. Three research tasks are planned for
achieving these objectives: (i) Human discrimination tasks with natural objects
such as fruits and tissues: here, an ink-based procedure will characterize
contact area, force, and displacement relationships. (ii) Generation of skin
deformation cues and digit kinematics: for this, engineered, elastic stimuli
will replicate natural interactions yet remove per stimulus variability. Novel
human subjects paradigms, imaging equipment, and data analysis algorithms will
be developed to characterize continuous skin deformation and stretch in 3D. The
relative importance of spatiotemporal cues will be analyzed using multi-
dimensional scaling. (iii) Reproducing key softness percepts: A soft,
transparent, multi-chamber hydraulic actuator will be designed using finite
element analysis to produce dynamic, on-the-fly control of skin deformation.
Overall, this project seeks to abstract cutaneous cues that underlie the percept
of compliance, akin to vision, where color is wavelength in physics space but
hue, saturation, and brightness in psychological
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.