* 1908632
* Generalized Embodied Modeling to support Science through Technology Enhanced Play
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ben Loh, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,248,332.00

The project will develop and research a new Mixed Reality environment (MR),
called GEM-STEP, that leverages play and embodiment as resources for integrating
computational modeling into the modeling cycle as part of science instruction
for elementary students. GEM stands for Generalized Embodied Modeling. Through
these embodied, play-as-modeling activities, students will learn the core
concepts of science, and the conceptual skills of modeling and systematic
measurement. MR environments use new sensing technologies to help transform
young children's physical actions during pretend play into a set of symbolic
representations and parameters in a science simulation. As students physically
move around the classroom, the computer will track their motion and interactions
with selected objects and translate their physical activity into a shared
display. For example, students pretend they are water particles and work
together to model different states of matter. The children see their activity
projected onto a computer simulation where a model of a water particle is
displayed over the video of themselves. As students collectively reflect upon
the nature of a water molecule, they refine their understanding of water as ice,
a liquid or a gas. The proposed innovation allows the students to program and
revise their own mixed reality simulations as part of their modeling cycle.
Embodied and computational modeling will help students to reflect on their
models in a unique way that will make their models more computationally accurate
and enhance their understanding of the underlying concepts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research how using the body as a
component of the modeling cycle differs from and interacts with the articulation
of a scientific model through more structured computational means. The project
will investigate the benefits of combining embodiment with computational
elements in GEM:STEP by studying the range of concepts that students can learn
in this manner. Lessons will be developed to address different disciplinary core
ideas, such as states of matter, pollination as a complex system, or
decomposition, as well as cross-cutting concepts of systems thinking, and
energy/matter flow, all of which link directly to upper elementary science
curriculum. Project research will gather data to understand what kinds of models
students develop, what learning processes are supported using GEM:STEP, and what
learning results. The data will include: (1) documenting and analyzing what
students modeled and how accurate the models are; (2) recording student activity
using audio and voice to code their activity to document learning processes and
to look at how different forms of modeling interact with one another to promote
learning; and (3) pre-post content measures to assess learning. All of the
software that is developed for GEM:STEP will be made available as Open Source
projects, allowing other researchers to build upon and extend this work. The
results of the research will be disseminated in academic conferences and peer
reviewed journals. The motion tracking software is already available on Github,
a popular open-source repository. Once developed, the aim is to implement
GEM:STEP in a wide range of classroom contexts, supported by a user-friendly
interface, teacher guides, and professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.