* 1908736
* From Topological Insulators to Hybrid Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Guillaume Bal, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 367,000.00

One primary objective of this project is to study transport phenomena that
afford a topological description, in the sense that some of their characteristic
properties are immune to large classes of defects and inhomogeneities. The
resulting asymmetric transport (with larger transport in one direction than the
other one) has the potential to transform our communication capabilities in
electronic and photonic structures at the nanometer scale as well as allowing us
to understand large-scale eastward moving modes along the equator at the
planetary scale. Similar mathematical models will be used in the second
objective of this project, which aims to improve our understanding of novel
high-contrast high-resolution medical imaging modalities such as photo-acoustic
tomography or elastography. A major component of the project includes the
training of graduate students and mentoring of postdoctoral researchers to work
on the aforementioned tasks and the development of graduate courses in these
areas of mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the topological
protection will be modeled by partial differential operators and their mapping,
using non-commutative geometry tools, to Fredholm operators with non-trivial
index (topology). Large classes of random coefficients added to the differential
model are then shown not to modify the topology, as a topological obstruction to
the otherwise expected Anderson localization. Physical observables of the form
of currents will then be assigned to the topological invariants to provide a
concrete physical expression of the asymmetric transport. A major objective of
the project is to consider the field of Floquet topological insulators, where
the non-trivial topology is obtained by high frequency periodic time-dependent
fluctuations of the material's properties. The above descriptions involve the
analysis of a forward map: from heterogeneous coefficients in differential
models to solutions of the models. The second objective of this project is to
analyze the inverse problem, aiming to reconstruct such coefficients from
information about the solutions. The principal investigator and his
collaborators plan to do so for several hybrid inverse problems, and in
particular those modeled by kinetic Fokker-Planck equations, which describe wave
propagation in turbid media with highly peaked forward scattering and find
applications in laser light through turbulent atmospheres as well as near-infra-
red light through biological tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.