* 1908177
* SHF: Small: Graph-X: Exploiting Hidden Parallelism of Irregular and Non-Stencil Computation in High-Level Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Mingjie Lin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 306,302.00

Modern Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) hold great promise in leapfrogging
our computing performance and energy efficiency in many important AI-driven or
big data applications. However, manual FPGA programming is extremely difficult,
error-prone, and hard to optimize. This project aims at developing a novel and
"automatic" methodology to greatly improve the FPGA developer's productivity and
the computing performance of their designs. This project, if successful, can not
only achieve the high-performance of FPGA computing previously infeasible, but
also significantly boost the FPGA developers' total productivity. Given the
growing importance of modern FPGA technologies in our high-tech future, solving
this fundamental problem is crucial to the future competitiveness of US computer
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major technical aspect that this project
seeks to address is how to optimally synthesize irregular yet important
computation patterns because all of the most important FPGA designs typically
exhibit much more general and sophisticated memory access patterns. To this end,
this project has proposed several novel and fundamental graph-based optimization
techniques that can not only greatly benefit FPGA technology, but also be
readily extended to other computing domains, such as CPU compiler or GPU-based
computing. In particular, the project uses graphs to capture memory accesses,
and presents three research thrusts: (i) GraphMorph solves the problem of
scheduling and binding, (ii) GraphFold maximizes conflict resolution, and (iii)
GraphProjection targets high-dimensional memory
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.