* 1908048
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Resilience Analysis for Core Decomposition in Real-World Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Sucheta Soundarajan, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The resilience of a network is generally defined as its ability to continue
performing well when it is subject to failures &lt;br/&gt;and attacks. Designing
and developing graph analysis algorithms that are robust against missing data,
incomplete network &lt;br/&gt;observation, or errors in data collection is
essential in many real-world applications. One fundamental and important class
&lt;br/&gt;of graph analysis methods are those that find the dense regions in a
given network. These methods have applications in &lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics,
social network analysis, router network monitoring, visualization, and other
areas. Core decomposition, &lt;br/&gt;a powerful and efficient algorithm for
finding dense subgraphs, has been proven to be extremely useful in understanding
&lt;br/&gt;the structure of complex networks from a variety of domain. However,
it is notoriously non-robust against small changes in the network structure.
This project will explore and characterize the robustness of core decomposition
process and develop attack (and corresponding defense) &lt;br/&gt;strategies to
manipulate the network to hinder the core decomposition analysis. The outcome of
this research will allow &lt;br/&gt;for increased understanding of the accuracy
core decomposition analyses on real-world networks, and propose new, related
&lt;br/&gt;decompositions that are more robust against noise or missing
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be performed in three parts: 1)
Exploring and characterizing the robustness of core decomposition to develop a
variety of techniques and metrics to quantify the robustness, 2) Developing
graph modification 'attack' strategies to tamper with a network's core structure
by &lt;br/&gt;adding/deleting nodes or edges -- the project considers three
types of attacks: those targeting nodes' core numbers, the subgraphs
&lt;br/&gt;induced by the core decomposition, and the hierarchy induced by the
core decomposition, 3) Developing corresponding strategies&lt;br/&gt; to defend
against the attacks on a network's core structure. Given the wide application
space of core decomposition, this project&lt;br/&gt; will increase the
robustness of algorithms for describing the hierarchical structure of a network,
detecting central nodes,&lt;br/&gt; spotting the anomalies, and speeding up
algorithms for other tasks, like community detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.