* 1908625
* Exploring  Cosmic Magnetic Fields and Interstellar Dust through Polarized Infrared Observations
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Charles Telesco, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 221,618.00

Interstellar space is not empty. The space between stars teams with gas atoms,
molecules, and tiny solid particles and is threaded by vast magnetic fields. The
investigators will determine the properties of these particles and molecules and
how they interact with those magnetic fields. The components of interstellar
space play a key role in how stars and planets form, but relevant astronomical
observations are scarce. This research will use a unique infrared camera on the
largest optical telescope to look at a special type of molecule called a
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH). A PAH efficiently absorbs ultraviolet
light and re-emits that energy in the form of infrared light. The polarization
(vibration direction) of that light will be measured, thereby telling scientists
how tightly, if at all, these PAHs are gripped by the magnetic field. That
measurement is also a valuable clue to the detailed properties of the PAH
molecules, such as size and electric charge. Their observations will provide a
more complete picture of the contents of interstellar space, since PAHs contain
a large fraction of all the carbon in space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will also observe the magnetic field in the intense burst of star
formation occurring in the core of a nearby galaxy. This image will reveal how
the magnetic fields, huge molecular clouds, and hundreds of supernova interact
across that unusual region. Their observations will thereby provide clues to the
origin and changes with time of one of the Universe's most dramatic occurrences,
a super-starburst in a galaxy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the University of
Florida's remote observing facility, many graduate and undergraduate students
will be involved in all aspects of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.