* 1908378
* Promoting Graphical Literacy Skills at Two and Four Year Colleges Through Virtual Tutoring
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Melissa Witkow, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,942.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by studying and understanding how all students develop
graphical literacy, an essential concept for the modern workforce. This project
will develop virtual tutoring systems and evaluate how they promote graphical
literacy at both a two-year community college and a four-year primarily
undergraduate institution. Understanding and interpreting graphical information
is a critical foundational skill for STEM majors and the STEM-literate public.
While college textbooks and curricula expect students to have mastered graph-
reading skills, evidence indicates that college students struggle to read and
interpret line and bar graphs. This is particularly true when graphs include
multiple variables that increase the complexity and structure of the graph.
Several versions of the tutoring system will be tested, each based on competing
theories of how individuals learn, to evaluate the most effective method or
methods for different students and in different environments. By its conclusion,
this project will have developed several research-validated, flexible virtual
tutoring systems that can be easily and freely
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop virtual tutoring
systems for graphical literacy by drawing on preliminary data demonstrating
common points of failure in graphical literacy exhibited by first- and second-
year college students. Within these tutoring systems, a controlled experiment
informed by cognitive and social-developmental theories of learning will test
the independent and interactive effects of context and scaffolding to promote
graphical literacy using a 2x2 ANOVA design. Additional hierarchical linear
regression analyses will test the role of potential moderators of program impact
as well as their interactions with program features. The proposed research is
novel in that it explicitly examines competing learning theories and their
interaction. An important element of the project is its intentionally inclusive
framework that evaluates materials across both two-year and four-year college
settings, as well as the role of individual learner characteristics on learning
outcomes. An advisory board, consisting of faculty from biology, chemistry,
exercise and health sciences, mathematics, and physics, will provide
interdisciplinary insights, including discipline-specific applications or
program modifications. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.