* 1908574
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative Research: HEECMA: A Hybrid Elastic Edge-Cloud Application Management Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Flavio Esposito, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 263,206.00

Application software is becoming increasingly abundant in functionality and
increasingly demanding of resources, e.g., memory and compute power. This
project examines how application software, e.g., a Virtual Reality (VR) based
drone control application, can be partitioned and deployed over different parts
of a distributed computing infrastructure, i.e., resources are managed by a
hybrid of service and cloud providers. Research questions that will be answered
include: what is the best partitioning of the application that balances compute
and memory demand for each application component (function) and the
communication needs between these functions? Which provider should be used for
each application function so that it runs quickly at the lowest cost? Moreover,
how should the system adapt to changes in the availability of resources to
maintain a high level of quality of experience for
users?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop the theoretical foundations
of decomposing applications over a distributed complex cyberinfrastructure. We
will study various decompositions and corresponding virtualization and resource
allocation services offered by different providers with resources at the edge of
the infrastructure, i.e., closer to users, and at the core, i.e., deeper into
the infrastructure. The goal is to find the "best" decomposition to meet users'
quality of experience while reducing the cost/price for the users. The
decomposed (distributed) solution will be realized by employing corresponding
feedback control algorithms and game-theoretic incentives. The project will then
experiment with three classes of applications to validate these theoretical
foundations: streaming Augmented/Virtual Reality (AR/VR), intrusion detection,
and spatiotemporal ecological forecasting. Toward this end, a prototype will be
developed and evaluated over existing open cloud infrastructures (e.g., GENI,
CloudLab, Chameleon), commercial clouds, as well as private clouds (e.g.,
Massachusetts Open Cloud).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the
state of the art in the area of application software decomposition and
deployment over large-scale hybrid cloud infrastructures. The theoretical
foundations and experimental validation of the work will inform the design and
deployment of other foreseen and unforeseen applications. The performance and
cost gains will translate to more efficient use of resources and consequently, a
society that is better connected and greener. Outreach efforts will include
several activities: (1) the development and delivery of hands-on tutorials that
involve partitioning and running application software over a distributed
cyberinfrastructure managed by multiple providers, (2) the organization of
annual summer camps on cyberinfrastructure operations and management for high
school students, and (3) the training and mentoring of minority and under-
represented students working on research related to this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will maintain a website at
http://csr.bu.edu/heecma for the duration of this grant and beyond. The website
will contain all the publications and results of this project in the form of
code, prototype, and tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.