* 1908481
* Validation of the Equity and Access Rubrics for Mathematics Instruction (VEAR-MI)
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Temple Walkowiak, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 05/31/2023
* USD 2,296,493.00

High-quality mathematics instruction remains uncommon and opportunities for
students to develop the mathematical understanding are not distributed equally.
This is particularly true for students of color and students for whom English is
not their first language. While educational research has made progress in
identifying practices that are considered high-quality, little attention has
been given to specific instructional practices that support historically
marginalized groups of students particularly as they participate in more
rigorous mathematics. The main goal is to validate a set of rubrics that attend
to the existence and the quality of instructional practices that support equity
and access in mathematics classes. In addition, the project team will clarify
the relationships between the practices outlined in the rubrics and aspects of
teachers' perspectives and knowledge as well as student learning
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make use of two existing large-
scale datasets focusing on mathematics teachers to develop rubrics on
mathematics instructional quality. The datasets include nearly 3,000 video-
recorded mathematics lessons and student achievement records from students in
Grades 3 through 8. The four phases of this research and development project
include training material development, an observation and rubric
generalizability study, a coder reliability study, and structural analysis. Data
analysis plans involve case studies, exploratory and confirmatory factor
analyses, and cognitive interviews. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.