* 1908507
* CNS Core: Small: MintCloud: An Elastic Multitenant FPGA Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sang-Woo Jun, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Application-specific hardware acceleration using Field-Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs) provide extremely high performance and power efficiency, but FPGA
resources in currently available cloud platforms are used inefficiently because
they are tied to physical host machines and cannot be allocated elastically,
unlike general-purpose resources in the cloud such as CPU and system memory.
This project, MintCloud, aims to design and implement a cloud platform for
elastic allocation of FPGA resources, as well as a development and execution
environment for distributed FPGA acceleration in such a cloud
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By elastically allocating FPGA resources,
MintCloud brings the benefits of cloud architectures to high-performance FPGA-
accelerated systems, including efficiency, manageability, and robustness. Cloud
instances can easily obtain a large amount of FPGA resources, and the
infrastructure is resilient to individual component failures. Furthermore, idle
resources can be used efficiently by allocating them across the cloud where they
are needed. For this goal, this project will develop components including secure
access into remote FPGAs over the cloud network, a multi-FPGA programming
abstraction and development environment, as well as an intelligent resource
manager and allocator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MintCloud provides a platform for
industry and academia to rapidly develop and deploy complex, high-performance
low-power applications at a low cost in the cloud, enabling the computationally
intensive applications of the future. Furthermore, by lowering cost and
improving manageability, MintCloud can deliver the benefits of efficient, FPGA-
accelerated computation to resource-constrained entities and parties. The same
benefits will also aid curriculum development efforts on the topic of FPGA-
accelerated systems, by lowering the cost and barrier-of-entry of setting up and
operating an educational environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All code, data,
configuration information, simulation results, and other artifacts will be made
openly available online until they are deemed no longer useful to outside
entities. Depending on the type and size of the resources, they will be stored
either in git repositories, long-term cloud storage, or as web pages. Links to
all such repositories will be organized and listed in the project website,
reachable at the following link:
https://www.ics.uci.edu/~swjun/mintcloud.htm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.