* 1908728
* Workshop:Expanding the Network of Natural History Collections Clubs through Workshops to Broaden Participation of Students in Biodiversity Collections; May 25-31, 2019; Chicago, IL
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Travis Marsico, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 02/28/2023
* USD 49,969.00

Natural history collections at universities across the United States were built
over time by researchers, professors, and students, and they often are the best
scientific representation of regional biodiversity for the surrounding areas.
Despite the research value, some of these collections are in distress due to
lack of local institutional support. One approach for raising awareness and
support for the research and education value of campus collections is a student-
led Natural History Collections Club (NHCC). Since 2013, several clubs have
formed based on the NHCC model to train the next generation of undergraduate
students in biological collections methods and management; and to raise
awareness, increase scientific and educational use, of their campus natural
history collections. These clubs collectively form the Natural History
Collections Club Network (NHCCN). The Network has hosted workshops at
international and regional meetings to encourage other groups to take up the
NHCC model on their campuses and to start a student club and become part of the
NHCCN. Through this award, workshop activities are planned that recruit and
educate interested students and faculty advisors to develop a NHCC, strengthen
the existing network, and support participation in existing NHCCs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 2019 workshop will take place during a full day of the
annual meeting of the Society for the Preservation of Natural History
Collections (SPNHC), which meets May 26-31. The workshop agenda includes
training and discussion on topics such as natural history collections
documentation, specimen digitization, and experiential learning. Invitations for
workshops will target institutions that may benefit most from joining the NHCCN,
such as those that have expressed interest in improving student involvement in
collections, particularly institutions with small collections and institutions
with minority-serving emphases such as Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs), and Hispanic-
Serving Institutions (HSIs). Universities with small natural history collections
often contain many records of their surrounding ecosystems not duplicated in
larger facilities and therefore provide unique representation of biological
diversity to national and global data resources. The support provided through
this award represents a cost-efficient way to ensure the maintenance, expansion,
and data sharing of participating collections by involving students and
recruiting participants from small collections that are committed to the success
and sustainability of those collections. A link to the workshop announcement is
available on the web (https://www.idigbio.org/content/spnhc-travel-grants-
nhccn).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.