* 1908331
* Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Dwarf Galaxies - A Comprehensive View of the Magellanic Clouds
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* David Nidever, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 351,297.00

The investigators lead large imaging and spectroscopic surveys of two nearby
dwarf galaxies, the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds. While most dwarf galaxies
are challenging to study because they are intrinsically faint, the Magellanic
Clouds (MCs) are nearby and serve as a unique laboratory to study the structure
and dynamics of low-mass galaxies. The investigators will utilize the power of
both the imaging Survey of the MAgellanic Stellar History (SMASH) and high-
resolution spectroscopy from the Apache Point Observatory Galactic Evolution
Experiment (APOGEE) to substantially improve our knowledge of the
MCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will create large maps of the
element abundance patterns and gradients across both MCs. With this combination
of observations, they hope to understand the elemental abundance changes over
time and space in the MCs by using nuclear reaction models and drawing
comparisons to simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the investigators
will engage the public in state-of-the art research through a citizen science
project called "The APOGEE Spectral Zoo", which will be developed on the
Zooniverse platform. Citizens will visually inspect samples of the two million
individual APOGEE spectra - including time series spectra on almost all sources
- and classify the APOGEE targets, flagging any that appear to have interesting
or "abnormal" spectral features that are not currently recognized in the current
automated APOGEE spectral analysis pipeline. These citizen scientists will learn
many aspects of astronomy, including stars with emission line spectra, time
variable objects, double-line spectroscopic binary stars, chemically peculiar
stars and cataclysmic variables. The citizens will enhance the research by
producing a complementary classification of stars in the survey. The
investigator will check the accuracy of the pipeline analysis by comparison with
the citizen scientists classifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.