* 1908010
* The evolution of buoyant magnetic structures in the solar interior
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nicholas Brummell, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2023
* USD 403,270.00

One of the great challenges in solar physics is to understand how solar magnetic
flux floats from the Sun?s deep interior (where it is generated by the solar
dynamo) to the surface. Until now, solar physicists have assumed that magnetic
flux could be modeled as discrete magnetically buoyant ?flux tubes.? Recent
research has suggested that this idealization might be invalid. The work
proposed here will expand that work, and rethink current 3D simulations by
modeling solar magnetic flux as concentrations of magnetic field embedded in a
diffuse background field. If successful, the work will lead to a fundamental
shift in our understanding of the evolution and dynamics of the solar magnetic
field, and provide insight into the solar dynamo. The results of this work will
provide a theoretical basis for DKIST observations of emerging solar magnetic
flux, which is one of the principal goals of the new observatory. This work will
also form the basis of a PhD thesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
be to develop a new model for the transport of magnetic flux from deep in the
solar interior to the surface through the mechanism of magnetic buoyancy. In
particular, the team will replace the idealization of discrete magnetic ?flux
tubes? with more physical concentrations of magnetic field set in a diffuse
background field. Field lines interweave between the magnetic concentration and
the background field, resulting in very different dynamics from what one would
expect with discrete flux tubes. This can include mass loss from the rising
magnetic concentration, which is prohibited in the flux tube case. They will
also increase the fidelity of the simulation by including turbulence in the
region through which the magnetic concentration rises. The team will expand
prior 2.5D studies into full 3D simulations. This will require the use of
supercomputing facilities which were acquired under prior NSF
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.