* 1908131
* SHF: Small: Design-for-Debug Architecture for Post-Silicon Security Validation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Prabhat Mishra, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 597,727.00

System-on-Chip (SoC) is the brain behind computing and communication in a wide
variety of systems, starting from simple electronic devices in smart homes to
complex navigation systems in airplanes. SoCs are designed today using hardware
components, often gathered from untrusted third-party vendors, to meet cost and
time-to-market constraints. These hardware components may have vulnerabilities,
which an attacker can exploit to leak secret information or cause system
malfunction. While researchers have proposed many promising ideas to detect pre-
silicon vulnerabilities, the existing solutions are not useful for fabricated
chips (referred to as "post-silicon" stage), since it is not possible to observe
or analyze all the internal signals. Moreover, it is infeasible to detect a wide
variety of vulnerabilities during fabrication and/or validation (at the "pre-
silicon" stages) due to runtime and other constraints. Post-silicon security
validation will enable secure and trustworthy systems. The impacts of this
project are to develop highly secure SoCs through synergistic integration of
pre-silicon verification with post-silicon security validation, working closely
with industry to enable technology transfer and produce results with practical
significance, and training students of diverse backgrounds for the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the proposed project is
to develop automated tools and techniques to detect post-silicon security
vulnerabilities using an effective combination of simulation-based security
validation and side-channel analysis. Specifically, the project will develop a
comprehensive list of SoC vulnerabilities, and design a fully automated and
cost-effective mechanism for monitoring of runtime security threats. In order to
improve the observability in fabricated chips, the project will develop an
effective design-for-debug architecture. The project will also utilize side-
channel analysis for vulnerability detection. A successful implementation of
this project is expected to drastically reduce the overall SoC security
validation effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.