* 1908110
* Getting Unstuck: Designing and Evaluating Teacher Resources to Support Conceptual and Creative Fluency with Programming
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Karen Brennan, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 06/30/2022
* USD 440,786.00

The project will create opportunities for teachers to develop programming
content knowledge and new understandings of the creative possibilities in
computer science education, thereby increasing opportunities for students to
develop conceptual and creative fluency with programming. K-12 introductory
programming experiences are often highly scaffolded, and it can be challenging
for students to transition from constrained exercises to open-ended programming
activities encountered later in-and out of-school. Teachers can provide critical
support to help students solve problems and develop the cognitive, social, and
emotional capacities required for conceptually and creatively complex
programming challenges. Teachers - particularly elementary and middle school
teachers, especially in rural and Title I schools - often lack the programming
content knowledge, skills, and practices needed to support deeper and more
meaningful programming experiences for students. Professional development
opportunities can cultivate teacher expertise, especially when supported by
curricular materials that bridge teachers' professional learning and students'
classroom learning. This research responds to these needs, addressing key
national priorities for increasing access to high-quality K-12 computer science
education for all students through teacher professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve the design and
evaluation of (1) an online learning experience for teachers to develop
conceptual and creative fluency through short, daily programming prompts
(featuring the Scratch programming environment), and (2) educative curricular
materials for the classroom (based on the online experience). The online
experience and curricular materials will be developed in collaboration with
three 4th through 6th-grade rural or Title I teachers. The project will evaluate
teacher learning in the online experience using mixed-methods analyses of
pre/post-survey data of teachers' perceived expertise and quantitative analyses
of teachers' programs and evolving conceptual knowledge. Three additional 4th
through 6th-grade teachers will pilot the curricular materials in their
classrooms. The six pilot teachers will maintain field journals about their
experiences and will participate in interviews, evaluating use of the resources
in practice. An ethnography of one teacher's classroom will be developed to
further contribute to understandings of the classroom-level resources in action,
including students' experiences and learning. Student learning will be evaluated
through student interviews and analyses of student projects. Project outcomes
will inform how computer science conceptual knowledge and creative fluency can
be developed both for teachers and their students' knowledge and fluency that
will be critical for students' future success in work and
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.