* 1908272
* Science learning through embodied performances in elementary and middle school
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nathan Phillips, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2023
* USD 913,734.00

There is a need to develop ways of making scientific ideas and practices more
accessible to students, in particular students in elementary grades and from
populations underrepresented in STEM disciplines. Learning science involves the
construction of scientific knowledge and science identities, both of which can
be supported by science instruction that integrates scientific practices with
theater and literacy practices. This project's approach uses two types of
embodied performances: experiential performances that engage learners in using
their bodies to physically experience scientific phenomena (e.g., the increase
of heart rate during exercise), and dramatic performances where learners act out
science ideas (e.g., the sources and impact of air pollution) with gestures,
body movement, dances, role-plays, or theater productions. Body movements,
positions, and actions along with language and other modes of representation are
employed as critical constituents of meaning making, which offer learners
opportunities to understand science core ideas, crosscutting concepts, and
scientific practices by dramatizing them for and with others. This project is
adding to the limited science education literature on the use, value, and impact
of embodied performances in science classrooms, and on the brilliance,
ingenuity, and science knowledge that all youth, and particularly historically
marginalized young people, have and can further develop in urban school
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's research focuses on
understanding how embodied performances of science concepts and processes can
shape classroom science learning, and how their impact is similar and/or
different across science topics, elementary and middle school grade levels, and
as the school year progresses. It explores the kinds of science ideas students
learn, the multimodal literacy practices in which they engage, and the science
identities they construct. The research attends to learning for all young people
with a specific focus on children from historically marginalized groups in STEM.
Using design-based research, the project team (students and teachers in Chicago
Public Schools, teaching artists, and researchers) designs embodied performances
that are implemented, studied, and revised throughout the project's duration.
Ten teachers participate in professional development to learn relevant theater
practices (including adaptation, workshopping, and inter- and intra-personal
embodiment practices), to strengthen their science understandings, and to learn
ways of intertwining both in their teaching. They are subsequently supported by
teaching artists through the implementation of various activities in their
classrooms, eventually implementing them without any scaffolding. Data sources
include fieldnotes during classwork related to embodied performances; written
materials, images, sound files, and other digital productions created to
enhance, share, expand, and/or support performances; ongoing written student
reflections on learning science and the role of embodied performances; regular
assessments found in the science curriculum; reflective conversations with
student teams about their embodied performances; one-on-one semi-structured
interviews with 6 focal students per classroom about science identity
development twice in a school year; video of classwork related to embodied
performances; and video of science ideas performed by students to school and
community audiences. Analyses include structured and focused coding of
qualitative data, multimodal discourse analysis, and content analysis. The
findings of this research are providing empirical evidence of the value and
impact of integrating performing-arts practices into science teaching and
learning and the potential of this approach to transform urban science
classrooms into spaces where young people from marginalized groups find access
to science to engage with it creatively and deeply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.