* 1908476
* CHS: Small: Supporting 3-4 Year Old Children's High-Quality Social Play Through Voice Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Juan Pablo Hourcade, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,994.00

Children born in the mid 2010s in the United States are arguably part of the
first generation that has been able to make meaningful use of computer devices
for as long as they can remember. Given this, it is important to make available
technologies that benefit young children's development. One area of development
that is often overlooked is self-regulation. Several large studies show that
high-quality social play helps young children develop self-regulation, which in
turn enables children to perform better in kindergarten and beyond. High-quality
social play typically involves groups of children engaged in pretend play that
includes common goals, planning, role-play, interactive social dialogue,
negotiation, improvisation, and the use of generic physical props as opposed to
realistic toys. However, implementing high-quality social play requires a
significant amount of teacher training. This project will focus on lowering
barriers to facilitating high-quality social play activities through the
development of StoryCarnival. StoryCarnival will consist of an application for
teachers and caregivers to set up and plan play activities, and voice agents to
support high-quality social play as it happens. The development of StoryCarnival
will lead to novel explorations of voice agents to facilitate face-to-face
social activities. The software developed will be freely available and outreach
activities will include national and regional conferences for preschool
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses three main research gaps
brought about by the increasing availability of interactive technologies for
young children: identifying common and critical skill deficits for 3-4 year old
children that may be addressed through interactive technologies; developing
design methods to use with this age group; and identifying technologies other
than mobile devices that may be developmentally appropriate for this population,
sustainable, and broadly available. This project will expand on prior research
that identified executive functions including self-regulation as a common,
critical skill deficit for 3-4 year old children, and high-quality social play
as an activity that can enhance these skills and may be facilitated through
interactive technologies. This project builds on this foundation with the
primary objective of developing and evaluating an innovative approach to voice
agents through StoryCarnival, an app to facilitate high-quality social play that
supports wide distribution, data collection, English and Spanish language use,
and long-term deployments. With this infrastructure, the project will then focus
on the iterative development and evaluation of voice agents combining caregiver
control with smart recommendations. The approach will be to enable caregivers to
keep track of play context, give them options for voice agent control based on
context, and ask them for feedback on how well specific agent interactions
worked in order to improve dialogue and activity recommendations. The project
will include evaluations of the impact of StoryCarnival on high-quality social
play through a combination of field studies and automated use logs and surveys
with a larger number of users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.