* 1908391
* Hyperbolic Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Rakesh Rakesh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 116,169.00

In fields such as oil and gas prospecting, mapping the interior of a planet, or
medical imaging, one determines properties of the interior of an object such as
the location of oil/gas deposits in the interior of the earth, characterize the
interior composition of a planet, or determine if an interior lump in the body
is cancerous or not. Since drilling or cutting is often expensive or unfeasible
in these situations, these objects are probed by non-invasive methods such as
sound waves generated on the boundary of the object. The expectation is that the
interior composition of the object will influence the incoming waves and the
response wave, also measured only on the boundary of the object, provides a
mathematical window into the interior of the object. The principal investigator
(PI) will study the mathematics behind this imaging technique. Further, the PI
will train graduate students and postdocs in this type of mathematics through
mini-courses, seminars, personal conversations and workshops. Some of these
students and postdocs will use these skills to solve practical problems for
companies exploring for oil, building imaging devices, or involved in remote
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problems like those described above, but with
over-determined data, where the unknown function depends on fewer variables than
the data, have received a lot of attention. The PI focuses on the less studied
formally determined problems where the unknown function depends on the same
number of variables as the data. Such problems, in two or more space dimensions,
are harder but very useful in situations where data acquisition is difficult,
and their investigation is one of the important challenges in the field. This
project will study the following problems in three space dimensions: the fixed
angle scattering problem, the backscattering problem, the point source problem,
and the incoming spherical wave problem. Recently, using an adaptation of the
Bukhgeim-Klibanov method, the PI and his collaborators proved stability for the
fixed angle scattering problem for coefficients which are even in one of the
variables and proved uniqueness for the problem of recovering a coefficient
given data from the point source problem as well as the incoming spherical wave
problem. This project aims at further adapting the Bukhgeim-Klibanov method to
use Robbiano-Tataru type Carleman estimates and unique continuation arguments to
tackle the proposed problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.