* 1908601
* SHF: Small: Acceleration Using Smart Memory-on-Chip
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Reetuparna Das, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Memory-on-Chip structures are used in almost all modern computer processing
chips, both general-purpose as well as accelerators chips. They occupy a large
fraction of the die area, for example, in Intel's server class Xeon processor
devotes 35 MB just for its last-level cache, while Google's Tensor Processing
Unit dedicates 24 MB for on-chip storage. Furthermore, a processor spends
disproportionately large fraction of time and energy in moving data over its
memory hierarchy, and in instruction processing, as compared to actual
computation. To tackle these inefficiencies, this project proposes a novel idea:
re-purpose the elements in memory structures and transform them into large data-
parallel compute units. Outcomes of this research have the potential to
accelerate computing operations involving heavy use of data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data stored in on-chip memory arrays share wires
(bit-lines) and signal sensing apparatus (senseamps). The research is grounded
in the obeservation that arithmetic operations can be computed over these shared
structures by augmenting a few gates to them. This in-SRAM computing technique
is referred to as bit line computing. The preliminary work has demonstrated the
potential and feasibility of smart memory-on-chip. This project will explore
novel vertically integrated solutions that explore broad use of smart memory-on-
chip. The research will develop new operation primitives, programming framework
and compiler for smart memories, design neural computing architectures,
investigate utilizing smart memories in Application Specific Integrated Circuits
(ASICs) and reconfigurable Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs), and explore
the applicability to emerging embedded nonvolatile
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.