* 1908482
* Crowdsourcing neuroscience: An interactive cloud-based citizen science platform for high school students, teachers, and researchers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ido Davidesco, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* David Daniel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,643,423.00

Current priorities in school science education include engaging students in the
practices of science as well as the ideas of science. This project will address
this priority by developing a cloud-based platform that enables high school
students, teachers, and scientists to conduct original neuroscience research in
school classrooms. Before students and teachers initiate their own studies using
the system, they will participate in existing research studies by contributing
their own data and collaborating with researchers using the online, interactive
system. When experienced with the system, students and teachers will become
researchers by developing independent investigations and uploading them to the
interactive platform. Both student-initiated and scientist-initiated proposals
will be submitted to the platform, peer-reviewed by students and scientists,
revised, and included in the online experimental bank. In addition to conducting
their own studies using the platform, scientists will act as educators and
mentors by populating the experiment bank with studies that can serve as models
for students and provide science content for the educational resource center.
This online system addresses a critical need in science education to involve
students more fully and authentically in scientific inquiry where they gain
experience in exploring the unknown rather than confirming what is already
known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This early stage design and development study is
guided by three goals: 1) Develop an open-science citizen science platform for
conducting human brain and behavior research in the classroom, 2) Develop a
remote neuroscience Student-Teacher-Scientists (STS) partnership program for
high schools, and 3) Evaluate the design, development, and implementation of the
program and its impacts on students and tachers. In developing this project, the
project team will link two quickly emerging trends, one in science education,
and one in the sciences. Consistent with current priorities in science
education, the project will engage students and their teachers in authentic,
active inquiry where they learn scientific practices by using them to conduct
authentic inquiry where a search for knowledge is grounded in finding evidence-
based answers to original questions. On the science side, students and their
science partners will participate in an open science approach by pre-registering
their research and committing to an analysis plan before data are collected. In
this project, students will primarily be using reaction time and online systems
to do research that includes study of their own brain function. The project
research is guided by three research questions. How does an online citizen
neuroscience STS platform: a) impact students' understanding of, and abilities
to apply neuroscience and experimental design concepts? b) Impact students'
interests in, and attitudes toward science, including an awareness of science
careers and applications? and c) Affect teachers' attitudes towards neuroscience
teaching, and the use of inquiry-based strategies? A design-based research
approach will be used to iteratively design a sustainable and scalable inquiry-
based neuroscience curriculum with teachers as design partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.