* 1908910
* CNS Core: Small: Sensor-based Wireless Network Management via Edge Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Eric Rozner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 347,239.00

As Internet-of-Things, mobile health, autonomous vehicles, cyber-physical
systems, virtual reality, and smart environments proliferate, wireless spectrum
demand continues to grow at a significant rate. This proposal investigates new
ways of managing wireless networks through the advanced integration of emerging
trends in software-driven networking, ubiquitous computing deployments, and
sensor-driven analysis. The proposal supports the National Science Foundation's
mission to advance prosperity by enabling wireless industries to more
efficiently and flexibly control their networks. The investigator will work
closely with the wireless communication industry that contributes $475 billion
annually to America's economy each year and supports up to 4.7 million jobs
nationally. The project further benefits society by developing sensor-based
computing educational modules that will be released on TeachEngineering, a free
searchable engineering curricula library for K-12
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two major thrusts will be studied to build an
architecture that enables practical sensor-based wireless network management.
The first thrust aims to utilize sensor data to more effectively and flexibly
manage the wireless network. First, objects in the sensory domain will be
aligned with objects in the wireless domain through behavior analysis techniques
in both domains. Second, techniques will be designed to flexibly schedule
network traffic based on the actions of mobile device users. Third, a
programmable framework and corresponding feasibility tools allow administrators
to configure this new type of network architecture. A second major thrust in
this proposal makes analyzing sensory data at the network edge more efficient.
First, user and traffic context are used to determine how much edge resources
should be allocated for sensor analysis. Second, computational demands on
network edge resources are lessened via context-aware sampling rate algorithms.
In addition, new techniques utilize wireless information to lessen sensor-based
processing. The research results will be incorporated into courses at the
University of Colorado Boulder, scientific publications, and released as open-
source software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.