* 1908582
* Observing Periodic Phenomena in Variable Stars and Cataclysmic Binary Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Joseph Patterson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 216,060.00

The principal investigator has assembled and managed a global network of small
telescopes, called the Center for Backyard Astrophysics (CBA), which involves a
collaboration among professional and amateur astronomers who carry out long-term
observations of Cataclysmic Variables (CVs) and other variable stars. Their goal
is to understand the many periodic processes and the long-term behavior of these
binary star systems. CVs are pairs of stars orbiting close to each other and
exchanging material, and they occasionally show explosive increases in their
brightness. The core network of about 30 amateur astronomers in the CBA monitor
the changes in CVs, accumulating the long baseline needed for the study of
period changes. The CBA is a long-standing, successful program of citizen
science in which amateur astronomers provide a meaningful and significant
contribution to important scientific research results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator has assembled the CBA to study periodic phenomena,
particularly in CVs, with unequalled time sampling. They will continue to find
orbital periods, superhump periods, spin periods, precession periods, flickering
quasiperiods, dwarf-nova quasiperiods, and a few mysterious periods that have
resisted efforts to interpret or explain. The team of professional and amateur
astronomers will study the CV population and discover more candidates in each of
these categories, building up a more complete account of their evolution and
demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.