* 1908743
* Ed+gineering: An Interdisciplinary Partnership Integrating Engineering into Elementary Teacher Preparation Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Kidd, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,398,054.00

Engineering education, with its emphasis on developing creative solutions to
relevant problems, is a promising approach to increasing elementary students'
interest in scientific fields. Despite its potential, engineering education is
often absent from elementary classes because many teachers feel underprepared to
integrate it into their instruction. This project addresses this issue through
an innovative approach to undergraduate elementary education programs. In this
approach, called Ed+gineering, undergraduate elementary education majors team
with undergraduate engineering majors to develop and teach engineering lessons
to elementary students in out-of-school settings. In this project, over 500
elementary education majors will team with engineering majors to teach
engineering design to over 1,600 students from underrepresented groups. These
standards-based lessons will emphasize student questioning, constructive
student-to-student interactions, and engineering design processes, and they will
be tailored to build from students' interests and strengths. The research team
will study whether Ed+gineering is correlated with positive outcomes for the
elementary education majors. They will also study whether and how the elementary
education majors subsequently provide engineering instruction during their first
year of licensed teaching. This project will advance knowledge by resulting in a
model for teacher education that has the potential to improve future elementary
teachers' confidence and ability to teach engineering. In turn, more elementary
students may have opportunities to experience engineering as they discover how
innovative applications of science can be used to solve problems in the world
around them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at Old Dominion University will
study whether a teacher preparation model is associated with positive outcomes
for pre-service teachers while they are undergraduates and in their first year
as professional teachers. Undergraduate elementary education majors and
undergraduate engineering majors will work in interdisciplinary teams, comprised
of four to six people, in up to three mandatory collegiate courses in their
respective disciplinary programs. Each semester, these interdisciplinary teams
will develop and teach a culturally responsive, engineering-based lesson with
accompanying student materials during a field trip or after-school program
attended by underrepresented students in fourth, fifth, or sixth grade. Using a
quasi-experimental design with treatment and matched comparison groups,
researchers will identify whether the teacher preparation model is associated
with increased knowledge of engineering, beliefs about engineering integration,
self-efficacy for engineering integration, and intention to integrate
engineering, as determined by existing validated instruments as well as by new
instruments that will be adapted and validated by the research team.
Additionally, the researchers will follow program participants using surveys,
interviews, and classroom observations to determine whether and how they provide
engineering instruction during their first year as licensed teachers. Constant
comparative analyses of these data will indicate barriers and enablers to
engineering instruction among beginning teachers who participated in the
Ed+gineering program. This project will result in an empirically-based model of
teacher preparation, a predictive statistical model of engineering integration,
field-tested engineering lesson plans, and validated instruments that will be
disseminated widely to stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models
and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.