* 1908244
* Collaborative Research: Optimal Design of a Teleretinal Screening Program for At-Risk Patients
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Tae Woo Lee, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2022
* USD 169,792.00

This award will contribute to the advancement of the national health and welfare
by studying effective use of teleretinal screening and design of an integrated
screening system for diabetic retinopathy. Diabetic retinopathy is the most
common diabetic eye disease in the US and the leading cause of blindness in
American adults. While diabetes-related vision loss is mostly preventable with
early detection and treatment, national screening rates are significantly lower
than desired, with disproportionately limited access for minority patients with
a low socioeconomic status. This award supports a fundamental understanding of
screening system design that utilizes teleretinal imaging technology to reduce
the disparities and increase population-level screening. This project is
expected to have a particular impact on the health and welfare of minority and
underrepresented patients by identifying cost-effective screening policies and
optimal screening locations. This award will fund a doctoral student in inter-
disciplinary research and create educational materials for both operations
researchers and healthcare professionals in ophthalmology, telehealth, and
public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will model an integrated
screening system design in a bilevel optimization framework: (i) the leader's
problem is modeled as a probabilistic maximal covering location problem to
identify optimal locations of teleretinal screening facilities in a large county
health system, and (ii) the followers' problems address screening decisions for
individual patients and are modeled as partially observable Markov decision
processes to maximize both health benefit and patient adherence. Because of the
computational challenges of the bilevel framework, the research will develop
appropriate approximations by analyzing solution structures and value functions
of the lower-level problems that enable simple solution forms and developing
geography-based, distributed heuristics that approximate the interaction between
the location decisions and patient-level screening decisions. The research is
expected to lead to advances in bilevel optimization where there are many lower-
level problems involving stochastic and sequential decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.