* 1908464
* Strengthening STEM teaching in Native American serving schools through long-term, culturally responsive professional development
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Pradeep Dass, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 08/31/2024
* USD 934,784.00

Although there is a long-established body of knowledge about effective
professional development for STEM teachers, very little of it has been applied
and studied with teachers in Native American-serving school districts. This
project will explore how a nationally-implemented professional development model
is applied in two distinct Indigenous communities, the impact the model has on
teacher practice in Native-serving classrooms, and the model's capacity to
promote the integration of culturally responsive approaches to STEM teaching.
This project will substantially grow the data and knowledge available within
this unique context, which is critical given the persistent gaps in educational
achievement and STEM career participation among Indigenous people in the U.S.
K-12 teachers will participate in an 8-month cohort designed to increase their
STEM content knowledge and facilitate their efforts to develop academically
rigorous, culturally responsive STEM instructional units for use in their
classrooms. The project will add to our knowledge about the transferability of a
nationally-implemented professional development model within two specific
Indigenous contexts, and it will grow our knowledge about how STEM professional
development impacts teacher practice. Finally, the project will provide concrete
examples and knowledge about the ways culturally responsive approaches to STEM
professional development, curriculum development, and teacher practice are taken
up in two distinct Native-student-serving contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project includes the development and implementation of professional development
that is long-term, teacher-driven, collaborative across grade levels and content
areas, and facilitated by university faculty with STEM expertise. The research
will follow a collective case study methodology in order to establish a robust
and nuanced understanding of (1) how a national professional development model
operates within two specific and distinct Indigenous contexts; (2) how a
professional development model impacts teachers' STEM instructional practice in
Native-serving schools; and (3) how teachers in Native-serving schools engage
culturally responsive approaches to STEM curriculum development and STEM
instructional practice. Data will include interviews and focus groups with
participating teachers, university faculty, and other stakeholders, classroom
observations and "Scoop Notebook" artifacts of teacher practice, and the
teacher-developed STEM instructional units. Data will be iteratively coded with
a combination of open and focused coding using a constant comparative method
with a specific emphasis on identifying the culturally responsive elements
present across the data sources. Individual and cross-case comparisons will be
conducted to reveal broader themes that address the research questions. Results
and products will be disseminated to researchers, practitioners, and community
members through peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations, annual
partnership meetings, and posting of the teacher developed instructional units
to a web-based, freely accessible clearing house.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.