* 1908298
* CNS: Core: Small: Energy and Load Management in Data Centers: Online Optimization and Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Mohammadhassan Hajiesmaili, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 515,139.00

Data centers, the backbone of the internet, are using increasingly massive
amounts of power, consuming by some estimates up to 3% of the world's power
supply and doubling their appetite every four years. This increasing appetite
for power has significant ramifications for both costs -- electricity counts
among the largest expenses in operating a data center -- and unwelcome
contributions to climate change. Major data centers are working to meet this
challenge by creating their own renewable energy sources (such as wind and solar
farms) and energy storage systems in addition to the electric grid. But the
fluctuation and lack of reliability built into the supply of energy from
renewable sources causes significant challenges for data centers attempting to
efficiently procure energy from these sources in combination with the grid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use proven methods of algorithms and
machine learning to optimize the energy procurement and load management of data
centers under these challenges. In doing so, it will enable data centers to
minimize their energy costs, maximize robustness against uncertainty, and
improve their energy footprints. As a result, the successful implementation of
this project will have a significant impact on lowering the overall cost of
internet services.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More broadly, by modeling how to more
efficiently use renewable sources and energy storage systems, this research has
significance beyond data centers. This project will facilitate the efficient and
reliable incorporation of renewables into the operations of other large energy
customers, playing a key role in moving toward a greener and more sustainable
electric grid. The project will broaden participation by involving
undergraduates in the research and will include outreach activities on
introducing data centers to local K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.