* 1908488
* SHF: Small: The Compiler-Architecture Solution to the Data Dependent, Circuit-Level Critical-Paths Variations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Simone Campanoni, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2023
* USD 523,741.00

Computing performance translates to opportunities for innovations, which
positively impact our society. Systems have experienced a steady performance
improvement in the past. Unfortunately, recent developments in the semiconductor
industry have made this progress hard to maintain, which has slowed down
innovations in science and engineering. System performance depends on the
capabilities of the compiler used and the underlying computer architecture.
Usually, a compiler can control system activities at the instruction granularity
while the underlying architecture hides finer-grained information. The
compiler's inability to access fine-grained information, however, limits the
overall performance obtainable in future systems. The project's novelty is a new
compiler and computer architecture co-design where the latter enables the former
to control activities at a much finer granularity compared to what has been
explored before. This allows the underlying computer architecture to
automatically boost the overall system performance as well as to save energy.
The project's impact is to enable programmers to automatically make better use
of the commodity processors. With processor performance increased, society will
benefit from increased productivity and innovation in all areas involving
computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments in computer architecture
have generated tremendous advances in single-chip core count as well as
remarkable performance benefits brought by accelerators. However, Amdahl's Law
reminds us that single-thread execution will always be the limiting factor for
system performance -- a dire warning considering that the processor industry has
fallen well short of the decades old sequential code performance growth trend.
The team of researchers found that an important performance roadblock is in the
sub-cycle domain where the circuit-level critical path latency depends on the
data computed. This project designs a new compiler co-designed with the
underlying architecture to access and control data-dependent, circuit-level
critical path latencies. The impact of this design is the elimination of sub-
cycle performance inefficiencies across the computation stack for commodity
processors widely used in the whole computing spectrum, ranging from mobile to
high performance computing. Code, data, and results emanating from the project
will be maintained publicly at the website:
http://users.cs.northwestern.edu/~simonec/SCDVCA.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.