* 1908519
* The multimodal coordination of sustained attention: Its development and consequences for word learning in a social context
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Jeremy Borjon, Borjon                  Jeremy         I
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2021
* USD 144,750.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Science of Learning and Developmental Sciences programs. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Linda B. Smith at
Indiana University, Bloomington, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the development of sustained attention in
infants. An infant's ability to sustain their visual attention is a
developmental achievement that exemplifies the complexity of human development
and is predictive of far-reaching developmental outcomes such as self-control,
language, and later school achievement. Sustained attention is more than just
looking. It is a complex sensory-motor state that includes object holding, a
stable head, and stillness of body. This multimodal coordination does not occur
in a vacuum. It is inherently embedded in and supported by social interactions
with a mature partner. The exact ways in which social interactions support
infant sustained visual attention and impact its multimodal coordination is
unknown. The proposed research aims to construct a unified, mechanistic
understanding of how the multimodal state of sustained visual attention emerges
in the context of play with a caregiver and responds to changes in both the
infant's own behavior as well as the behavior of the
caregiver.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned study uses novel methodologies such
as head-mounted eye-tracking and an in-house built wireless vest equipped with
wireless sensors to densely sample multiple components of infant behavior: eye
gaze, body movement, heart rate, respiratory rate. Using a single data-
collecting procedure, the present research will identify the multimodal
components of sustained visual attention in 12- to 18-month old toddlers, an age
when individual differences in sustained attention emerge with predictive
consequences. Study 1 will identify the multimodal components of sustained
attention and how they develop in a context without the interaction of a mature
partner. Study 2 will identify how the child's own holding behavior supports and
organizes these components. Study 3 will leverage a context where infants and
their caregivers play together with objects, to address how the behaviors of
caregivers and their internal state organize the infant's multimodal attention.
Study 4 will answer whether the quality of the coordination between caregivers
and their infants have practical consequences for cognitive achievements such as
word learning and language outcomes. Results from these studies will make
significant advancements in our understanding of the use, development, and
consequences of the multimodal state of sustained attention. The proposed
project has relevance to the fields of Developmental, Cognitive, and the
Computational Sciences. In addition, this proposal leverages the development of
a novel, wireless device to capture infant movement, heart rate, and
respiration. The schematics of the vest, instructions for its construction, and
a suite of custom software will be made freely available for public
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.