* 1908327
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Reconstructing the data-driven workplace
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Phoebe Sengers, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2022
* USD 183,809.00

This research will develop evaluation heuristics and methodological innovations
to better incorporate worker perspectives into the research and design of data-
driven workplace systems. Advances in sensing technology and data collection are
moving us toward a data-driven workplace. Employers can now gather detailed,
granular information about workers from digital communication and wearable
sensors, leading to benefits such as improved workplace safety and performance
improvements. Yet, these same technologies also have potential for negative
impacts on workers: to be invasive, hinder worker self-management, and
exacerbate poor working environments. Research into designing workplace
analytics to work better for workers faces two key challenges: (1) given complex
organizational dynamics, it is hard to immediately predict the long-term
outcomes of design decisions on workers; and (2) researchers lack access to
information about and data from proprietary systems currently being deployed in
the workplace. This project addresses these challenges by collecting and
analyzing available archival data from the development of earlier forms of work
measurement that form the precedent for systems used today. This data will be
used to understand the long-term impact of data advocacy, and to develop
heuristics and methods that will provide guidance for contemporary technology
practitioners in design of and advocacy for the data-driven workplace. This
research will also inform curriculum design for courses on HCI methods and
designing technology for social impact, and a summer school for underrepresented
scholars on the same topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research answers three
questions: (1) How has workplace data been used to advocate for US workers in
the past, in an industry facing analogous challenges to data-driven workplaces
today? What was effective and ineffective? (2) How do the decisions and
challenges of using data to represent worker perspectives map onto analogous
methodological challenges that impact the design of workplace measurement
analytics today? (3) How can these design techniques and insights from the past
be used in present-day workplace analytics and advocacy for workers in data-
driven workplaces? This project answers these questions by combining historical
and design research, organized around a case study of management-engineering
projects conducted by the International Ladies Garment Workers Union (ILGWU).
Archival data will be gathered and analyzed to identify strategies to use data
to advocate for workers and to evaluate the long-term impact of those strategies
on work in an industry threatened by a volatile economic climate, outsourcing,
and automation. Through an analysis of historical data-driven design methods for
the workplace and an interview study with contemporary union organizers on the
use of data systems in contemporary organized labor, the project will identify
how and in what ways past union strategies, opportunities, and challenges are
relevant to contemporary issues in HCI research in data-driven
workplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.