* 1908670
* Collaborative Research: Designing for science learning in schools by leveraging participation and the power of place through community and citizen science.
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Sol Henson, Sierra Streams Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,381,531.00

Current priorities in science education include efforts to engage students in
scientific reasoning and using the knowledge and practices of science to
understand natural phenomena and constructively respond to local and global
challenges. This project responds to these priorities by developing and testing
a place-based environmental science research and monitoring program for
elementary school students and their teachers. Students will investigate
locally-relevant phenomena related to forest health, such as fire management and
invasive species. The students will collect and analyze data related to resource
management issues and share findings with community scientists and stakeholders.
The project will develop and test a reproducible and adaptable place-based
instructional model for schools, districts, and counties having underserved
rural populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This early stage design and development
project for students and teachers of grades 3-5 addresses two major goals: 1)
Design and implement a science education program focused on local forest
management issues to promote community-relevant learning and agency, and 2)
Conduct design-based research to identify effective approaches to engaging young
students in purposeful data collection and interpretation, and informed
interaction with local stakeholders. The study includes 15 comprehensive public
schools and charter schools in 12 school districts in a rural region having
limited access to the formal and informal science learning opportunities
typically available in urban centers. Research activities are guided by two
research questions: 1) To what extent and in what ways do students participating
in a school-based, community-engaged, place-based, environmental-focused program
develop environmental science agency? And 2) Which design variations of the
three Central Design Features foster the three science learning outcomes for
students? The three Central Desig Features are: 1) Collecting place-relevant
environmental data, 2) Facilitated meaning-making with collected data embedded
within larger data sets, and 3) Community-engaged, place-based projects and
interactions. A design-based research approach will be used to determine how the
planned design variations impact learning. The project will involve three design
cycles of two-years each, with adjustments being based on insights gained during
each implementation cycle. Pre- and post-program sureveys will be used to track
changes in student environmental science agency (ESA), and field observations,
semi-structured interviews with students and teachers, and examination of
student work and artifacts will be used to gather data used to answer the
research questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research PreK-12 Program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.