* 1908984
* III: Small: Automatic Detection and Resolution of Anti-Patterns in Database Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Joy Arulraj, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Designing and deploying data-intensive applications is easier now than it ever
has been due to the proliferation of data science and database-as-a-service
platforms. Data scientists can create applications in a short amount of time
that have the potential to reach millions of users and that need to efficiently
operate on large amounts of data. Designing database applications is, however,
non-trivial since scientists can unknowingly fall into the trap of using an
intuitive solution to a problem that is ineffective and often counterproductive,
a so called "anti-pattern," thus violating fundamental design principles. The
goal of this project is to improve the quality of database applications through
a new holistic approach to automatically finding, ranking, and fixing anti-
patterns. Studying and developing these techniques is essential in order to
support future data science applications that need to efficiently process large
amounts of data. The proposed research will make it easier for data scientists
to develop applications that: (1) support much larger data sets and more complex
workloads; (2) can evolve with less maintenance effort; and (3) are more
accurate and secure than what is possible today. As a result, this will
accelerate data science and reduce the labor cost of designing and maintaining
database applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project
are divided into three interacting research thrusts: (1) finding anti-patterns
in database applications with high precision and recall; (2) ranking the impact
of different anti-patterns on performance, maintainability, accuracy, and
security; and (3) fixing anti-patterns by altering the logical and physical
design of the database and rewriting queries. This research will develop new
mechanisms for automated detection and resolution of anti-patterns that go
beyond what is achievable in existing systems. The proposed techniques will
enable data scientists to develop more performant, maintainable, accurate, and
secure applications and will be implemented in a new open-source toolchain. The
techniques and methods developed from this research will offer benefits outside
of the context of database management systems because it will remove a
significant impediment in deriving the full benefits of data-driven decision-
making applications. This research effort will advance the understanding of
applying program analysis and refactoring techniques to improve database
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.