* 1908517
* AF: Small: Looking Under Rocks: A Search for a Provably Stronger TSP Relaxation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* David Williamson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 105,587.00

The traveling salesman problem is one of the most widely known problems of
computational difficulty. The goal of the problem is to find the cheapest route
for a salesman to visit a number of cities and return to home. It is not known
whether there is a means of finding the best possible tour short of enumerating
the exponentially large number of possible tours. Widely used algorithms for
finding the best possible solution involve computing lower bounds on the length
of the tour, and the closer the bound is to cost of the best possible tour, the
quicker these algorithms run. This project will investigate alternative lower
bounds for the traveling salesman problem to the ones widely used in practice,
in the hopes of finding a provably better lower bound. A better understanding of
lower bounds for the traveling salesman problem should help with solving other
computationally difficult problems. The traveling salesman problem is one that
is easy to explain to undergraduates and high school students. The PI and his
graduate student plan to use their research as a means of outreach to such
students, and to involve undergraduates in their
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current methods for computing the optimal solution
to the traveling salesman problem involve repeatedly solving a well-known linear
programming relaxation of the problem. Although this bound is extremely good in
practice (that is, it is very close to value of an optimal solution), its worst-
case behavior is not well understood, despite decades of research. This project
intends to study alternative lower bounds for the traveling salesman problem: it
will start by studying semidefinite programming relaxations of the problem, and
also consider other constraints that might be added to the linear program in
order to be able to prove stronger statements about its worst-case behavior than
are currently known. In addition, the project will consider some variants of the
traveling salesman problem that have not been as well-studied, including the
circulant TSP; for this variant, we are not even sure if the problem is NP-hard
or has a polynomial-time algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.