* 1908709
* Coherent Structures in Nanomagnetism
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Cyrill Muratov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 354,300.00

There has been a genuine revolution in nanofabrication of advanced magnetic
materials in the last 5-10 years. Swift advances in the field of spintronics -
an emergent discipline that aims to take advantage of the intrinsic spin of
electron in addition to its electric charge for computing and data storage -
present new challenges for mathematical modeling, analysis and simulations of
these materials, which need to keep pace with the progress in material design.
The aim of this project is to provide efficient theoretical treatments of the
next generation of magnetic materials within the general micromagnetic modeling
framework down to nanoscale. Its focus on magnetic skyrmions and other coherent
structures is strongly motivated by the ongoing development of new spintronic
hardware for neuromorphic computing inspired by biological neural networks and
particularly suited for deep learning. The nonlinear, nonlocal and multiscale
nature of the problems make it into a formidable problem of the 21st century
applied mathematics. Nevertheless, both the need to develop new mathematical and
computational tools to tackle the genuine complexity of these systems and their
potential to revolutionize computer technologies make these fundamental
challenges very exciting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator undertakes a
combination of modeling, analytical, asymptotic and computational studies of
layered ferromagnetic materials of current interest to spintronic applications.
Due to the increased dominance of interfacial effects at nanoscale, the three-
dimensional micromagnetic modeling framework must incorporate new types of
boundary terms. This new physics often results in surprising effects near the
material boundaries and gives rise to novel types of edge magnetization
structures such as edge-curling walls, edge vortices and chiral bobbers. The
investigator plans to formulate micromagnetic models of ferromagnetic films that
exhibit interfacial magnetic anisotropy and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,
derive the reduced two-dimensional models appropriate for thin films and develop
efficient computational tools to simulate current and stochastically driven
systems. Next, within the obtained class of the reduced models, the investigator
plans to undertake a study of several types of coherent structures supported by
these materials, such as magnetic skyrmions in extended and patterned ultrathin
films, spin textures in nanowires, and various edge structures. The questions of
existence and asymptotic properties of these coherent structures give rise to
challenging problems of energy-driven pattern formation and calculus of
variations. A key component of the project is the involvement of a new
generation of applied mathematicians into this highly interdisciplinary area of
research. As part of this process, the investigator develops courses in applied
sciences and takes part in interdisciplinary training of mathematics and
engineering graduate and undergraduate students and postdocs. It is hoped that
the project will also help foster better interactions between applied
mathematicians and experimentalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.