* 1908587
* Biophysical Studies of Metalloenzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Brian Hoffman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2024
* USD 900,000.00

Enzymes, the catalysts for biological reactions, are able to efficiently perform
very difficult chemical transformations. This project has two major long-range
goals: (i) to help implement the conversion of cellulose, the major constituent
of plant-derived biomass in nature, into green and sustainable biofuels; (ii) to
understand how nature fertilizes the earth through the conversion of atmospheric
nitrogen molecules into bioavailable nitrogen. Cellulose is potentially a
renewable source of biofuels, but despite years of study, the efficient and
economical degradation of cellulose remains a limiting factor in the industrial
conversion of cellulose to biofuels. Polysaccharide monooxygenases are enzymes
that use a copper active site to catalyze cellulose degradation, and their
utilization could help to overcome the prohibitive costs of cellulose
degradation. The reduction of nitrogen to yield two moles of ammonia, available
as fertilizer, is catalyzed by the metalloenzyme, nitrogenase. The agronomic,
economic, and social significance of nitrogenase can be appreciated by
recognizing that it supplies approximately 50% of the N atoms in humans. The
remainder is produced by the high-temperature/pressure Haber-Bosch industrial
process, which uses H2 generated from CH4 as reductant and as a result produces
vast amounts of CO2 and accounts for ~2% of the world's total energy
consumption. The goal of this project is to understand the mechanism of these
two important enzymes. This project will contribute to the training of graduate
students and postdocs, with special attention to increasing the participation of
women and underrepresented minorities in the scientific
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is founded on techniques developed
in the laboratory of the investigator for freeze-trapping reactive
intermediates, reducing them in the frozen solid by radiolytic cryoreduction,
and performing EPR/ENDOR characterizations of paramagnetic states. In the case
of polysaccharide monooxygenases, a primary intermediate is freeze-trapped and
paramagnetic one-electron reduced forms generated by cryoreduction. A step-
annealing protocol propels this along its reaction pathway in a controlled
fashion for study of successive intermediates that have only fleeting existence
at ambient temperatures. This work is paralleled by studies of Cu-oxy,
hydroperoxy, and peroxo model complexes, both with and without substrate
present. The investigator and his group have established that nitrogenase
functions by sequential accumulation of 4e-/4H+ to generate an activated state
that undergoes reductive elimination of H2 coupled to N2 displacement and
N&amp;#8801;N triple bond cleavage. The subsequent delivery of 4 additional
electrons/protons then produces 2 NH3 as products to complete the catalytic
cycle. In this project, the characterization of the nitrogenase mechanism by
trapping intermediates through freeze-quench or cryoreduction with analysis by
EPR/ENDOR, and by monitoring their interconversion, is
sought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.