* 1908716
* Calibrating Quasars for Cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Gordon Richards, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 102,226.00

Cosmology can be described as the study of the history, future, structure, and
geometry of the Universe and is a foundation of astronomical research.
Astronomers' current best understanding of cosmology comes from using a certain
type of exploding stars&lt;br/&gt;(supernovae) to "map" the Universe. However, a
fundamental tenet of science is that results should be tested and confirmed with
independent methods. This investigation thus seeks to determine if another type
of astronomical object can be used to test current theories. These objects are
black holes that lurk in the cores of all massive galaxies, some of which are
actively "feeding" today and are called "quasars". Ultimately the goal is to
attempt to determine if a sub-class of quasars can be used in the same way as
supernovae to map the geometry of the universe. In this process a graduate
student will be trained in modern data science methods and both the student and
PI will support education and public outreach, through activities involving
Drexel's Lynch Observatory, engaging with elementary and middle-school
classrooms, and actively working to increase inclusion and diversity at both
Drexel University and in the science community in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has potential for advancing science
because known quasars vastly outnumber the supernovae that are currently the
foundation of cosmology and the quasars "live" longer in addition to having been
discovered across cosmic time. What one might hope to learn from them would
provide independent constraints on existing methods. This project will undertake
a novel method for leveraging machine learning to improve and expand upon the
use of quasars for cosmology. The work involves calibrating two relationships
that can be applied to up to 500,000 known quasars and can be accomplished using
existing public data from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. The project is designed
as a 1-year high-risk, high potential reward exploratory investigation that the
proposing team is uniquely positioned to carry out. The results of this
investigation will be broadly distributed, by making code and data products
available not only through the science literature, but also common data-sharing
platforms and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.