* 1908865
* RI: Small: Speaker-Specific Articulatory Strategies
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Louis Goldstein, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2023
* USD 474,013.00

Speech is a uniquely human act that involves the conversion of discrete
cognitive, linguistic representations to continuous, complex movements of speech
articulators. By helping to understand better the variability and constraints of
this conversion mechanism in healthy speech production, this project contributes
to assessing speech disorders associated with neurological disease, such as
apraxia. Moreover, it paves the way for novel science-driven paradigms to
automatic synthesis of speech from text; a technology of increasing importance
for social inclusion. It also provides a unique interdisciplinary training
opportunity for students, integrating exposure to various facets of speech
science research. Novel dynamic imaging data of speech production, analysis
results, and derived models are shared with the broader research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is on the coordinative
patterns governing the movement of speech articulators toward the achievement of
speech production goals (articulatory strategies). The aim to develop a toolset
for characterizing this variability, that will also enable mapping phonological
representations to speaker-specific dynamics of the vocal tract. The project
builds upon the frameworks of Articulatory Phonology and Task Dynamics that
provide a model for generating vocal-tract dynamics from linguistic structures,
in which the formation of linguistically relevant constrictions in the vocal
tract is governed by the temporal deployment of dynamical systems: critically
damped oscillators that are characterized temporally by parameters including
targets (end goals of articulatory movements) and natural frequencies (time-
course of the movement trajectories). This model is updated using vocal-tract
real-time magnetic resonance imaging data from 32 speakers, in order to
characterize their speech production behavior at three levels: (i) the vocal-
tract deformations put forth in the act of speaking; (ii) the relative
contributions of those deformations towards the achievement of phonological
goals; and (iii) the temporal coordination of articulatory gestures for the
production of well-formed utterances. Such characterizations of individual,
speaker-specific articulatory strategies, as directly observed using state-of-
the-art vocal-tract imaging technology, significantly contributes to our
understanding of what underlies phonological constancy and what drives
individual variability via phonetic context, speaker anatomy, and speaking
style.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.