* 1908374
* RI: Small: Principles of Normative Multiagent Systems for Decentralized Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Munindar Singh, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 458,000.00

Emerging technologies such as blockchain and the Internet of Things offer
opportunities for multiple autonomous parties (people or organizations) to
collaborate in new ways that respect everyone's interests. This consideration
applies as well to building software applications involving multiple agents,
however our ways of building these software applications have not kept up with
these opportunities. Most current approaches focus on data and control from the
unitary perspective of a single organization. This project seeks to overcome two
conceptual challenges in multiagent system design: over-constrained interactions
that interfere with participants' autonomy, and the characterization of
interactions in a manner that is not meaningful to humans. This project, dubbed
Mia, aims to enable innovative applications that promote users' autonomy with
anticipated benefits in the quality of life for users as well as gains in
efficiency for users and enterprises. In particular, enabling decentralization
without compromising on rigor could lead to new ways of realizing scientific and
business interactions and thereby provide new pathways for value generation in
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to support interoperation of
autonomous parties for decentralized applications by investigating theoretical
models and programming techniques for multiagent systems. The Mia framework
seeks to model interactions between autonomous parties via communication
protocols that specify messages in support of fully decentralized enactments.
First, Mia will investigate ways to specify multiagent protocols such that a
protocol can be effectively enacted by decentralized participants, each acting
autonomously based on its local knowledge and private decision making, and one
participant can verify the compliance of another participant with respect to the
protocol. Second, Mia will investigate how autonomous parties may achieve
alignment on their joint activities through a formalization of norms modeled as
directed deontic constructs. Third, Mia will investigate ways in which to elicit
stakeholder requirements that respects their autonomy; mine norms from logged
interactions; and systematically induce flexible protocols from a model
formulated in terms of norms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.