* 1908960
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Revealing the Fate of Heavy Nuclei in Stellar Explosions and Pathways to Cosmic Rays
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Shunsaku Horiuchi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 05/31/2024
* USD 343,188.00

Cosmic rays are sub-atomic particles that reach the earth from outer space. Some
cosmic rays are the highest energy particles ever detected by humans, far
exceeding the energies produced in the largest particle accelerator experiments.
The origin of these ultra-high energy cosmic rays and the distribution of their
masses remains a mystery. A science collaboration between Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University and Pennsylvania State University will carry out
a research program designed to further knowledge of the origins of ultra-high
energy cosmic rays (UHECR) by establishing detailed connections to massive
stars, and to two different, but related types of exploding stars: supernovae
and gamma-ray bursts. The research will focus on understanding the distribution
of masses of ultra-high energy cosmic rays, which will be used to address long-
standing challenges in the quest for unraveling the origins of cosmic rays. The
work will benefit from ongoing discoveries of how supernovae explosions are
driven, and the development of a new multi-messenger astronomy that combines
traditional observations of light with observations of cosmic rays and other
particles from space. The research is interdisciplinary, requiring detailed
astrophysical numerical models, applications of nuclear physics, and
considerations of sub-atomic particle acceleration and interactions. Finally,
the project includes an active outreach program aimed at local high schools. The
centerpiece is the integration of a smartphone app "Crayfis" that detects UHECR
by a network of smartphone CCDs triggering on the particles called muons created
by the cosmic-rays. The app will be used as a catalyst to share excitement in
astrophysics and discovery and it will leverage the existing Virginia Tech
QuarkNet infrastructure to work with high school teachers, thereby reaching out
to a large and broad range of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive
numerical study, starting from the origins of nuclei in jets to their pathways
to ultra-high energy cosmic rays, will be performed. These studies will deliver
predictions for the mass compositions of ultra-high energy cosmic rays and allow
quantitative comparisons with ultra-high energy cosmic-ray and multi-messenger
observables. The main tasks of the proposal are: (i) to establish detailed
predictions for the nuclear mass compositions of engine-driven supernovae and
gamma-ray burst jets; (ii) to quantify the modification to such nuclear
abundances during jet propagation, cosmic-ray acceleration in dissipation
regions, and cosmic-ray propagation in intergalactic space; (iii) to make signal
predictions for cosmic ray and multi-messenger observables; and (iv) to perform
quantitative comparisons with data. Together, these tasks will deliver a
quantitative assessment of engine-driven supernovae and gamma-ray bursts as
sources of ultra-high energy cosmic ray nuclei. This project advances the goals
of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.