* 1908798
* SHF: Small: Formalisms, Implementations, and Verification Procedures for Alternatives to Floating Point
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2024
* Santosh Nagarakatte, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2024
* USD 516,000.00

Efficient and accurate representation of real numbers is a foundational question
in computer science. A floating-point number is widely used to approximate a
real number using a finite number of bits. Given the need for good performance
and challenges in reasoning about rounding errors or exceptional conditions with
the floating-point representation, there is interest in the community to explore
possible alternatives to it. The Posit representation is a recently proposed
alternative to the IEEE-754 floating point representation. This project develops
techniques, tools, and procedures to determine whether Posit is a viable
alternative to floating point. This project's impacts are the following: (1)
enable programmers to effectively write correct programs using Posits, (2) make
foundational advances for generating high-performance math libraries and
automated reasoning for Posits, (3) influence domain experts in scientific
computing and alleviate their concerns about correctness and accuracy, and (4)
educate graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students on foundational
abstractions and reasoning techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Posit
representation can represent more real numbers than the floating-point
representation given the same number of bits. Depending on the configuration, it
can represent every real value that floating point can. The Posit community is
attempting to find specific applications where a Posit outperforms floating
point in accuracy, performance, or storage. This project develops techniques,
tools, and procedures to reason about the feasibility, performance, and accuracy
of applications written with Posits. Specifically for performance, the project
develops high performance math libraries for the Posit representation and
explores hardware support for Posit operations. To reason about the accuracy of
computation, the investigators develop techniques for fast shadow execution that
compares a Posit execution to an execution with real numbers. To enable
automated reasoning for programs using Posits, the project develops a theory of
Posits usable with satisfiability modulo theory
solvers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.