* 1908900
* Aligning the Science Teacher Education Pathway. A Networked Improvement Community
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Michele Korb, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 06/30/2024
* USD 3,577,306.00

California State University will study the activities of a Networked Improvement
Community (NIC) as a vehicle to bridge gaps across four identified steps along
the science teacher training and development pathways within local contexts of 8
participating universities (NIC sites). Networked Improvement Community (NIC)
will co-create a shared vision and co-defined research agenda between university
researchers, science educators and school district practitioners working
together to reform teacher education across a variety of local contexts. By
studying outcomes of shared supports and teacher tools for use in multiple steps
along the science teacher education pathway, researchers will map variation
existing in the system and align efforts across the science teacher education
pathway. This process will integrate an iterative nature of educational change
in local contexts impacting enactment of the NGSS in both university teacher
preparation programs and in school district professional training activities and
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to
strengthen the capacity of universities and school districts to reliably produce
teachers of science who are knowledgeable about and can effectively enact the
Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), although prepared in varied
organizational contexts. The project will accomplish this goal 1) leveraging the
use of an established Networked Improvement Community, composed of science
education faculty from eight university campuses and by 2) improving and
studying coherence in the steps along the science teacher education pathway
within and across these universities and school districts. The project will use
a mixed methods approach to data collection and analysis. Consistent with
Improvement Science Theory, research questions will be co-defined by all
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.