* 1908669
* RI:Small:3D Shape Understanding and Generation using Unstructured Point Clouds
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Rui Wang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,894.00

3D shape understanding and generation are fundamental research problems in
computer vision and graphics. Techniques to efficiently and accurately detect,
classify, segment, and label 3D shapes have widespread applications in
autonomous vehicles, home assistance, industrial automation, and medical
engineering. Similarly, techniques to generate new shapes or complete partial
shapes are instrumental in design, manufacturing, and digital preservation.
While recent advances in deep learning have revolutionized 2D image
understanding and generation, adapting them to 3D shapes is still a fundamental
challenge. One bottleneck is the choice of 3D representation. Standard choices
such as 3D voxel grids, geometric images, multi-view representations have been
extensively studied, but they impose various limitations such as poor
efficiency, issues with representing complex shapes, difficulties in capturing
interior structures and maintaining view consistency. This project investigates
suitable and efficient 3D representations that enable deep learning algorithms
to achieve the level of success on 3D shapes as on 2D image understanding and
generation tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to study shape
understanding and generation using unstructured point clouds, which represent 3D
shapes as a collection of points on shape surfaces. Such representation is
compact, scalable, and suitable for capturing complex geometric details. For
shape understanding, the research investigates new approaches, such as using
various spatial data structures and multigrid tree networks, to enable deep
convolutional networks on unstructured point clouds. For shape generation, the
research studies effective generative models, such as using variational
autoencoders and GANs, applied on point clouds to produce high-quality 3D shapes
in a scalable manner. Different choices of loss functions on point clouds will
be investigated in detail. The research will be evaluated on real-world datasets
for shape recognition tasks, image-to-shape reconstruction and shape completion
tasks. It also enables new applications such as unsupervised 3D shape induction
from unlabeled image collections in the wild.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.