* 1908117
* Environmental Innovation Challenges: Teaching and Learning Science Practices in the Context of Complex Earth Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Gillian Puttick, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,538,554.00

Current priorities in science education include efforts to engage students in
scientific reasoning and using the knowledge and practices of science to
understand natural phenomena and constructively respond to local and global
challenges. This project responds to these priorities by engaging teams of
students and teachers of grades 7-12 in four competitive Challenges to design
innovative strategies for carbon mitigation in areas such as transportation,
agriculture or energy use. The project expands the typical boundaries of schools
by enabling teams of students in multiple locations to collaborate in model-
based reasoning through online discussion forums, using social media, and
crowdsourcing ideas to construct possible solutions to environmental challenges.
Project research will examine the impacts of the project on student learning and
engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This early stage Design and Development study
is guided by the hypothesis that competitive challenges supported by social
media and crowdsourcing will engage a diverse array of students in sustained and
meaningful scientific inquiry. Over a period of four years, the project will
design and refine four Challenges that will engage approximately 1,000 students
of ages 13-17. Project research is guided by three overarching questions related
to the design of the Challenges, the influence of school contextual factors, and
student learning and self-efficacy. The questions are: (1) How do features of
the challenge environment support the work of teams, and the participation of
students from communities historically underserved in STEM? (2) What structures
within the school ecosystem support or raise obstacles to team work? And (3)
Does participation in a Challenge result in the intended student outcomes.
Intended outcomes include: a) Learning of basic concepts related to the science
of the project focus; b) Engagement in learning disciplinary core ideas, cross-
cutting concepts and science and engineering practices; c) Persistence in
completing a Challenge; and d) self-efficacy in STEM. Students and their
teachers will cross disciplinary boundaries as they choose concepts from
chemistry, engineering, mathematics, biology, and social science to support
their innovations.Teachers, students, staff members and advisors will comment
and provide quidance to the teams on a range of issues through crowdsourcing.
Design research will be used to examine how features of the Challenge
environment supports the work of teachers and teams, and implementation research
will focus on participant learning at the individual and team levels. The
project will engage at least 25 teams of 3-4 students each, and researchers will
track team activity during all phases of the Challenge process. A mixture of
qualitative and quantitative analyses will be used to examine outcomes, and data
for girls and others from underserved populations will be disaggregated for
separate analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.