* 1908419
* CDS&amp;E: AAG: "glupyter": Enabling multi-dimensional linked data visualization with glue in the browser
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Alyssa Goodman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2023
* USD 233,534.00

The open-source glue package allows scientists to explore relationships within
and across related datasets. It makes it easy to create multi-dimensional linked
visualizations, to select subsets interactively or programmatically, and then
see those selections in context. A unique feature of glue is that it allows
user-defined mathematical relationships between sets of data components. Because
of limitations with the current glue application, a new interface to glue is
under development, called "glupyter". The present award will support
transforming glupyter from a proof-of-concept application to a fully featured,
polished and science-grade application for astronomical research and beyond.
Glue and glupyter can be used across many fields of science, from exploring
astronomical observations to analyzing radiological images of the brain to
exploring patterns in multi-wavelength satellite images. As their capabilities
expand, so will their potential for impact outside of scientific research. They
are already good tools for teaching the fundamentals of data exploration, and
will enable new data-science curricula for students in grades 6-14.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive and visualization research has long shown that
humans are especially adept at seeing change, which is why real-time data
exploration using linked views of high-dimensional data offers such an effective
way to look for trends, outliers and salient subsets, even in very large data
sets. Commercial linked-view tools can be used for single tabular data files,
but no extant tool handles linked-view selection in two-dimensional images and
three-dimensional volumes spread across multiple files. This is where the
strength of glue lies. Meanwhile, Jupyter notebooks are increasingly popular for
data analysis, as they store an entire workflow using narrative text, code, and
visualizations. They encourage reproducibility and facilitate sharing. Bringing
glue into the Jupyter ecosystem as glupyter offers unparalleled potential for
insight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.