* 1908888
* CNS Core: Small: GoT -- Groups of Things Abstractions for Distributed IoT
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Indranil Gupta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The Internet of things (IoT) market for smart homes, buildings, and cities, is
expected to reach over a half trillion dollars in size by 2021. Today's IoT
technology landscape is the culmination of many decades of research, but large-
scale IoT deployments are still hard to setup, configure, and manage, and this
process is often laborious and time-consuming. This project will develop a new
distributed computing substrate called "Groups of Things (GoT)". GoT consists of
several software building blocks on top of which IoT applications can be built
easily and flexibly for environments like smart homes, buildings, campuses, and
cities, bringing us closer to the vision of making these deployments truly
robust, scalable, self-sufficient, and self-managing. GoT adapts, for IoT
settings, three important distributed computing primitives that have been
successful in datacenters and cloud computing, namely--membership, coordination,
and storage. The applications built by this project atop GoT provide an
opportunity to explore the approach of designing systems with a human-first
philosophy, for the IoT setting. The project's activities include designing
algorithms, analyzing them formally, implementing them in real devices including
Raspberry Pis, and deploying them in real buildings on the University of
Illinois campus. The project will produce open software and engage with industry
in the IoT and wireless sector to maximize industry impact of ideas from the
project. Educational contributions include developing modules for online MOOCs
and working with students from under-represented groups in K-12, undergraduate
school, and graduate school. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technically, this project
will build a new abstraction for IoT Networks, called the "Groups of Things
(GoT)" substrate. The work includes designing and analyzing new distributed
algorithms, techniques, and systems and implementations, for three specific
foundational building blocks: 1) distributed failure detection and membership in
IoT networks; 2) distributed coordination in IoT networks; and 3) distributed
IoT small object storage (iSoS). The solutions to these three components are
tightly integrated, leveraging each other (latter ones build atop former ones).
Because of the fluid and failure-prone nature of IoT environments, the project's
philosophy is to design using probabilistic techniques--such techniques have
been shown to work well in internet-based distributed systems (such as clouds
and datacenters). These techniques are analyzable and have provable behavior in
a variety of scenarios. The researchers will also implement applications atop
the GoT substrate, including the first distributed command and control interface
that realizes ACID abstractions (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability)
inspired by transactional databases. The project's implementations will be in
state-of-the-art IoT platforms such as Raspberry Pis. Experiments will be
performed via both real traces using a simulation and using real deployments
inside buildings at the University of Illinois campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.