* 1908515
* PBS NewsHour Student Reporting Labs StoryMaker: STEM-Integrated Student Journalism
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* John Voiklis, Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications Association
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,225,604.00

PBS NewsHour's Student Reporting Labs (SRL) is a youth journalism program that
creates transformative educational experiences through video production and
community engagement. The program aims to produce unique STEM stories from a
teen perspective and partners with local public media stations to provide
mentorship and amplify the voices of young people. In this project, Student
Reporting Labs will develop an online curriculum delivery platform called
StoryMaker and a unique set of tools called Storymaker:STEM that will supply in-
demand interdisciplinary, multi-modal, STEM-infused teaching and learning tools
to classrooms across the country. SRL StoryMaker:STEM will be a free, self-
directed online curriculum delivery system designed to guide educators working
with middle and high school-age students through videojournalism experiences
that highlight and integrate STEM skills, concepts, issues, and potential
solutions into the learning process. This program will also develop mentoring
connections with 40 journalism professionals and STEM professionals to provide
supports for participating teachers and students. The project will recruit and
work with about 100 teachers and their students over the course of the project
to inform, test, implement and provide feedback on the SRL StoryMaker:STEM
platform and resources. The associated research will explore evidence-based
strategies for structuring co-learning and mentorship connections for students
and teachers with journalists and science content experts around SRL
StoryMaker:STEM to best support student and teacher outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four-year associated research study will contribute to
understanding how teachers collaborate on teaching STEM across academic
disciplines through a series of interviews, surveys, and site visits with the
pilot teachers and their students using SRL StoryMaker:STEM. The analysis of the
data will focus on identifying the benefits of developing a community of
teachers who collaborate on teaching STEM across the academic discipline through
journalism practice. Specifically, a combination of quantitative and qualitative
methods will be used to examine the following research questions: What teacher
affordances are necessary for using journalism practices to support STEM
learning across academic disciplines? How do teacher perceptions of their school
constraints influence their use of STEM-based learning activities? How do
teachers from different disciplines teach numerical reasoning, communicating
with data, and the other essential STEM thinking skills? How might an online
support community be structured to encourage teacher-to-teacher scaffolding
related to STEM content given variation in their pedagogical training?
Meanwhile, front-end evaluation will identify barriers and opportunities
specific to this project. Formative evaluation will focus on how each specific
iteration is meeting teachers' needs and aspirations, and summative evaluation
will examine teachers' STEM learning and teachers' perception of students' STEM
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DRK-12 seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.