* 1908992
* SHF: Small: Automated Algorithm/Hardware Co-Design for Accelerating Nanopore Base-calling
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Sarath Janga, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2023
* USD 498,850.00

Nanopore genome sequencing is becoming the cornerstone to enable personalized
medicine, global food security and wildlife conservation. 'Base-calling' is the
process of assigning bases (nucleobases) to signal peaks observed by the gene
sequencer. It is the most time-consuming step during sequencing and uses deep
neural networks to translate vast amounts of raw electrical signals produced by
nanopore sequencers to digital DNA symbols. However, although current approaches
reduce the computing overhead of a base-caller, they substantially increase
uncorrectable systematic errors resulting in low accuracy for base-calling.
Moreover, the low power efficiency of prior base-calling accelerators severely
restrict the use of this sequencing technology in numerous real-time biomedical
applications. Currently, there is no methodology to automatically explore the
huge design space of a base-caller in conjunction with its hardware
accelerators. To remedy these issues, this project will develop a novel
algorithm &amp; hardware co-design methodology to make nanopore base-calling
more power efficient, scalable and accessible, making it possible to realize its
value in socially relevant applications that demand fast genome sequencing
solutions. It will also lower the barrier to nanopore sequencing development,
bringing the benefits of sequencing to users who are not machine learning and
hardware design experts. This project will engage undergraduate and graduate
students in cutting edge interdisciplinary fields ranging from genomics to
computer engineering. All artifacts and teaching materials will be broadly
disseminated via open source and creative commons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop and rigorously validate (1) a systematic-error-aware
binarized base-caller, (2) a power-efficient spintronics accelerator for
binarized base-calling, and (3) deep-reinforcement-learning-based approach to
automatically explore the design space of the base-caller and its accelerator,
to generate optimal frameworks for developing the next generation of base-
callers. These three aims will enable even non-experts to take advantage of
nanopore base-calling in numerous life science fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.