* 1908159
* Design and Implementation of Immersive Representations of Practice
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Cheng-Chang Lu, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,488,759.00

Various researchers have documented that a large proportion of preservice
teachers (PSTs) demonstrate less sophisticated professional knowledge for
teaching both fractions and multiplication/division. Use of representations of
practice (i.e., video, animation), and accompanying annotation technology, are
effective in improving such professional knowledge, but PSTs continue to
demonstrate a lack of precision in attending to or noticing particular
mathematics in classroom scenarios. Fortunately, a new technology, 360-degree
video, has emerged as a means of training novices for professional practice.
This project will address the potential positive and negative impacts of using
360-degree video for bridging the gap between theory and practice in mathematics
instruction. Specifically, PSTs demonstrate difficulty in synthesizing explicit
knowledge learned in the college classroom with tacit professional knowledge
situated in professional practice. The initial pilot of the technology resulted
in PSTs demonstrating specific attention to the mathematics. The purpose of the
project will be to investigate how PSTs' tacit and explicit professional
knowledge are facilitated using immersive video technology and annotations
(technologically embedded scaffolds). To do this, the project will examine where
and what PSTs attend to when viewing 360-degree videos, both at a single point
in the classroom and through incorporating multiple camera-perspectives in the
same class. Additionally, the project will examine the role of annotation
technology as applied to 360-degree video and the potential for variations in
annotation technology. Findings will allow for an improved understanding of how
teacher educators may support PSTs' tacit and explicit knowledge for teaching.
The project will make video experiences publicly available and the platform used
in the project to create these video experiences for teacher educators to use,
create, and share 360-degree video experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will examine how representations of practice can facilitate preservice
teachers' professional knowledge for teaching fractions and
multiplication/division. The project will: examine the effect of single versus
multiple perspective in PSTs' professional knowledge; examine how PSTs use
annotation technology in immersive video experiences, and its effect on PSTs'
professional knowledge for teaching fractions and multiplication/division; and
design a platform for teacher educators to create their own 360 video immersive
experiences. Using an iterative design study process, the project team will
develop and pilot single and multi-perspective 360-degree video experiences in
grade 3-5 classrooms including developing a computer program to join multiple
360-degree videos. They will also develop an annotation tool to allow PSTs to
annotate the single and multi-perspective 360 video experiences. Using a
convergent mixed methods design, the project team will analyze the quantitative
data using multiple regressions of pre-post data on mathematical knowledge for
teaching and survey data on PSTs reported immersion and presence in viewing the
videos to compare single and multi-perspective 360-degree video data. They will
also qualitatively analyze heat maps generated from eye tracking, written
responses from PSTs' noticing prompts, and field notes from implementation to
examine the effect of single versus multiple perspectives. The team will use
similar methods to examine how PSTs use the annotation technology and its
effect. The results of the research and the platform will be widely
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.