* 1908779
* Collaborative Research: Liquid Metal Tuned Flexible Metasurfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jeong Bong Lee, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 290,999.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical windows such as lenses in
prescription glasses are reasonably customizable. Lenses can vary in size,
shape, curvature, or design. In addition to aesthetic features, the
functionalities and overall packaging can also be modified or upgraded. For
example, anti-reflective coatings can be added to reduce glare and photochromic
lenses suppress light transmission on exposure to ultraviolet radiation. These
optional features have minimal impact on physical properties since such coatings
add less than a millimeter of thickness. Microwave windows can be considered as
a type of optical window that functions in the microwave spectrum. As with
optical windows, microwave windows are made to transmit, reflect, or absorb
electromagnetic waves. Microwave windows are indispensable components in systems
such as radomes (enclosures that protect a radar antennas) and shields that
reduce electromagnetic interference. Unlike optical windows, current design
techniques do not lend much freedom to customize both functional and physical
characteristics of the microwave windows. For example, practical microwave
windows that are flexible, thickness customizable, and can tune the transfer
response on-demand in real-time remain to be realized. This project will exploit
new techniques that can be applied to realize liquid metal enabled tunable and
mechanically flexible multi-layered microwave windows. The proposed device will
be made by integrating movable liquid metals that can provide a wide tuning
range with minimal loss. The resulting concept can be adapted to all types of
filters, delivering unprecedented design control in the implementation of multi-
layered tunable/flexible microwave windows. The educational and outreach plan
focuses on students from underrepresented groups, integrating research findings
into classroom courses taught by the PIs and developing active collaboration
with industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this proposal are to study new theoretical foundations and explore
the potentials and limitations of liquid metal tuned mechanically flexible
(bendable/foldable) metasurfaces. The technical approach relies on adopting a
multi-layer metasurface synthesis technique based on thickness customizable
intercoupling layers that behave as admittance inverters. The proposed liquid
metal tuned mechanically flexible metasurfaces consist of gallium-based liquid
metal slugs in polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) microfluidic channels as moveable
tuning elements and another gallium alloy filled in specific metasurface pattern
as fixed metal. These liquid metal slugs will be made oxide free and freely
movable in the microfluidic channel. Thus, the position of the moveable liquid
metal slug train in a large 2D array metasurface can be tuned pneumatically with
high precision. The reconfigurable property makes microwave windows attractive
for a wide range of applications that demand controllable/stable high-frequency
response when operated under a dynamic EM environment. When combined with the
flexibility feature, the new technology can revolutionize the use of next-
generation microwave windows by enabling deployable, transportable, and
conformable metasurfaces that can be tuned on-demand, in real-time. The end
result is a significant scientific leap in metasurface technology and
establishment of the principles and the feasibility of new technologies for
future metasurface-based devices and systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.