* 1908633
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Understanding and Evolving Search-based Software Improvement
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Westley Weimer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Software is pervasive, supporting entertainment, finances, health care, travel,
and social interactions. Latent software glitches, or bugs, are costly to
diagnose and repair. Today, most software bugs are repaired by highly-trained
software engineers, but it is uneconomical to repair all such bugs manually, and
even for important security-critical problems there can be long delays between
bug discoveries and fixes. This project develops improved methods for
automatically finding repairs for software bugs, thus addressing a key component
of the high cost of software maintenance. Techniques for automated software
improvement have matured over the past&lt;br/&gt;decade, and industry has begun
adopting the more successful approaches. Despite these successes, current
methods can repair only a fraction of presented bugs. The project focuses on
extending the range of existing techniques, which search for small changes to
the buggy program that will repair the error. Current approaches use search that
is analogous to "looking for one's keys under a streetlamp": they search where
it is easy, not where it would be most effective. By leveraging insights from
evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;biology and on-line learning methods, new algorithms will
be developed that explore more aggressively, thus finding more repairs for more
complex bugs more often and more consistently. In addition to repairing bugs,
the new algorithms will be tested on other aspects of software improvement, for
instance, reducing how much energy a program uses when it
executes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All search algorithms face a tradeoff between
exploration and exploitation, balancing continued refinement of current good
solutions against looking for even better solutions farther afield. Current
methods for search-based software improvement overemphasize exploitation,
limiting searches to only one or two changes to the original program. To search
more aggressively, the project focuses on the space of "neutral" or "safe"
program edits, adapting the concept of the space of neutral mutations in
biology, where there is extensive theory and analysis to describe its topology
and account for negative interactions among mutations. The project: (1) adapts
these analyses to the software domain, (2) uses them to design new program-
improvement algorithms, and (3) tests the algorithms quantitatively using three
important software-improvement domains: software repair, energy optimization,
and optimizing speed/accuracy tradeoffs. The resulting algorithm is a radical
departure from existing search-based methods, because it eliminates two key
components: selection of the highest-performing samples from a population and
recombination of high-performing partial solutions. By focusing on exploration,
and by quantifying important properties of the search space, the project
complements work by other researchers to improve mutation operators, fault
localization, and fitness functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.