* 1908311
* Building A Teacher Knowledge Base For The Implementation Of High-quality Instructional Resources Through The Collaborative Investigation Of Video Cases
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Carolyn Narasimhan, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 06/30/2024
* USD 617,710.00

This is a Late-Stage Design and Development collaborative effort submitted to
the teaching strand of the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK12) Program. This
project will address the pressing national need to generate shared, practice-
based knowledge about how to implement freely available, high-quality
instructional resources (mathematics formative assessment lessons) that have
been shown to produce significant gains in student learning outcomes. It will
expand a professional development model (Analyzing Instruction in Mathematics
using the Teaching for Robust Understanding Framework (AIM-TRU)) that supports
teacher learning about effective lesson implementation. The backbone of AIM-TRU
is a growing, open repository of video cases available to teachers and teacher
educators across the U.S. who use or are interested in using the lessons. The
repository will include tools such as a facilitator's guide to support teachers
and teacher educators to engage in the model and collaboratively investigate the
video cases. Consequently, the work will have the potential to engage teachers
and teacher educators in improving mathematics education at scale. Because the
video cases will capture implementation and ideas for improving instruction in
schools serving populations who are underrepresented in mathematics, AIM-TRU
will serve to improve mathematics education
equitably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research questions focus on what teachers learn
about high-quality mathematics instruction and instructional materials within a
community of practice, and how that learning influences their teaching. In AIM-
TRU, teachers engage in the collaborative investigation of video cases utilizing
a shared repertoire that includes questioning protocols adapted from the
Teaching for Robust Understanding (TRU) framework. This framework articulates
five dimensions of classroom instruction that are necessary and sufficient to
support students in becoming powerful mathematical thinkers. This affords
teachers opportunities to use the TRU dimensions as lenses to diagnose common
problems of practice that arise in implementation, and propose innovations and
theories for improving instruction that can be tested in real classrooms and
documented in new video cases. Analytic tools will be used from frame analysis
to produce empirical evidence of what teachers are learning about instruction
and instructional materials along the five dimensions of TRU. These data will be
mapped to a random sample of video recordings of participating teachers'
instruction, scored using the TRU Math Rubric, in order to link learning
outcomes from the professional development to changes in instruction. Addressing
these research questions will provide a deeper understanding and empirical
evidence of learning within teacher collectives, the pressing national need to
develop mechanisms to produce collective professional knowledge for teaching,
and further efforts to understand the types of knowledge required for effective
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DRK-12 Program seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.