* 1908385
* RUI: Precision Nanocrystallization for Enhanced Strength and Ductility in Bulk Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Mark Atwater, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2020
* USD 297,925.00

Metals are strong and durable, which enables them to serve in diverse
performance-critical industries, such as automotive, aerospace, national
defense, biomedical implants, and many more. A limitation to metals is their
high density, which lowers their strength-to-weight ratio. Metals can be
significantly strengthened by reducing their grain size to the nanoscale, but
this can also make them brittle. If the strength of metals can be increased
without becoming brittle, then less material can be used overall, and new
designs can be applied. This project will examine the fundamentals of this
tradeoff using a commercially feasible technique known as surface mechanical
attrition treatment (SMAT). SMAT uses the impact of ball bearings to deform a
surface and increase its strength. The underlying material remains ductile,
thereby achieving a balance between strength and ductility. The goal of this
work is to quantify the SMAT process and to understand the fundamentals, thus
enabling optimized impact energy and location selection. This will allow larger
components to be processed than is currently practical, or even possible, by
other currently available nanostructuring methods. Industries that could
potentially benefit from the work include aerospace, energy and automotive. This
project provides unique research experiences to undergraduate students by
connecting engineering theory to advanced applications using new experimental
and computational approaches. Opportunities for in-depth training will be
further enhanced by leveraging partnerships with other research institutions,
such as the US Army Research Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strength-
ductility tradeoff with metallic materials is a thoroughly studied and
documented phenomenon. The seriousness of this compromise has been emphasized by
the development of nanocrystalline metals and alloys. These materials can
provide remarkable strength and hardness increases through simple grain
refinement, but this presents two significant challenges: (i) a commensurate
decrease in tensile ductility, and (ii) the use of processing techniques that
are often incompatible with cost-effective bulk production. This project aims to
address both aspects by developing experimental and computational tools to
quantify grain refinement during nanocrystallization by impact-mediated severe
plastic deformation (SPD). This will be accomplished using a suite of custom
research equipment that allows the direct correlation of impact energy and
frequency with microstructural transformation using surface mechanical attrition
treatment (SMAT), which allows a combination of strength and ductility to be
achieved. This will be coupled with finite-element analysis to verify and extend
the technique to create two-dimensional impact patterns to optimize the plastic
strain gradients for strength and ductility. The purpose of this approach is to
gain fundamental knowledge about SPD nanocrystallization and to use that
knowledge to create bulk nanostructured metals and alloys in a cost-effective
and scalable way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.