* 1908823
* The Intracluster Mass Function from Brown Dwarfs to Stellar-Mass Black Holes from the Microlensing Fluctuations of an Extremely Magnified Star
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Patrick Kelly, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 12/31/2023
* USD 432,175.00

This project will take advantage of the gravitational bending of light to
observe a very distant galaxy whose image is being magnified by the gravity of a
cluster of galaxies in the foreground. By carefully studying the magnification
of the distant galaxy they will learn about the mass distribution in the
foreground cluster. This galaxy is unique because one star in that galaxy has
been magnified enough to be seen at a distance of billions of lightyears. By
observing changes in brightness of this star, they will learn about the masses
of stars in the foreground cluster of galaxies. The project will also develop
several exhibits for he Bell Museum at the University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will compare different lens mass models
with the surface brightness spatial variations across the lensed galaxy images
to determine the most accurate mass distribution map of the lensing cluster. By
obtaining a 3-year light curve for the single, highly magnified star, using the
Large Binocular Telescope, they will be able to measure microlensing light
fluctuations that can be used to constrain the mass function of the intracluster
stars in the foreground cluster. This will help place constraints on the initial
mass function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.