* 1908094
* SHF: Small:Automatically Synthesizing System and Integration Tests
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mark Grechanik, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 378,860.00

System and integration testing is a set of key activities in software
development and maintenance to determine if applications and their constituent
components behave correctly. System/integration testing is vitally important for
ensuring software quality, since many serious software defects occur in
interactions among different components. Unfortunately, creating effective
system/integration tests requires significant time and effort, since it is not
feasible to test the enormous set of all combinations of the components from a
nontrivial software application. It is crucial to reduce the cost and increase
the quality of software with system/integration testing that is effective in
fault finding and efficient in resource consumption and execution time. In sum,
there are unique factors in system/integration testing, not previously
considered, that if not addressed will continue to limit the quality of software
applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, a novel framework will be
created for automatically creating effective system/integration tests that find
bugs efficiently. A three-pronged research program will be developed for
Automatic Synthesis of System and Integration Software Tests (ASSIST). New
algorithms and techniques will be created and evaluated as part of the work on
this project for automatically obtaining models that describe interacting
components, thus reducing the number of synthesized system and integration tests
and increasing their fault-finding power. Also, a novel way will be created in
which static and dynamic analyses and machine learning are used to obtain test
input data as well as oracles for the synthesized system and integration tests.
As a result of the work on this project, system and integration tests will be
automatically synthesized using ASSIST that have a comparable bug-finding power
with manually created integration tests. A suite of new ASSIST tools that will
be developed, evaluated, and applied to different open-source and commercial
applications, and made available to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.