* 1908892
* Precise Stellar Parameters in the Era of Planet Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Daniel Jaffe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 471,420.00

The investigators seek to understand the formation of stars and planets.
Astronomers study planet formation by observations of the composition and speed
of material forming these solar systems. The first stage is the collapse of a
vast cloud of gas in a galaxy. This gas contracts, heats up and forms a disk
rotating around the densest regions. The planets form while the stars are still
young. The disk breaks up into clumps and the clumps form planets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In our solar system there are many types of planets, from
rocky planets like the Earth to gas giant planets like Jupiter. The
investigators seek to better understand what causes these types of planets to
form. The type of planets formed depends on the magnetic fields and elements
present in the clouds when the initial collapse begins. The investigators will
focus on a key aspect of planet formation, the lifetime of the disk of material
before in breaks up into planets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators have
designed and constructed a special purpose device to precisely measure the
properties of Young Stellar Objects (YSOs) as they form. The device the
investigators built is a very sensitive optical spectrometer, called the
Immersion GRating INfrared Spectrometer (IGRINS). The investigators have
observed hundreds of YSOs in the Taurus and Ophiuchus star forming regions.
Their IGRINS device has been installed on many of the most sensitive telescopes
in the world. Their observations simultaneously determine the temperature,
magnetic field strength, surface gravity, and rotation rates with great
accuracy. The investigators will analyze the entire IGRINS YSO Survey and create
a public archive of reduced spectra. The investigators plan to consistently
calibrate and process their observations into a library of useful measurements
of the process of star and planet formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will make astronomical concepts more accessible to the broadest
audience. By working with an expert in Universal Design at Northern Arizona
University, in collaboration with the Texas School for the Blind and Visually
Impaired (TSBVI), they will augment astronomy lesson plans with tactile
graphical devices. This effort will include graduate student volunteers and will
be implemented in TSBVI classrooms and at Austin public elementary schools. The
accessibility and adoption of these tools by students will be documented and
presented at national conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.