* 1908611
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: New Frontiers in Encryption Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Brent Waters, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 601,581.00

Encryption is the process of encoding data into a ciphertext such that only the
intended recipient can decode and learn the data. This project pushes the
frontiers of what is achievable for encryption. The project's novelties are
building encryption systems with advanced capabilities that have provable
security under standard assumptions. These include the capability to trace
malicious users who leak confidential information as well as the ability to only
release select pieces of information to users on a need to know basis. The
project's impacts are the development of a new generation of encryption systems
that are built from reliable and tested mathematical
underpinnings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three primary
thrusts. (1) Chosen ciphertext security. Chosen ciphertext security (IND-CCA) is
arguably the right notion of security both for traditional encryption systems as
well as ones with advanced functionality. The investigators investigate generic
methods and new tools for converting IND-CPA systems into IND-CCA ones. (2)
Tracing in encryption systems. Traitor tracing is the problem of determining the
source of a decoder box in a broadcast system. The investigators explore
challenging new problems including: getting trace and broadcast systems with
N^{1/c} sized ciphertexts for any constant c, achieving public traceability for
the same parameters and using tracing techniques as a tool for proving adaptive
security. (3) New frontiers in encryption based on the Learning With Errors
(LWE) assumption. Building from the LWE assumption is an exciting avenue for
producing new functionality in cryptography from a well-studied assumption. The
investigators will pursue ambitious goals in this direction, including a new
concept of obfuscating pseudorandom functionalities and its applications, as
well as a program for constructing witness encryption from LWE beginning with an
intermediate goal of building constrained pseudorandom functions for the bit
fixing functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.