* 1908974
* CNS Core: Small: Realistic Traffic Generation through Application-Agnostic Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Deniz Gurkan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 353,841.00

Industry evaluation of new computer network applications and infrastructure - as
well as research evaluation of proposed platforms and protocols - rely on high
quality representations of realistic network usage. Historically these needs
have largely been met through the use of workload generators that rely on
generalized traffic models. However, these models have increasingly proven
inadequate in modern environments with fast-evolving applications, expanding
mobility, and the rising prevalence of Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices in end-
user networks. As a result, novel methods, protocols, and hardware prove
difficult to verify in real-world scenarios prior to production deployment. This
project distills complex applications into realistic models that can be used to
evaluate future systems and deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools
developed through this project employ a combination of a novel expert system
that separates application-specific behavior from infrastructure-specific
behavior and a machine learning (ML) pipeline that captures complex application
exchanges in order to provide realistic models of application traffic patterns
for use in existing generators. Label selection, classifier design, and choices
of existing ML algorithms will drive documentation on both future research
direction as well as the environments in which current tools and models are best
employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The generation of abstract but high-fidelity
models of application traffic patterns as a result of this project provides
valuable data to industry users and researchers alike. The separation of
application behavior from potentially sensitive and proprietary input data
allows for significant expansion of the quality of traffic models available for
planning and research tasks while also providing portability to environments
exploring new protocols and infrastructure design. The availability of these
models allows for significantly more effective validation and reproducibility of
prospective studies. Furthermore, the production of these models will integrate
with educational outreach efforts to high school, undergraduate, and graduate
level courses on computer networking and cybersecurity where representative
topologies and application traffic drive hand-on
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Documentation for project tools and code, as well as
backing project data, will be located at http://docs.uh-
netlab.org/appmodel/index.html, and it will be publicly available for at least 5
years after the end of substantive project work. Source code (along with
documentation source) will be made available at bitbucket
(http://www.bitbucket.org/uh-netlab/) on an ongoing
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.