* 1908521
* Re-evaluating Mechanisms of RNA-mediated Initiation of Transposable Element Silencing in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,03/31/2021
* R Keith Slotkin, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 03/31/2021
* USD 332,025.00

Transposable elements are DNA fragments in a genome that can mobilize and create
mutations by inserting into new locations. To guard against this mutagenic
outcome, cells have evolved mechanisms to interfere with transposable element
mobilization. Previous work established a role for small RNAs in transposable
element inhibition. This project will use modern genomics-enabled approaches in
the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, to conduct a 'severe test' of the
assumptions and conclusions that led to the prevailing mechanistic view and to
expand understanding of how transposable element silencing is triggered. Because
transposable elements are widespread in the genomes of both plants and animals,
the results are expected to have broad impact in the field of regulatory
biology. The project will also have strong educational impact, as it emphasizes
data reproducibility and scientific ethics in three contexts: curricular
enrichment for undergraduates who will integrate the research in their
laboratory courses; annual outreach workshops for 7th grade minority students
focused on science, technology, engineering and mathematics; and direct
participation in research by early-career scientists at postdoctoral, graduate,
and undergraduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mobility and mutagenic
potential of transposable elements depends on mRNAs produced by synthesis of
RNAs (transcription) from the elements themselves. This transcription step is a
key control point for regulating transposable element mobility. Previous work
has shown that transcription of transposable elements is turned off by small
RNAs, which initiate silencing by a post-transcriptional interference mechanism
that transitions to transcriptional-level silencing. This project will reproduce
key aspects of that previous work and will apply modern technological
capabilities to produce higher-value datasets that will be analyzed in creative
and innovative ways to determine precisely how RNA interference is targeted to a
particular transcript and how RNA-directed DNA methylation and transcriptional-
level repression are established to produce trans-generational epigenetic
silencing of transposable elements. Data and protocols will be broadly
disseminated via open-access routes to enable the reproducibility of the
research. The results should provide not only new understanding of how RNA-
mediated silencing occurs, but also clues about how such silencing could be
prevented. These insights could have practical consequences for genetically
engineering plants with agronomic benefit.