* 1908577
* RI: Small: Frontiers in Monte Carlo and Variational Inference
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Daniel Sheldon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,623.00

Probabilistic inference allows humans to gain insight and make predictions from
data. There is an ever-growing need in business, government, and science to
answer questions using data. Often, these questions are best answered by
phrasing them as probability calculations. As data sets grow larger and more
complex, probability calculations are increasingly difficult and often cannot be
performed exactly within reasonable time budgets. This project will promote
science and technology by providing new theoretical results, algorithms, and
empirical knowledge about how to compute approximate answers to probabilistic
queries in a way that achieves good tradeoffs between accuracy and efficiency.
In particular, the project will study how to best combine the strengths of two
different strategies for calculating probabilities. This work will provide new
techniques that are practical, have tunable accuracy, and scale to very large
data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these goals, this project will combine
two different approaches to probabilistic inference: variational inference (VI),
and Monte Carlo (MC). MC algorithms are general-purpose and are asymptotically
exact, but may fail to give good answers in reasonable time or scale large data
sets. In contrast, VI is a way to get a "pretty good answer, quickly" by
restricting the approximate posterior to tractable family. This project will
combine these in a principled way to derive algorithms that are general-purpose,
practical, have tunable accuracy, and scale to very large data sets. The new
algorithms are expected to achieve time-accuracy tradeoffs that dominate Monte
Carlo methods for a wide range of problems and time budgets. The proposed
methods will 1) incorporate strengths of Monte Carlo methods into variational
inference by designing approximating families based on Monte Carlo estimators;
and 2) improve the usefulness of variational inference for downstream tasks by
adapting divergences and approximating families to the needs of a downstream
Monte Carlo estimator. The project will result in a comprehensive evaluation
benchmark as well as a set of practical techniques to make the method more
effective. A novel application in ecology will demonstrate the project's real-
world potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.