* 1908886
* The School Gardeners' Southwest Desert Almanac:  A Conference for Supporting, Sustaining, and Spreading Garden-Based Science Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Steven Zuiker, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 07/31/2021
* USD 99,905.00

Garden-based science teaching (GBST) integrates formal and informal learning,
provides teaching opportunities in a wide range of science topics (e.g., soil
science, ecology, botany), and creates a place for those topics to be locally
and culturally relevant. A proliferation of school gardens nationwide reveals a
significant increase (42%) in the creation of school gardens between 2013-2015
(USDA, 2015). As students increasingly engage in science learning in school
gardens, the demand for high-quality instruction also grows. However, much of
the available research on school gardens emphasizes health and nutrition
interventions, without also characterizing the instructional practices of
science. This conference addresses the need for research on effective
instructional methods that can be used to support students' science learning in
school gardens. The conference will focus on the Southwest Desert ecoregion. The
ecoregion focus is driven by the longstanding challenges of coordinating a
national model of GBST across ecoregion differences, by concentrating on states
and sites whose problems and opportunities reflect common ecoregion conditions.
This conference will lead to development of an ecoregional model for GBST that
builds on regional ecological and cultural resources to engage teachers and
students in richer and more relevant science learning experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will organize and implement collaborative
activities during and after a 2-1/2 day meeting in Arizona. It will involve 35
participants comprised of teachers (grades K-5), teacher educators, educational
researchers, and science content specialists who collectively bring experience
with science teaching in school gardens, culturally relevant pedagogy,
traditional agricultural practices, and science practices. Conference activities
will draw upon participatory design research methods to understand how, when,
and why educational innovations work in practice. A key product of the
conference and post-conference activities will be an ecoregion model of GBST as
instantiated by The School Gardeners' Southwest Desert Almanac. The Almanac will
be an online resource for information on GBST, collaboratively produced by
practitioners and researchers during- and post-conference activity. This website
will feature curated resources such as a multi-media set of case studies
illustrating GBST instructional practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research PreK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.