* 1908021
* OAC Core: Small:  Collaborative Research: Data Provenance Infrastructure towards Robust andReliable Data Sharing and Analytics
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Yonghwi Kwon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The rapidly increasing number of interconnected devices and systems brings
unprecedented collaborative opportunities between researchers, business
partners, and healthcare organizations that can extend discoveries beyond those
derivable from any single study. For instance, data sharing between various
medical organizations can enhance understanding of the results from an
individual clinical by polling of results from various trials from multiple
organizations, and thus it enables extending the analysis of treatment options
and accelerating biomedical research. While a vast amount of data collected from
various sources brings us benefits, it imposes, at the same time, an important
challenge of ensuring trustworthiness and quality of data due to the integration
of disparate data from various sources. Furthermore, faulty, improperly
configured, or broken sensors, as well as buggy or compromised data processing
units, can severely affect the quality of data and the analyzed results. This
project proposes to develop an infrastructure that provides robust, fine-grain,
and end-to-end provenance for collaborative data sharing and analytics. The
outcome of this research will directly serve as the foundation of trustworthy
data sharing and analytic infrastructures by providing robust and attack/fault-
resilient fine-grain provenance of the shared data by creating fine-grain end-
to-end data provenance framework for diverse communication
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PIs will develop an
end-to-end data provenance framework that provides robust and fine-grain data
lineage for trustworthy data sharing and analytic infrastructures. First, they
will develop a scalable and reliable infrastructure for collecting data
provenance for distributed interconnected devices that can derive a concise
provenance data in various environments of distributed devices (e.g., devices
using diverse hardware and software platforms). Next, they will design and
implement a framework to enable proper derivation and propagation of fine-grain
provenance records for data sharing, processing, and analytics. It will provide
services for provenance tracking as well as provenance record processing when
the data are aggregated, analyzed, and processed (e.g., merge, split, duplicate,
delete, extract, or statistical analytics). The PIs also plan to develop a
system that can analyze and visualize the complete lineage of data to measure
the quality of data and conduct various root cause analyses to identify the
fundamental reasons behind data quality issues. The system will be capable of
handling a large amount of data generated over a long period of time across
multiple devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.