* 1908026
* High Angular Resolution Investigations of Binary Stars and their Disks
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Douglas Gies, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 342,068.00

The Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy (CHARA) optical interferometer
array on Mt. Wilson is the nation's premiere facility for high angular
resolution astronomy. This proposal describes a program to investigate binary
stars and the disks of gas and dust that form around them. Images of these
debris disks can now be obtained for the closest and largest examples using
CHARA. The first part of the program is aimed at determining the orientation of
the binary orbits with respect to their surrounding disks. The second part is a
survey of binary systems that are undergoing an intense stage of mass exchange
between the stars. The third part will be a program to image a set of stellar
disks and search for indications of spiral arms. Finally, they will use CHARA to
search for faint companions in other systems. The program will directly support
the continued training of a research scientist, a postdoctoral associate, and
several Ph.D. students at Georgia State University, which operates the CHARA
array. The work will be highlighted in the undergraduate courses taught at GSU,
which has a very diverse student population with a large minority component, and
advanced undergraduates will participate in work at CHARA. The team will also
support public outreach efforts at GSU and at Mt. Wilson, including the renewal
of exhibits at the CHARA Visitors Gallery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
provide us with fundamental data on binary star systems with disks in their
youth and after their transformation through mass transfer and loss. The study
of binaries in debris disks will show how disks act to form binary stars and,
once formed, how the binary systems implant structures in the disks that will
influence where and how planets are formed. Detection of circumbinary disks
around strongly interacting binaries will show us how much mass and angular
momentum are lost from the system during the peak of mass transfer. Observations
of structures in the disks of Be stars will provide the means to test theories
of tidal processes and disk perturbation modes that are important in our
understanding of star and planet formation, accretion processes in X-ray
binaries, and accretion onto supermassive black holes. Detection of the mass
donor remnants orbiting rapidly rotating stars will reveal the products of
binary star evolution and shed light on the processes that lead to other
products of mass transfer (massive X-ray binaries, hydrogen deficient
supernovae, long duration gamma-ray bursts, neutron stars, black holes, and
gravitational waves from mergers).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.