* 1908122
* Gravity in the Galactic Center: Precise 3D Stellar Kinematics in the Inner Parsec
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jeremiah Darling, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 460,346.00

Black holes are the best laboratories for studying gravity. In the center of our
galaxy, the Milky Way, lies a massive black hole that weighs four million times
the mass of our Sun. The spacetime around this black hole is curved by its mass
and twisted by its rotation. This project aims to study the deformed spacetime
around the Milky Way's central black hole by monitoring the motions of special
types of stars orbiting the black hole. These peculiar stars emit bright radio-
frequency lasers (called masers) that radio telescopes can observe and measure
very precisely. Radio telescopes in Chile and New Mexico will track the motions
of these maser stars in three dimensions and map out the spacetime around our
nearest massive black hole. The main goals of this project are to study gravity
in the center of our galaxy, to promote science education at all levels, and to
make this science publicly accessible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
measure the positions, velocities, and accelerations of stars in the central few
light years of the Milky Way, as they react to the gravitational field of the
supermassive black hole (SMBH), stars, and stellar remnants in the Galactic
Center. This is done through Doppler tracking of stellar atmosphere silicon
monoxide (SiO) masers using the NSF's Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter
Array and the Very Large Array. With a series of observations, the investigators
provide a reference frame for infrared observations of stars orbiting the SMBH
and probe the dark stellar remnant population. By tracking these stars, the
investigators can measure the spin and mass of the central black hole and test
the equivalence principle, the "no-hair" theorem of black holes, and frame-
dragging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will train new scientists and
create synergy between theoretical and observational studies of gravity. The
investigators will bring the research into the classroom and the public domain.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be directly involved in the research
and in outreach to traditionally under-represented groups in STEM fields,
including minorities, women, first-generation college students, and rural
communities. Animated theoretical and observational visualization of the motions
of stars close to a massive black hole will be developed for the Science on a
Sphere (SOS) program and distributed to the roughly 150 SOS installations
worldwide. The investigators will adapt the visualizations for digital
planetarium presentation, using Colorado's Fiske Planetarium as a development
testbed, and distribute them to all digital facilities for maximum impact. This
project will enable communication of the broad ideas of gravity, relativity and
black holes to the public and to K-12 schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.