* 1908548
* Collaborative Research: Organic and Inorganic Geochemical Investigation of Hydrologic Change in East Antarctica in the 4 Million Years Before Full Glaciation
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Sarah Feakins, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 252,379.00

The East Antarctic Ice Sheet holds the largest volume of freshwater on the
planet, in total enough to raise sea level by almost two hundred feet. Even
minor adjustments in the volume of ice stored have major implications for
coastlines and climates around the world. The question motivating this project
is how did the ice grow to cover the continent over thirty million years ago
when Antarctica changed from a warmer environment to an ice-covered southern
continent? The seafloor of Prydz Bay, a major drainage basin of the East
Antarctic Ice Sheet (EAIS), has been drilled previously to recover sediments
dating from millions of years prior to and across the time when inception of
continental ice sheets occurred in Antarctica. The last remnants of plant
material found as 'biomarkers' in the ocean sediments record the chemical
signatures of rain and snowfall that fed the plants and later the expanding
glaciers. Sediment carried by glaciers was also deposited on the seafloor and
can be analyzed to discover how glaciers flowed across the landscape. Here, the
researchers will identify precipitation changes that result from, and drive, ice
sheet growth. This study will gather data and further analyze samples from the
seafloor sediment archives of the International Ocean Discovery Program's (IODP)
core repositories. Ultimately these findings can help inform temperature-
precipitation-ice linkages within climate and ice sheet models. The project will
support the training of three female, early career scientists (PhD &amp; MS
students, and research technician) and both PIs and the PhD student will
continue their engagement with broadening participation efforts (e.g., Women in
Science and Engineering Program; local chapters of Society for the advancement
of Native Americans and Chicanos in Science and other access programs) to
recruit undergraduate student participants from underrepresented minorities at
both campuses and from local community colleges. Antarctic earth science
education materials will be assisted by professional illustrations to be open
access and used in public education and communication efforts to engage local
communities in Los Angeles CA and Columbia SC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers at the University of Southern California and the University of South
Carolina will together study the penultimate moment of the early Cenozoic
greenhouse climate state: the ~4 million years of global cooling that culminated
in the Eocene/Oligocene transition (~34 Ma). Significant gaps remain in the
understanding of the conditions that preceded ice expansion on Antarctica. In
particular, the supply of raw material for ice sheets (i.e., moisture) and the
timing, frequency, and duration of precursor glaciations is poorly constrained.
This collaborative proposal combines organic and inorganic proxies to examine
how Antarctic hydroclimate changed during the greenhouse to icehouse transition.
The central hypothesis is that the hydrological cycle weakened as cooling
proceeded. Plant-wax hydrogen and carbon isotopes (hydroclimate proxies) and Hf-
Nd isotopes of lithogenous and hydrogenous sediments (mechanical weathering
proxies) respond strongly and rapidly to precipitation and glacial advance. This
detailed and sensitive combined approach will test whether there were hidden
glaciations (and/or warm events) that punctuated the pre-icehouse interval.
Studies will be conducted on Prydz Bay marine sediment cores in a depositional
area for products of weathering and erosion that were (and are) transported
through Lambert Graben from the center of Antarctica. The project will yield
proxy information about the presence of plants and the hydroclimate of
Antarctica and the timing of glacial advance, and is expected to show drying
associated with cooling and ice-sheet growth. The dual approach will untangle
climate signals from changes in fluvial versus glacial erosion of plant
biomarkers. This proposal is potentially transformative because the combination
of organic and inorganic proxies can reveal rapid transitions in aridity and
glacial expansion, that may have been missed in slower-response proxies and more
distal archives. The research is significant as hydroclimate seems to be a key
player in the temperature-cryosphere hysteresis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.