* 1908748
* Collaborative Research: The Heavy Metal Survey: Stellar Metallicities and Chemical Abundance Patterns of Massive Galaxies out to z~2.3
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Charles Conroy, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 195,866.00

As galaxies grow and age, their chemical composition changes as a result of
their own star formation as well as the history of any mergers that they may
have had with other galaxies. At large distances, previous studies only measured
the chemical composition of galaxies that were actively forming stars. This
project will take advantage of new instruments available on the Keck telescope
to measure the chemical composition of quiescent galaxies, which are more common
than star-forming galaxies out to the distances accessible by these instruments.
This data will then be used to provide information about the histories of
distant quiescent galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use the
MOSFIRE and LRIS spectrographs on Keck to obtain a survey of the metallicities
of 20 quiescent galaxies in a redshift range of 1.3-2.3. They have 16.5 nights
scheduled on Keck for this survey. Upon completion of the analysis of the
spectra, the team will use the chemical abundance patterns, structural
parameters, and stellar abundance patterns from the survey data to constrain
assembly histories and star formation histories of quiescent galaxies over
cosmological timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.