* 1908875
* The Telomere Anti-Checkpoint Activity
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Kurt Runge, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2023
* USD 874,998.00

The DNA of multicellular organisms is packaged into linear chromosomes. The goal
of this project is to understand how cells deal with DNA breaks, specifically
how breaks near the ends of linear chromosomes are treated differently from
breaks in other locations. The outcomes will help clarify why breaks near the
ends of chromosomes do not trigger a DNA damage response while those at other
locations do, and how this differential treatment maintains genome integrity.
The project will offer research training and career development opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students, and a post-doctoral scientist,
particularly aimed at increasing diversity in the STEM workforce. Results from
the project will also be integrated into coursework in order to teach students
current concepts of genomic stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
question in the field of chromosome biology is why telomeres, the ends of linear
eukaryotic chromosomes, are stable while internal double-strand breaks are not.
DNA double-strand breaks promote genomic instability by DNA recombination and
cause growth arrest by activating cell cycle checkpoints, but telomeres are
stable and allow continuous cell growth. Telomeres are composed of DNA repeat
tracts bound by specific proteins that "cap" the chromosome end to prevent its
degradation and block checkpoint activation. This project will investigate how
telomeres accomplish these functions by using an inducible telomere formation
system that leverages powerful molecular genetics tools in the
Schizosaccharomyces pombe model system. The specific hypothesis to be tested is
whether S. pombe telomeres recruit effectors that post-translationally modify
checkpoint proteins to block DNA damage signaling. Known candidate proteins will
be tested and new candidate proteins will be sought by proteomic approaches in a
comprehensive approach to identify the effectors of DNA damage checkpoint
suppression at telomeres. The project will offer research training for graduate
and undergraduate students, and a post-doctoral scientist, and project outcomes
will be integrated into coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.