* 1908957
* CIF: Small: Description Length Analysis for Machine Learning and Graph Models
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Anders Host-Madsen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 487,106.00

Coding, in the information theoretic sense, is the transformation of data into
sequences of numbers (usually 0 and 1) so that the data can be quickly
transmitted from a source to a receiver. The challenge of coding is how to find
the most efficient transformation such that 1) the data can be reconstructed
perfectly by the receiver, 2) the data is represented by the shortest possible
sequence of numbers; the length of this sequence is called the description
length. Minimizing description length is both of interest for storing and
transmitting data and because the description length reveals important
information about structure of data. For example, description length can be used
to bound the error of a learning model in machine learning, thereby allowing the
algorithm to select the best model for data classification or regression tasks.
The project will expand the applications of description length to new types of
problems and data. Furthermore, the project also seeks to expand the type of
data traditionally considered in coding by going from sequential type to data on
graphs, such as arising from social networks. The project aims to simplify the
sharing and storing of scientific data by developing efficient coding methods
based on graph coding and learned coding, and likewise broaden the applicability
of machine learning by developing efficient methods for model selection. The
project will also develop new methods for anomaly detection in graphs that have
applicability in medicine such as the detection of onset seizures, power grids,
and computer network security including fraudulent transactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model selection is a central problem in many areas of
science. Minimum description length (MDL) was developed by Rissanen to provide a
formal criterion for model selection. It is based on coding data losslessly
together with the model describing data, and choosing the model that results in
the shortest total code length. The goal of the project is to extend minimum
description length in new directions by going back to basics, namely that
description length is based on coding. The focus is on developing new lossless
coding methods. This includes the coding of graph structures, graphs with
attributes, as well as combining machine learning and source coding. The
research consists of three thrusts. In the first thrust, theory and practical
algorithms for learned coding, which is coding based on training data, will be
developed. Learned coding will be used for model selection and hyperparameter
optimization in machine learning methods. In the second thrust, coding methods
for graphs will be developed and be used to select graph models of data. In the
third thrust, algorithms for anomaly detection and novelty detection in graph-
based data will be developed by combining learned coding and graph
coding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.