* 1908730
* FET: Small: Improving Quantum Computing and Classical Communication using Discrete Sets of Unitary Matrices
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Arthur Calderbank, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 476,456.00

Quantum computers promise to be more capable than any classical computer at
solving certain problems and these devices are moving out of the lab and
becoming generally programmable. The different physical implementations of
qubits have quite different strengths and weaknesses, and it is essential to
consider these characteristics when designing a quantum computer. This project
uses the error characteristics of trapped-ion qubits to align algorithm design
and hardware implementation for this physical architecture. The research program
combines abstract mathematics, quantum physics, and signal processing; it is
highly interdisciplinary. Research experience at the interface of engineering
physics and signal processing will provide students with the skills needed to
build bridges between these disciplines in either academia or industry. Code
released on GitHub will encourage use by different research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design new algorithms that
optimize the realization of logical operators acting on encoded qubits, and that
use the error characteristics of trapped-ion qubits to choose appropriate
realizations for this architecture. Phase 1 will develop tools for manipulating
Pauli operators, including stabilizer groups (with signs), Clifford operators,
and diagonal gates represented by symmetric matrices over rings. The software
that is developed will be compatible with commonly used software for quantum
circuit optimization. Phase 2 will implement efficient algorithms to synthesize
stabilizer codes that support transversal small-angle
rotations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.