* 1909568
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative Research: A Motion Tracking Library for Sports Analytics using Wireless Sensors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Romit Roy Choudhury, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The project explores embedding sensors in balls, racquets, and on players to
track metrics of interest in sports such as location and spin trajectories of
balls, bat swings, and motion of players. The amateur sporting market is global,
ranging from schools to clubs to local games among neighborhood friends.
Bringing technologies that are otherwise professional-grade and expensive to the
masses could result in wide-scale impact in sports analytics. This technology
will encourage a healthier lifestyle among young individuals by making gym,
exercise and sports even more exciting and helping them improve their skills.
The motion tracking libraries to be developed and released publicly as a part of
the project would catalyze innovations by allowing anyone to extend the
libraries into creative applications. Further, the results will be published in
academic venues and integrated into graduate and undergraduate classes,
tutorials and workshops. Industry collaborations will be explored to enhance the
outreach. Finally, if successful, the project can offer a valuable springboard
to this broad application area, with a focus on making the technologies
accessible to the masses.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Foundations for Internet of
Things (IoT)-based sports analytics is already underway, but most of the efforts
are focused towards establishing the platform - the sensing capabilities are
primitive, at best. The difficult research questions, such as high-speed ball
tracking, spin estimation, racquet motion analysis, and human-gesture
decomposition, remain unaddressed. Unfortunately, the rich literature in
wireless localization and inertial gesture recognition do not apply under the
constraints for real sporting environments. For instance, Wi-Fi based
localization is not designed to support centimeter-scale 3D-location at ball
speeds. Inertial sensors such as accelerometers cannot measure gravitational
direction, whereas gyroscopes saturate under ball rotations. This proposal will
cut across and help bring together many research areas like motion sensing,
wireless networking, statistical inference, circuit design, kinesiology, and
sports. The proposal will enable building sports analytics systems from cheap
wireless IoT sensors which can replace the very expensive vision-based systems.
To this end, it will it will focus on fusion of under constrained sensor data
with aerodynamic models of ball motion, patterns of bat swings, kinematic models
of arm and body motions to track location, spin, and motion of balls, bats, and
players. Statistical inferencing techniques would be used to estimate the
parameters under noisy sensory information. Finally, an app will be developed to
visualize the motion and provide feedback to players.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.