* 1909007
* SHF: Small: Evolving Safety Cases in Agile Development Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jane Huang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 479,105.00

Software operating in safety-critical domains must not only support its intended
functionality but must also be assuredly safe for use. Delivering such systems
requires a rigorous and systematic hazard analysis to identify and mitigate
potential hazards. Prior to deployment, a safety case is often constructed that
provides claims, evidence, and arguments for system safety. Safety-critical
systems have traditionally been engineered using carefully controlled processes
which emphasize detailed planning, upfront design, and quality assurance. This
has led to the phenomenon referred to as the 'big freeze' in which the cost,
effort, and difficulty of introducing new functionality becomes prohibitively
expensive. As a result, many organizations operating in safety-critical domains
are adopting more agile approaches in which software is delivered on shorter
release cycles. At the same time, organizations that have not traditionally
worked in the safety domain are increasingly building Cyber-Physical Systems,
such as factory-floor robots, unmanned aerial systems and medical devices, often
without the knowledge or tools to support appropriate hazard analysis and safety
assurance. These two trends -- emerging from opposite ends of the process
spectrum -- point to a new way of developing safety-critical software, one which
embraces the rigor of safety-critical development while benefiting from the more
incremental, faster delivery cycles made possible by agile
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will deliver an intelligent
solution for creating, evolving, and using trace links within agile safety-
critical project environments. The novel Software Artifact Forest Analysis
(SAFA) approach will aid validators, verifiers, safety analysts, and other
project stakeholders working in an agile environment to understand and analyze
the impact of change upon an existing safety case, to assess the safety of the
current system, and to evolve the safety case accordingly. The research will
deliver a process workflow for guiding developers through the task of creating
trace links, traceability solutions for automating the creation and evolution of
trace links in an agile project, interactive solutions for visualizing how the
system mitigates identified hazards, and techniques for supporting change impact
analysis and maintenance of safety-assurance cases. The research directly
addresses the emerging industrial challenge of adopting agile processes in
safety-critical projects in order to address the `big freeze' problem. The
algorithms, tools, and processes delivered through the project are expected to
have significant industrial impact. This will be aided by the proactive
engagement of industrial partners in test-driving novel and practical solutions
produced throughout this project. Opportunities will be provided for broadening
participation in computing by engaging underrepresented students at all stages
of their academic careers in challenging research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.