* 1909414
* SHF: Small: Explicating and Exploiting the Physical Semantics of Code
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sebastian Elbaum, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 515,022.00

Code drives robots, space vehicles, weapons systems, and cyber-physical systems
more generally, to interact with the world. Yet in most cases, code consists of
machine logic stripped of real world semantics. This means that there is no way
for the computing machine to prevent operations specified in code from violating
physical constraints inherited from the physical world. Traditional programming
semantics can tell us that the expression, 3.0 + 4.0 means 7.0, in the sense
that 7.0 is the result of evaluating that expression. But our traditional
conception of programming semantics does not address the questions, 3 of what, 4
of what, or 7 of what, or whether such a sum makes any physical sense. For
example 3 meters plus 4 grams does not make physical sense. Major systems
malfunctions have occurred due to the machine-permitted evaluation of
expressions that have no well defined physical meanings. To improve the safety
and reliability of cyber-physical systems, this project will develop and
evaluate the proposition that the software code of the future should comprise
machine logic paired with interpretations that map terms in code, and eventually
in program executions, to formal specifications of their intended physical
meaning so that the consistency of code with the physics of the larger system
can be automatically checked. The investigators aim to establish a new and
formal concept of the physical semantics of programs based on interpretations
that map code elements to mathematical quantities that precisely represent
objects and other phenomena in the physical world. Having such mappings will in
turn support the evaluation of code for consistency with its intended physical
interpretation, enabling significant improvements in system
dependability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish
theoretical foundations for physical semantics of cyber-physical code by
augmenting code with interpretation mappings from code-level terms to
mechanically checkable specifications of dimensionful physical quantities, such
as points and transformations, formalized in the higher-order logic of a
constructive logic proof assistant. This project will establish mechanisms to
substantially automate the construction of interpretations to enable practical
physics-level analysis and checking of software-intensive systems. It will
advance software-engineering theory and practice by investigating means for
specifying and analyzing such interpretations, including mechanisms for
automated inference of physical semantics, libraries of formalized physical
abstractions, systems to enforce interpretations imposed on code, and means for
exploiting physical interpretations for testing, program understanding, system
integration, and other use cases. The project will contribute to education by
developing teaching materials on formalized physical abstractions and by
supporting the ongoing development of a discrete mathematics course for
undergraduates based on the use of a constructive-logic proof assistant. It will
contribute to workforce development in research and in software engineering for
cyber-physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.