* 1909103
* Complex and Singular Behavior in Continuum Mechanics Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Anna Mazzucato, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this project is to study models in the mechanics of fluids and
elastic materials characterized by a complex and potentially singular behavior
in the response of the physical system. Such models are deeply rooted in
applications. The project will investigate, in particular, models of faults and
rock slippage in the Earth's crust, models for the behavior of slightly viscous
fluids around moving bodies in aero- and hydro-dynamics, as well as around the
wing of an airplane or around the propeller of a submarine, and models for
effective mixing in fluids, which has applications ranging from industrial to
environmental processes. A key aspect of the project is the use of rigorous
mathematical analysis, combined with simulations whenever feasible, to obtain
quantitative results that can be used in a predictive fashion, with potential
direct societal impacts. For instance, one part of the project addresses how
data from global positioning systems (GPS) can be used, through a mathematical
algorithm, to locate buried faults which would be otherwise inaccessible, and to
estimate the relative slip of the rock layers along the fault, a predictor of
earthquakes. The project provides training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, particularly women and members of underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to study various aspects of
models in elasticity and fluid mechanics in the presence of singularities.
Analytical techniques will be employed primarily, but the impetus for the
proposed problems comes from applications, such as models of dislocations in
geophysics, optimal bounds for mixing in convection-dominated problems, and
boundary layer analysis for incompressible fluids. The project consists of three
separate, but connected, parts: I. Incompressible Fluid Mechanics: I.a. Optimal
mixing with diffusion; I.b. Boundary layer analysis in singular domains; II.
Elasticity: direct and inverse problems for models of dislocations in
geophysics. The unifying aspects of the project are the presence of
singularities due to discontinuities and incompatibilities in the parameters for
the underlying model equations and to irregular geometries, and the focus on
rigorous, quantitative estimates, such as optimal bounds in mixing and
quantitative stability estimates in inverse problems. The project contributes to
the development of mathematical approaches to challenging open problems by
combining known techniques in a novel way, such as in mixing problems, where
geometric analysis, partial differential equations, and optimal control are
employed, and in advancing our basic understanding of important physical
processes, such as anomalous diffusion in turbulent mixing and modeling of
interseismic build-up along faults and microseismicity, which may impact other
fields, in particular geophysics and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.