* 1909185
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative: Content-Based Viewport Prediction Framework for Live Virtual Reality Streaming
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Yan Yan, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 02/28/2021
* USD 125,982.00

Virtual reality (VR) video streaming has been gaining popularity recently with
the rapid adoption of mobile head mounted display (HMD) devices in the consumer
video market. As the cost for the immersive experience drops, VR video streaming
introduces new bandwidth and performance challenges, especially in live
streaming, due to the delivery of 360-degree views. This project develops a new
content-based viewport prediction framework to improve the bandwidth and
performance in live VR streaming, which predicts the user's viewport through a
fusion of tracking the moving objects in the video, extracting the video
semantics, and modeling the user's viewport of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three research thrusts.
First, it develops a content-based viewport prediction framework for live VR
streaming by tracking the motions and semantics of the objects. Second, it
employs hardware and software techniques to facilitate real-time execution and
scale the viewport prediction mechanism to a large number of users. Third, it
develops evaluation frameworks to verify the functionality, performance, and
scalability of the approach. The project uniquely considers the correlation
between video content and user behavior, which leverages the deterministic
nature of the former to conquer the randomness of the
latter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the rapidly increasing popularity of VR
systems in domain-specific immersive environments, the project will benefit
several VR-related fields of studies with significant bandwidth savings and
performance improvements, such as VR-based live broadcast, healthcare, and
scientific visualization. Moreover, the interdisciplinary nature of the project
will enhance the education and recruitment of underrepresented minorities in
several science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project repository will be stored on a publicly
accessible server (https://github.com/hwsel). All the project data will be
maintained for at least five years following the end of the grant
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.