* 1909233
* OPUS:  CRS--Experiments, Meta-analysis and Big Data in Advancing Ecological Understanding
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Jessica Gurevitch, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 06/30/2022
* USD 229,662.00

Science relies on both theory and data. Data provide the information that guides
and tests theory. Together, theory and data advance our understanding of the
natural world. Ecological data once emphasized the observations and controlled
environment experiments of individual scientists, but progressed to field
experiments in natural systems, then to multi-investigator studies and research
synthesis, and more recently, to the analysis of "big data," studies based on
large electronic databases that include climate, geography, land use, and
ecological data. Experiments are the most rigorous way to test hypotheses and
disentangle potential confounding factors, but face challenges and limitations.
For example, experiments in natural populations have the great advantage of
realism, but are limited because they are almost always conducted at local
spatial scales. This project will examine how individual experiments, the
synthesis of data from many experiments using meta-analysis, and analyses of
"big data" at large spatial scales, have brought different perspectives and
understanding to ecology over the past 50 years, and changed our understanding
of the natural world. Broader impacts of this research will include seminars and
training for freshman, graduate students and professionals, presentations, and a
YouTube video on how to record, save, organize, and make scientific data in
ecology available and transparent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have witnessed and
will continue to experience a major shift in emphasis in how we gather
information used to understand the natural world. Can we still answer important
fundamental and applied questions through experiments carried out by individual
researchers, or is ecology best situated within multi-investigator research
programs? Are questions different in individual experiments, large group
studies, meta-analyses and analysis of large databases? This study will examine
five hypotheses, focusing on plant population, community and macro-ecology. H1:
The role of individual investigator field experiments in advancing ecological
understanding ecology, once central, is now more secondary; H2: Field
experiments have declined from a peak from the mid-1970s to 1990s, to the
present; H3: Observational macroecological observational studies using "big
data" have concordantly increased in frequency, funding, visibility and
prestige; H4: The role of meta-analysis and research synthesis has increased
exponentially from the late 1990s to the present; and H5: The focus of work
addressed by individual experiments, large group experiments, meta-analysis and
the analysis of observational big data differ systematically in spatial scale,
topics, questions asked, and insights and understanding
gained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.