* 1909255
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Modeling and Managing Extremist Group Influence in Massive Social Media Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Anna Squicciarini, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Social media enables an unprecedented positive shift in how people communicate
and consume content. In the other direction, extremist groups can embrace social
media to spread negative/violent ideologies. This project aims to build
mathematical and data-driven models to understand the dynamics of extremist
groups at scale, the patterns of their influence, and integrated micro
(individual-level) and macro (group-level or system-level) data-driven models
that can guide future interventions. This project provides a greater
understanding of users' behavioral patterns and social dynamics related to
online extremism. This will be coupled with a set of technical solutions to
detect and counter episodes of self-isolation and anti-social behavior. This
project may lead to new results eventually impacting social sciences, by means
of new or refined cyber-behavior theories, and in exciting, novel mathematical
models and natural language processing methods for online discourse. This
project will promote awareness and normative behavior to both K-12 students and
college students, and will train and educate students in mathematics and
computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the exceptional increase in social
network use and the critical role it is now playing among extremist groups, this
project focuses on developing methods and algorithms for modeling and managing
anti-normative behaviors. The goal is to mitigate the effects of negative
behavior on user social interactions while simultaneously managing the
ideological self-isolating effect social networks can encourage. The approaches
will involve both macro and micro level statistical behavior models incorporated
with innovative natural language processing and deep learning methods. One
approach to be investigated is behavioral models of extremist influence, which
are creating mathematically rigorous behavioral models of social capital at the
individual level that can capture imitative behaviors. A second approach is
data-driven discourse-level contagiousness, use to identify extremist discourse
structures representing ideological payloads, and uncover overall patterns of
extremist ideology infectiousness. The third approach, nudging antinormative
behaviors, builds on the others to design and validate new interventions that
could lessen the impact of extremist group influence through simulation and off-
line experiments. Experimental results, datasets, and project software will be
made accessible to the research community via public project websites and code
sharing platforms (e.g., GitHub).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.