* 1909729
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Dynamic Light Transport Acquisition and Applications to Computational Illumination
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Sanjeev Koppal, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Cameras that view a dynamic scene typically capture interactions of moving
objects with light. Computer vision algorithms can use these measurements to
infer properties of these objects, such as depth, motion and appearance.
However, there is a subtler, richer visual back-story that occurs as an object
moves in a scene, and usually these effects are ignored in traditional
algorithms, sometimes causing errors. This project studies all the interactions
of light with dynamic scenes, which we term as dynamic light transport, and the
goal is to understand and recover effects such as multiple reflections and
scattering as objects move in a scene. The innovations of the project include
new computational cameras and projectors to capture light transport for dynamic
scenes, and to explore new physics-based and data-driven algorithms to exploit
this information for improved computer vision and graphics applications. The
project further seeks to include broadening access to computing education and
research through curriculum material and capstone experiences which emphasize
the intersection of light transport and digital media as well as outreach to
middle and high school students in summer programs to discover imaging and
optics applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on designing new
light transport acquisition frameworks to capture dynamic scenes,
characterization of dynamic light transport properties including sparsity and
low-rank, and algorithms to exploit this information for computer vision
applications. In particular, the project focuses on three main objectives. The
first is design of an MEMs-based optical scanner coupled with high frame rate
cameras to capture the full set of light transport paths at extremely fast
timescales. The second contribution is new algorithms for adaptive light
transport sampling using both physics-based and data-driven priors for light
transport interpolation via generalized light transport flow. Finally, the
project will provide applications of dynamic light transport for 3D scanning of
deformable, moving, and specular objects. These innovations are evaluated in an
integrated testbed via the optical scanner and the collection of a dataset of
dynamic light transport for real-world scenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.