* 1909923
* EAGER:  An inducible degron system for control of protein degradation in plants.
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Marcela Pierce, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 03/31/2023
* USD 299,922.00

Biologists can identify the functions of proteins in living organisms by
studying the effect of removing such proteins from the cell. In most cases, this
can be accomplished by genetic manipulations that result in reduced protein
expression or protein inactivation. This strategy, however, is not feasible when
the loss of such proteins is lethal to the organism. Moreover, some cellular
pathways are very dynamic, and the effect of protein inactivation may be
detectable only within short time frames. This project will develop an on-demand
system to target specific proteins for degradation in plants and will allow
plant biologists to determine the effect of removing such proteins from the cell
within a short time. This protein degradation system is applicable to any plant
pathway and therefore will become a transformative tool for plant biology. This
work will train two undergraduates and a postdoctoral research associate in
state-of-the-art techniques in molecular biology, live-cell imaging,
communication and public engagement. The research will include outreach to
underrepresented high-school students in hands-on research as part of NCSU's
CAALS-3D program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this exploratory EAGER
project is to design, test and optimize the first plant-compatible inducible
degron tool for inactivation of protein targets in plants. This system will also
enable the characterization of essential proteins, for which the only genetic
tool available today is dexamethasone-induced RNA silencing. RNA silencing
requires days of incubation before changes in protein levels are detected, which
makes it inadequate for dynamic cellular events. A fast, inducible system to
control protein abundance in plants will be useful for studies of highly dynamic
processes such as endomembrane trafficking and cell cycle control. The proposed
degron is based on the specific interaction between a heterologous E3 enzyme and
its target protein. A fusion of the target protein with a protein of interest
will be co-expressed with the E3 enzyme fused to an inducible domain. This
design will result in an inducible system for on-demand degradation of proteins
of interest in plants. The aims of this project are: 1) To develop the first
plant inducible protein degron; and 2) To demonstrate degron functionality by
targeting two essential proteins. GoldenBraid cloning and genetic transformation
into Nicotiana and Arabidopsis will be used to test the feasibility, efficiency
and speed of the degron. Quantitative imaging of GFP and two endogenous
essential proteins will be used as test cases for proof of concept. The induced
degradation of targeted protein is expected to occur rapidly, within 30 min,
which will allow plant biologists to query any pathway of interest with
unmatched time resolution using stably transformed plants. This system will
facilitate analyses of a wide variety of cellular processes that are controlled
by essential proteins and will improve temporal resolution in protein knockdown
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.