* 1909528
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: An Investigation of Richer Conductance Measures for Real-World Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* David Gleich, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Over the past two decades, massive networks or graphs appear in the very fabric
of society. For example, networks appear in the form of social networks such as
people on Facebook, sharing networks such as Twitter, computer networks such as
the routers of the Internet, and power systems. Understanding the structure of
these real-world networks is a fundamental scientific challenge. A significant
aspect to this structure is the existence of "communities", or tightly knit
collections of objects in the network with a large number of connections within
them; examples iwould include a large group of mutual friends in a social
networks, or an echo-chamber in a sharing network. A common technique to analyze
community structure, as well as other structural features, is the use of random
walks. In this technique, one imagines a particle that randomly walks in the
graph by simply moving from object to object by following a random connection at
each step. Despite the simplicity of this technique, it forms the foundation for
state-of-the-art community-detection and graph-sampling methods; however,
although there is a rich and deep mathematical theory on random walks, there is
a lack of understanding for the success of this technique. In particular, the
current theory on random walks essentially uses measures of "bottlenecks"
(called conductance), and shows that random walks are effective when there are
no bottlenecks. But there is overwhelming empirical evidence that real-world
graphs contain bottlenecks, yet random walks are effective for analyzing them.
The main aim of this research is a scientific investigation of this phenomenon,
with the hope of finding the right mathematical tools to explain this behavior.
Given the central role that massive networks play in modern society, such
studies play a fundamental role in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
has been recognized in earlier work that the classic notion of conductance is
too crude a lens to understand real-world graphs. The aim of this research is to
design richer conductance measures to study the behavior of random walks, design
provably robust algorithms to approximate these measures, and demonstrate the
relevance of these measures for algorithmic problems in graph sampling. The
starting point for the investigation is a "truncated" notion of conductance that
ignores small sets, introduced in the discrete math literature to study volumes
of convex bodies. The investigators believe this to be a more useful
characterization of random walks on real-world graphs. This leads to a number of
research challenges. The first challenge is to design efficient algorithms that
approximate these richer conductance measures. The second challenge is to prove
that existing empirical heuristics are exploiting these other conductance
measures, to get performance better than that predicted by previous theory. The
third challenge is to perform a detailed study of these measures on real-world
graphs in order to empirically ground the theory. One of the by-products of this
research will be a greater insight into the actual structure of real-world
graphs, and this will likely inspire better models. The primary outcomes from
this research will be in the form of theorems and algorithms, as well as papers
describing them, that characterize the impact of richer conductance measures on
the behavior of algorithms run on networks. The investigators also plan to
release software to compute or approximate the new conductance measures
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.