* 1909323
* III: Small: Exploiting the Massive User Generated Utterances for Intent Mining under Scarce Annotations
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Philip Yu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,999.00

With the advance of artificial intelligence and machine learning technology,
users interact with computational devices through spoken language to search
information or accomplish tasks, as is evident by voice-based personal
assistance products in smart home, automobile, education, healthcare, retail,
and telecommunications environments. This project studies user intent mining
that aims to understand the underlying goals or purposes from user-generated
utterances. For example, by asking the personal assistance system "should I
bring an umbrella tomorrow?", a user reveals the intention of getting weather
information. Intent mining has been an elusive goal for information search due
to diverse, implicit expressions in questions, and it is even harder for task
accomplishment in conversational systems. For example, by giving a voice command
"book a restaurant near me", the system shall learn to follow up with date or
dietary preferences questions and refine the task goal, i.e., the intent,
according to the user response. This project explores new computational
techniques to understand user-generated utterances while addressing the scarcity
of annotation data available for intent mining. The research findings and
insights are expected to lead to better natural language understanding, dialogue
management with reduced requirements on human annotation efforts. The proposed
research will be applicable to the design of new question/conservation
understanding systems that improve service, user satisfaction with reduced
annotation cost. The research projects will engage graduate and undergraduate
students to participate in. Research findings will be incorporated into course
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project provides major
advancements to the foundation of intent mining from user-generated utterances,
by formulating four fundamental intent mining tasks that cover the discovery,
annotation, unsupervised learning and sequential modeling phase in mining user
intentions. The research tasks are proposed with a specific and consistent focus
on dealing with the labeling scarcity issue as it is time-consuming and labor-
intensive to obtain a large scale labeled data where user intents are accurately
defined and correctly annotated from diverse and noise utterances. The project
will include developments of principles, models and algorithms for intent
discovery, joint intent and slot annotation, unsupervised intent learning and
intent evolvement modeling. Abundant learning schemas such as zero-shot
learning, reinforcement learning, generative modeling, and multi-modal learning
will be introduced for the ever-intensive scenario where there is not enough
annotation data for current learning rationales to succeed out-of-the-box. The
research team plans to share results, including datasets and software, with the
research community to facilitate future studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.