* 1909407
* Numerical Methods and Analysis for Interfacial Flow with Ionic Fluids and Surfactants
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Michael Booty, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,997.00

This project is an investigation of fundamental problems in the dynamics of
fluids, complex fluids, and deformable matter that occur in applications to
biology and microtechnology. Its focus is on the development of new mathematical
models and efficient numerical methods to study the morphology and control of
drops, cells, and vesicles by electric fields in electrolytic fluids and by flow
fields with surfactant. Electrokinetic techniques are among the most common
methods for manipulating soft particles and ionic fluids in micro-scale and
biological applications and can induce, for example, shape changes in cells and
vesicles, from which membrane properties can be inferred. They can also induce
membrane channel and pore formation for advanced cell treatment and therapy.
Surfactants are used to enhance or control a wide range of complex fluid flows
that occur in industries ranging from oil extraction to agriculture, food, and
pharmaceutical processing. They are also important in microfluidic applications.
Impacts of the proposed research include the development of new mathematical
models and numerical methods that will be of benefit to scientists and engineers
studying electrokinetic and surfactant phenomena in biology and engineering. An
additional impact of this project is the education and involvement of graduate
students. The interdisciplinary training they receive will be valuable
preparation for a range of careers in mathematics and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the deformation of a fluid-fluid interface
with surfactant, surfactant exchange between the interface and bulk occur in a
thin layer adjacent to the interface, and the layer's dynamics control
interfacial surface tension and shape. During the interfacial flow of an ionic
fluid that is driven by an electric field, a thin screening cloud of ions
develops at the interface to form an electrochemical double layer or 'Debye
layer'. The electric field induces motion in the ion cloud, the interface, and
the surrounding fluid. The influence of surfactants on interface and flow
dynamics and the occurrence of 'induced-charge electrokinetic flow' in an ionic
fluid are both important phenomena in a wide range of applications. This project
addresses a difficulty in the numerical computation of such flows in the
practically important limit of thin surfactant exchange layers and thin
electrical double layers, by developing fast and accurate 'hybrid' or multiscale
numerical methods that incorporate an asymptotic analysis of the layer dynamics
into a boundary integral or similar formulation of the interfacial free boundary
problem. Central themes of the current project are the development of a hybrid
method for electrokinetic flow about a deformable membrane and the investigation
of fast and accurate numerical methods for studying the influence of surfactant
and ionic surfactant on interfacial flow. The algorithm for electrokinetic flow
will incorporate an analysis of the high-wavenumber or small-scale component of
the elastic and electrostatic stresses on a membrane into a nonstiff method that
is capable of handling the multiple time and space scales inherent in the
problem. The method will be used to study canonical problems in the deformation
of drops, vesicles, and cells, and to explore the interaction between membrane
and ionic fluid properties. In the context of surfactant-laden flows, the hybrid
numerical method will be developed to accurately handle multiply connected
domains with close interaction of interfaces, such as occurs with multiple
drops, and the presence of surfactant in the interior fluid, both of which are
associated with substantial numerical challenges. This project also involves the
development of fast or accelerated algorithms, including for drops in 3D flow
with soluble surfactant, as well a fundamental analysis of the stability and
convergence of the boundary integral methods that are a cornerstone of this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.