* 1909363
* AF: Small: Embedding Distributed Computations and Flows in Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Rajmohan Rajaraman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 416,000.00

This project is motivated by fundamental problems arising in networks underlying
enterprise and infrastructure systems. The diverse applications spanned in this
project include cloud computing, datacenters, blockchain technologies, and
networks of mobile devices. What is the best algorithm to map a collection of
communicating processes in a cloud of heterogeneous servers? How should a large
AI computation be embedded in a network of computers? How can the data-flow
needs of a distributed system be effectively supported by the underlying
datacenter network? Can a highly dynamic network support fast and reliable
communication? The focus of this project is on developing a rigorous algorithmic
framework for studying these questions and designing efficient algorithms for
the relevant problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI endeavors to translate the
advances in algorithmic foundations of these problems to tangible benefits in
the applications. The integrated educational component of the project includes
experimental and measurement studies, several concrete directions for
dissertation research, and a new course on "Algorithms for Modern Networked
Systems". As part of an effort to broaden participation in computer-science
foundations, the PI plans to lecture on graphs and their applications at a
summer institute for participating middle- and high-school teachers from Boston-
area schools. The ultimate goal is to engage young students from these schools
and suggest a possible academic and professional future in CS to a diverse
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical core of the project comprises
three categories of algorithmic problems. The first component is on embedding
distributed computations in arbitrary network topologies, with an emphasis on
modeling heterogeneity in both the computational tasks and the network machines.
The expected research contributions include (a) resolving the complexity of the
minimum-stretch graph-retraction problem, which is a natural variant of classic
metric embeddings, and (b) approximation algorithms for the communication-aware
embedding of directed acyclic graphs. The second component is on embedding flows
and their generalizations called coflows, which capture flow collections sharing
a common performance goal. The aim here is to minimize objectives related to the
response times of the flows, for general networks. Both the first and second
components assume that the underlying network does not change with time. The
third component of this project concerns embedding in dynamic networks. It seeks
distributed algorithms for information flows in highly dynamic networks, and
solutions to several temporal optimization problems for networks with known
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.