* 1909879
* RI: Small: A Study of Agent's Expectations for Nondeterministic and Dynamic Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Lifang He, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,388.00

Society is increasing relying on both (1) fully autonomous systems physically-
embodied such as self-driving cars and automated cashiers as well as virtually-
embodied such as automated stock traders and characters in virtual environments;
and (2) semi-autonomous systems in physically-embodied platforms such as the
break system in vehicles and virtual environments such as trip advisors. This
project addresses the following question: when these agents are executing a
course of action, how to compute the expectations of the agent's actions? This
is a fundamental question as expectations can be used to detect when the agent's
behavior is anomalous; that is, when their course of action deviates from the
expectations. They can also be used to explain the agent's behavior by
indicating what to expect from the agent's own execution. This project also
includes a concrete educational activity targeting high school students that is
tightly integrated with the particularities of the research program. The project
will develop a plan for an educational unit providing an experience centered
around a hands-on exercise experiencing AI by evaluating if an automated agent
is performing its assigned tasks. Through that educational unit, students will
gain an appreciation of the challenges in assessing if automated AI systems are
behaving as intended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the problem of
computing the expectations of course of action generated by an agent.
Specifically, this project will investigate this problem (1) when the course of
action is a policy that accounts for non-determinism in the outcome of the
actions in the domain; (2) when the course of action is a plan and the domain
includes numeric fluents bounded by margins of error; (3) when the course of
action is a policy and the domain includes numeric fluents bounded by margins of
error. The project is agnostic with regard to the particular planning paradigm
used to generate the course of action and with regard to the paradigm used for
correction of the course of action when a discrepancy is detected. The study is
based on two representations of the courses of action: (1) sequential plans with
numeric fluents valued within margins of errors and (2) policies for non-
deterministic domains. Both of these representations account for uncertainty in
the execution of the actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.