* 1909916
* III: Small: Geometric Constraint based Concept Keyword Embedding for Domain-neutral Knowledge Graph Construction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mohammad Hasan, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 494,763.00

Many knowledge-driven applications, including question answering systems and AI
based intelligent personal assistants depend critically on the availability of
high quality knowledge graphs. However, existing knowledge graphs suffer from
many limitations, including lack of completeness, and excessive need for human
intervention. The objective of this proposal is to overcome these limitations by
learning meaningful representation vectors for the entities and the
relationships by combining sentential context of entities from text documents
with the relational context of entities from existing knowledge bases. Another
objective is to develop methodologies for automatic extraction of entity-pairs
and their relationships from natural language text.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main intellectual merit of the proposed methodologies is the design of
representation learning methodologies which can impose geometric constraints on
the embedding vectors for capturing the underlying semantics; in other words,
using the proposed method, the disposition of the learned vectors would capture
various semantic relationships among the entities, including hierarchical,
compositional, and sequential, which would yield high quality representation
vectors for the entities, leading to high-quality knowledge- graphs. Validation
of the proposed methods will be performed by building a living knowledge graph
of all of computer science. In terms of broader impact, the proposed methods
would benefit any information-heavy disciplines, for which, the construct and
temporal evolution of a knowledge graph are critical. Also, there is a direct
benefit to computer science as a discipline, since organizing and summarizing
all the known and emerging concepts in computer science within a living and
encyclopedic knowledge graph will enable better organization of new knowledge,
and better search of related works from the existing
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.