* 1909803
* CHS: Small: Exploring Design and Evaluation Space through Crowds and Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jeffrey Nickerson, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,932.00

Design leads to new products that drive economic growth; new technologies make
it possible for many more people to be involved in design processes. For
example, some online community members now share designs for products with each
other, allowing each member to further develop an idea and customize it for
their own needs. These design choices and explorations could, in principle, be
combined to give a wider picture of the space of possible designs around a given
problem; this, in turn, might lead to better overall designs and solutions.
Further, collective exploration of large design spaces might afford solutions to
problems that are currently difficult or impossible to solve. This project seeks
to understand how large numbers of cooperating individuals can create new
products through better understanding and guiding their exploration of possible
designs. The goal of the work is to discover tools and techniques that can be
used to increase the speed and quality of design for both physical products,
such as those produced by 3D printers, and informational products, such as
articles in Wikipedia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve
design as practiced by large sets of cooperating individuals. This improvement
will be measured by looking at both the quality of the designs produced, as well
as the overall coverage of alternatives and the efficiency of the exploratory
process. The research will proceed over a three-year period. The first year will
seek to understand how descriptions of design are related to design processes
and outcomes. This will be accomplished through five activities. The first
activities will look at existing data from two different domains: designs of 3D
objects, and texts of articles. The next two studies will involve experiments
with human designers who will be presented with alternative descriptions for the
same objects, as well the same descriptions for alternative objects. The last
activity of the first year is related to broadening participation in computing:
exercises will be constructed to attract participation from high school
students. The second year will study how changes in design criteria can guide
the exploration of design spaces. Human participants will be placed in one of
two conditions that address changes in criteria in different ways. The third
year will use experiments to discover how tools that work over longer periods of
time can augment the productivity of designers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.