* 1909778
* Collaborative Research: A Multi-Wavelength Observational and Theoretical Study of the Fastest Evolving Stellar Explosions
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Damiano Caprioli, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 484,575.00

A new class of short-lived astronomical events was discovered in 2018. Named
Fast and Blue Optical Transients (FBOTs), these events are as bright as a
supernova (SN), or exploding star, but brighten within a few days, much faster
than the tens of days typical for supernovae. They are believed to be powered by
a newly-born black hole (BH) or neutron star (NS), which is a very compact type
of star. A research team between Northwestern University and the University of
Chicago will study these FBOTs with a combination of telescope observations and
theoretical investigations. The researchers expect to observe about five FBOTs
per year from NSF-funded astronomical survey telescopes such as the Zwicky
Transient Facility, enabling them to understand what kind of stars become FBOTs
and how compact objects like neutron stars and black holes are formed. The
investigators will integrate their research with three educational programs: (i)
providing summer research opportunities to under-represented minority and women
undergraduates; (ii) work with Chicago-area high school teachers to develop
curricular material on stellar explosions for their classes; and (iii) work with
visually impaired scientists and professional musicians to translate
astronomical measurements into sound. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent technological
advances have revolutionized the investigative power of optical Astronomical
Transient surveys (e.g. PanSTARRS and PTF), which allowed the exploration of
uncharted territories of the parameter space, and led to the discovery of new
types of transients. As the research team showed in their recent study of the
Astronomical Transient AT 2018cow, the large FBOT luminosities -- reaching peak
luminosities of ~4 X 10^44 erg/s -- and extremely short rise-times of a few days
- rule out traditional SN models powered by the radioactive decay of 56Ni ,
imply small ejecta masses of 0.1 to 0.5 solar masses, and point at the presence
of a central engine in the form of a newly-born NS or BH powering the
transient's display. The radio-to-X-ray emission from an FBOT provides an
unparalleled opportunity to study BHs and NSs at the time of their formation, a
phase of evolution that has been hidden to our eyes so far. The research program
uniquely combines the strengths of panchromatic observations of FBOTs and a
theoretical investigation of the emission from their fastest ejecta informed by
Particle-In-Cell simulations, with the immediate goals to (i) shed light on the
nature of FBOTs stellar progenitors; (ii) provide critical insight onto the
process of formation of compact objects and their properties at the time of
birth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.