* 1909731
* CNS Core: Small: Managed Languages: From Non-volatile Memory to Persistence
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* J. Eliot Moss, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 06/30/2024
* USD 530,000.00

Soon, computer main memories will likely use new technology, non-volatile memory
(NVM). While current memories lose their contents when power is removed, NVM
will retain its contents. However, computers keep some recent information inside
the processor. That data will still be lost. So, NVM will not by itself enable
users to get back to exactly where they were. To make full recovery possible,
programs will need to use NVM carefully. Doing this well for modern programming
languages (such as Java and Python) is hard. This project will provide a common
base of support for NVM for such languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clean language
semantics for non-volatility is called persistence. Managed languages (ones with
garbage collection and threads) require both appropriate persistence semantics
and a robust performant implementation. Adding clean persistence in the presence
of threads and garbage collection is hard, and modern multi-core machines
present additional challenge because of their weak memory consistency models.
The project will extend a language-independent virtual machine with flexible
persistence semantics. This will help avoid having every language project build
its own support from scratch. The project direction is to support transactions
over a persistent heap of containers and versioned
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build on Mu (http://microvm.org),
an existing virtual machine that has commercial interest. A persistent virtual
machine will save development effort and encourage creative use of persistence
in applications. This will contribute to innovation, reliability, and
trustworthiness of software. The project team will continue to engage in
recruiting students from under-represented groups, including mentoring of future
applicants and visits to historically minority
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's products will reside in a
repository at https://github.com/umass-moss-lab/persistent-mu, which will
continue to be available for at least three years after the project concludes.
The repository will contain released code, data, etc. Non-code materials will be
available under the Creative Commons license, and code under the Apache open
source license, subject to the University of Massachusetts policy on
intellectual property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.