* 1909212
* CNS Core: Small: Online learning of cross-layer systems for robust and high-performance Internet video transmission
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Keith Winstein, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Over the last 20 years, many research projects have used machine learning to
create new algorithms that take data over the Internet and try to draw
conclusions or make decisions. Unfortunately, although many of these algorithms
have performed well in a laboratory setting, the same learned algorithms
sometimes underperform when deployed over the real Internet -- or they perform
well initially, but decay or produce nonsensical results after some time has
passed. These problems may be caused by model mismatch, when laboratory
conditions do not match the real world, or by dataset shift, when the
environment changes away from the conditions an algorithm was trained to handle,
or by the decentralized nature of the Internet where no one person or computer
can see how well or how poorly the entire network is working. Whatever the
causes, these issues remain vexing obstacles to the practical use of machine
learning on the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will work
to discover and validate approaches that allow learned networking algorithms to
work reliably over time, in the presence of a varying, unpredictable network and
user population that are challenging to simulate faithfully in the lab. The
project will explore whether learned algorithms for network video transmission,
which accounts for about 75% of Internet usage, can be made robust if the
learning happens continually, at the same time and place as deployment, instead
of in the lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will center around a public
research experiment, called Puffer: a live video-streaming website run for
research purposes. To sample a broad range of network paths that represent the
diversity and variability of the Internet, Puffer will stream high-definition
broadcast television channels to up to 500 members of the public simultaneously,
to be viewed in a Web browser. Puffer will experiment on this live traffic on a
continuous basis, teaching itself the best algorithms and parameter values for
video streaming and congestion control, and randomizing users to different
video-streaming algorithms, including ones contributed by other researchers. If
successful, the project will demonstrate (and evaluate over a sustained period
of time) whether it is possible to make machine learning robust in this real-
life networked setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project website is
https://puffer.stanford.edu, which will be maintained with code and data
repositories for at least five years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.