* 1909021
* RI:  Small:  Grasping the Inaccessible
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Matthew Mason, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2023
* USD 428,083.00

Robots can only grasp "accessible" objects, objects with clearance for the
robot's gripper or fingers. Unfortunately, objects are often kept tightly
packed, for efficient storage or transport, like the silverware in a drawer.
Acquiring such an inaccessible object is called "unpacking". Unpacking requires
the shifting of an object, or the surrounding clutter, without a conventional
grasp. In current practice, unpacking is almost always performed by humans. This
project identifies different classes of unpacking problems, and explores
solutions for each class. Unpacking by robots will increase the impact of
robotics in applications of strategic and economic importance such as
manufacturing and logistics. Unpacking problems also arise in the household and
in health care institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project's activities
include classification based on the object, and the surrounding clutter. The
project proceeds by refining a preliminary classification, identifying
representative benchmark problems for each class, and identifying the challenges
particular to each class or cutting across several classes. The project will
explore novel effector designs, controls, modeling, and planning. One key
broadly applicable approach, when access to an object's surface is limited, is
to use "partial closure" -- insufficient for a stable grasp, but sufficient to
shift an object or the surrounding clutter, increasing accessibility of the
object.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.