* 1909538
* AF: Small: Understanding the Behavior of Large Markets
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Richard Cole, New York University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2023
* USD 449,998.00

The Tragedy of the Commons indicates that at least in some circumstances the
self-interested behavior of many individuals can lead to an outcome that is far
from optimal. In contrast, the Invisible Hand of the Market suggests that in
other settings, self-interested behavior leads to positive outcomes. What
distinguishes these settings? One important differentiator is whether there is a
diversity of interests. Another important ingredient is that the setting be
large, in the sense that individual participants form only a small part of the
setting (or the market, in particular). This project will be seeking to better
understand large settings by quantifying the inefficiencies that arise due to
self-interested behavior, and more specifically the rate at which these
inefficiencies shrink as the setting size grows. The project will seek broadly
applicable results, but will make this concrete by focusing on some specific
settings including: (1) Price adjustment in market settings; one issue will be
to identify when and why price adjustment algorithms lead to the desirable
outcomes promised by the Invisible Hand. (2) Settings in which decisions do not
involve payments, such as admissions to universities; the goal will be to
develop plausible models which yield fair outcomes and which allow sensible
student and university strategies to be explored. This genre of problem,
involving human behavior together with computational concerns, appears to have
broad appeal, both to undergraduate and graduate students; accordingly, the
project will seek to involve students of all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
this notion of largeness has been well-studied in the economics field, this has
been mainly in continuum settings or as in-the-limit results. In contrast, this
project will seek quantifiable results, i.e. results that express a trade-off
between the setting size and the quality of an outcome, and in particular
settings for which there are polynomial trade-offs between the setting size and
the quality of an outcome. One broad question is to identify conditions that
allow continuum and in-the-limit results to be systematically converted to
quantified results. More specific questions concern whether large market
settings lead to robust versions of tatonnement (this is the family of price
adjustment algorithms in which the price of a good is increased when the demand
exceeds the supply, and reduced in the opposite case), robust in the sense that
they are relatively parameter-free. The ultimate goal of this line of work is to
provide an algorithmic explanation of price convergence to near-equilibrium
states in a model which incorporates self-interested behavior. A second, quite
distinct thrust will seek to explore conventional advice in large stable-
matching-type settings, e.g., for students applying to college, namely advice
such as: include one or two stretch schools and a safety
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.