* 1909707
* RI: Small: Toward Human-Level Face Verification Performance Using Distinctive Features
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Emily Hand, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 435,979.00

This project aims to transform the way in which researchers approach face
recognition technology by modeling distinctive features. Humans are capable of
recognizing images of familiar faces even as they become extremely distorted.
This project seeks to address current issues with face recognition technology by
modeling the process after human perception. This project advances the fields of
automated face recognition and human face perception by combining research in
both areas to produce computational models of human face memory. This research
will benefit society by producing techniques capable of recognizing faces in
low-quality imagery as seen in surveillance and human-computer interaction
settings. This project supports education and diversity through the recruitment
of a diverse research team, the incorporation of research results into
artificial intelligence courses and the wide dissemination of research results,
data and code. This project is jointly funded by the Robust Intelligence (RI),
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research investigates whether automated face verification performance can be
improved by recognizing and emphasizing distinctive facial features. The project
focuses on three main objectives: 1) modeling distinctive facial features, 2)
face verification using distinctive features and 3) modeling exaggerated
distinctive features. In modeling distinctive facial features, a new set of data
will be collected with many images per identity and each identity labeled with
distinctive features. Baseline and robust approaches to distinctive feature
recognition will be developed and made publicly available along with the data.
For face verification using distinctive features, multi-task learning approaches
will be explored and evaluated on several large-scale surveillance and human-
computer interaction datasets. The approach for modeling exaggerated distinctive
features of faces involves learning generative models from weakly labeled data
to produce realistic facial images from veridical faces. Automatically generated
images will then be used to break up end-to-end deep learning frameworks for
face verification in low-quality imagery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.