* 1909602
* Development of the Biology Lab Inventory of Critical Thinking for Ecology (Eco-BLIC)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Michelle Smith, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,997.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by developing a new assessment instrument, titled the Biology
Lab Inventory of Critical thinking for Ecology or Eco-BLIC, that biology
instructors can use to measure undergraduate students' critical thinking skills
in the context of ecology data collected from field settings. Critical thinking
is defined here as the evidence-based ways in which individuals make decisions
about what to trust and what to do. While education research to date has largely
focused on student learning from lectures and recitations, there is far less
research on the critical thinking learning outcomes that are often stated goals
of instructional laboratory and field courses. This unequal balance leaves many
open research questions regarding what students are currently learning from
these courses, what students could be learning, and how to measure such
learning. Furthermore, ecology lab and field courses that help students engage
in critical thinking through participation in research projects can be some of
the most resource intensive components of a departmental curriculum. They often
require specialized facilities, extensive coordination, and occupy a significant
amount of student and instructional staff time. These logistical challenges and
resources, along with little research to evaluate what critical thinking skills
students are learning in these courses, have caused a decline in offerings of
authentic laboratory and field ecology courses at the undergraduate level. With
the Eco-BLIC, departments will be able to measure potential growth in students'
critical thinking skills, which in turn can help them determine how to best
argue for and use resources to enhance their ecology laboratory and field-based
offerings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there are related instruments, no single
instrument effectively meets the needs of assessing experimentation-focused
critical thinking in undergraduate ecology lab and field courses. The proposed
Eco-BLIC instrument will allow the biology education research community to
respond to calls to build evidence about laboratory and field course
instruction, and to generate new knowledge about student core competencies and
difficulties in critical thinking. The design of the Eco-BLIC will build from
recent work to develop a Physics Lab Inventory of Critical thinking (PLIC).
Based on the design of the PLIC, we will create experimental contexts and suites
of questions that probe students' critical thinking skills about ecology field
research data. The contexts and questions will be intended to assess a range of
students from multiple institutions and will be research-validated following
standard procedures, including comparing open- and closed-response versions,
interviewing students, and getting feedback from experts. During the question
development process, the expert feedback will check the clarity and accuracy of
the Eco-BLIC questions. Expert answers will also be used to: 1) develop the
scoring scheme, 2) evaluate discrimination of the instrument by comparing
differences in undergraduate and expert critical thinking skills, and 3) measure
pre/post changes in students' agreement with the expert responses. Pilot
versions of Eco-BLIC will be given to students at multiple institution types and
we will use a suite of statistical techniques (e.g., reliability coefficients
for test-retest stability, item analysis, test analysis, factor and network
analysis) to collect evidence of assessment validity and reliability, and to
determine the extent to which the questions are able to measure outcomes in
various student populations. We will also compare student answers on the PLIC
versus the Eco-BLIC to identify and study themes about critical thinking that
span multiple disciplines. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.