* 1909067
* CNS Core: Small: Multi-Scale GPU Resource Management for AI Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mosharaf Chowdhury, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 462,704.00

As an increasing amount of data, such as text, audio, and video, are collected
from many sources, the need to better understand the collected data is
increasing as well. The analysis of large datasets has evolved into complex
artificial intelligence (AI) techniques in recent years. This is because the
need has expanded from just a human analyzing the data to enabling a machine to
make sense of it on its own. The overarching goal of this project is to enable
such AI applications - specifically, deep learning - to become more
efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) are often used
in AI applications like those mentioned above. This project addresses the
fundamental limitations in resource management in modern GPUs. To this end, this
project plans to take a holistic approach with three broad focus areas: (1)
fine-grained sharing of individual GPUs; (2) coarse-grained sharing of a GPU
cluster; and (3) dynamic readjustments to mitigate the impact of communication
on distributed deep learning. The core techniques include temporal scheduling
and spatial resource allocation with partial or no knowledge of job durations or
workload characteristics. Algorithms designed as part of this project will have
applications beyond simply running AI applications on GPU clusters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing GPU efficiency will help reduce the cost of
using AI, leading to pervasive use of deep learning techniques. This will enable
new applications of AI in emerging domains such as augmented/virtual reality and
real-time interactive video analytics, while making them more cost-effective.
The project includes plans to work with industry to translate the research into
practice and to include its outcomes in graduate/undergraduate curricula.
Lastly, it will build upon already-established outreach activities at the
University of Michigan to help better convey the impact of AI on society to
diverse student population groups and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All code and data generated and collected for this
project, including software systems, simulators, and emulators, will be made
available to the public as open-source resources at
https://github.com/symbioticlab. They will be will be retained for at least the
duration of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.