* 1909310
* FET: Small: Foundations of Quantum State Learning and Testing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Ryan O'Donnell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2022
* USD 469,998.00

The goal of this project is to advance our scientific understanding of how to
most efficiently learn or test the state of a quantum particle system. Whenever
researchers/engineers build a quantum device -- say, for a quantum teleportation
experiment, or as a component of a quantum computer -- they need to check
whether it works as intended. That is, they need to be able to determine the
quantum state of the particles it produces. Given enough samples from the
device, it is possible to determine the quantum state to any desired accuracy.
But due to the expensive nature of quantum experiments, it is important to seek
highly efficient strategies for estimating the unknown state, ones that use as
few samples as possible. The overarching goal of the project is to try to
mathematically determine the optimal samples vs. accuracy tradeoff for problems
such as: a) learning an unknown quantum state; b) testing whether an unknown
state is equal to a desired target state, etc. Success in the project will tell
us the efficiency benchmark against which all practical state-learning
methodologies can be judged. Additionally, the project contains a significant
educational component involving undergraduate and graduate students in the
research effort, and the insights gained will also filter into a free online
quantum computing course curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more
technical level, the project seeks to understand the optimal sample complexity
of many basic problems in quantum state tomography and estimation. Proposed
problems include: a) estimating a d-dimensional state's eigenvalues using o(d^2)
samples; b) quantum tomography and state certification with respect to more
stringent measures of accuracy, such as chi-squared divergence; c) testing
whether a d x d quantum state is separable (unentangled) or far from separable
using o(d^4) samples; d) performing 'm-measurement shadow tomography' with a
number of samples linear in log(m) and polylogarithmic in the dimension; and e)
improving the computational efficiency of known sample-optimal algorithms. For
many of these problems, the investigator plans to use and extend the
representation theory-based quantum learning framework developed recently with
other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.