* 1909520
* CNS Core: Small: DeepEdge: QoE-based Resource Allocation for Future Heterogeneous and Dynamic Edge-IoT Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Jianli Pan, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 12/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The emerging Internet of Things (IoT) is connecting increasing numbers of smart
devices and enabling varieties of heterogeneous IoT applications, empowered by
cloud and edge computing technologies. In particular, edge or fog computing
technologies will significantly benefit IoT applications that are delay-
sensitive, bandwidth/data intensive, or that require closer intelligence.
However, for effective Edge-IoT resource allocation, significant challenges
exist due to the following requirements and constraints: 1) the demand side that
a massive number of IoT devices can run heterogeneous applications with various
Quality of Service (QoS) requirements and different priorities; and 2) the
supply side that the edge clouds need to dynamically and optimally allocate
limited and multidimensional resources (CPU, storage, and bandwidth) at
geospatially distributed points. The objective of this project is to respond to
these challenges by designing and developing a new Edge-IoT framework named
DeepEdge using deep online learning that allocates resources to heterogeneous
IoT applications and dynamic IoT devices to maximize users' Quality of
Experience (QoE). The proposed research will advance knowledge and fundamentally
change the way future edge computing systems work in supporting heterogeneous
and dynamic IoT applications. The transformative research outcomes will benefit
users and society with inexpensive and effective IoT application delivery, and
contribute to important societal challenges in supporting emerging IoT devices
and applications. The project will also broadly involve and impact K-12
underrepresented groups and female students in computer science, and develop
strong research and education integration for various levels of students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to develop the
framework, model, and algorithms in effectively delivering heterogeneous IoT
applications on edge clouds and provisioning high-quality QoE for users. More
specifically, the project will result in: i) a new QoE model to quantify the
users satisfaction and its related factors including multiple applications QoS
requirements and applications priority; ii) a new deep machine learning based
two-stage resource allocation scheme that will adapt application QoS
requirements according to available resources at the edge cloud and maintain
application's priority, and will intelligently and jointly allocate
communication and computation resources with the objective of maximization of
users QoE; iii) a novel deep Q-learning scheme that will dynamically select the
most appropriate edge nodes to handle the multiple application tasks with the
goal to optimize the task execution delay; iv) a hardware and software test-bed
implementation to validate and evaluate the effectiveness, efficiency, and the
practicality of the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.