* 1909097
* Relating the Chemistry of Distant Galaxies to the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jens Kauffmann, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2023
* USD 520,265.00

Some of the most exciting research in astronomy focuses on the birth of galaxies
over cosmic time. To do this well we must understand how stars form in other
galaxies. Stars and their planets assemble out of the densest gas in molecular
clouds. Such gas clouds in space typically contain enough material to form more
than 10,000 stars like the Sun. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astronomers use radio
telescopes to discover the types of molecules in clouds forming stars. The
molecules have unique signatures, which are matched to laboratory measurements,
enabling studies of chemistry at great distances from the Earth. The radio
signatures are patterns of high intensity signals at specific radio frequencies.
Astronomers use these identifications to deduce the chemistry, temperature and
density of the regions forming stars. Fortunately, specific molecules in
molecular clouds are likely tied to specific conditions prevailing in the gas.
To give an example, the carbon monoxide (CO) molecule is found to reside in gas
at any density. In contrast to this, hydrogen cyanide (HCN) molecule is rather
tied to gas at the high densities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because nearby
molecular clouds are brighter, observations of our Milky Way are easier than
observations of more distant galaxies. The investigator studies molecular clouds
in the Milky Way, where the chemistry is thought to be better understood. The
investigator will confirm the accuracy which molecular line observations can be
used to measure important parameters relating to star formation and interstellar
chemistry. The investigator will combine new observations with models for the
physical conditions in these molecular clouds. The investigator will determine
how sensitively their observations are tied to the physical conditions in the
molecular clouds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will share their
research experience with students in community colleges. The investigator
enables easy student access to their data using a computing tool, called
"Jupyter Notebooks", which work in common web browsers. This approach teaches
computer skills, while not requiring excessive special purpose software to be
installed on the students? computers. The data and analysis tools will be
developed into classroom material for undergraduate courses. This is done in
collaboration with community colleges in
Massachusetts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.