* 1909536
* FET: Small: Tools and Experimental Validation for Predicting Enzymatic Promiscuity and its Products
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Liping Liu, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 631,393.00

The engineering of microbial cells through synthetic biology promises to advance
the production of high-volume commodity chemicals such as biopolymers, fuels,
nutraceuticals, therapeutics, and other specialty products. Increasing
understanding of metabolic and regulatory networks underlying microbial
physiology hinges on developing metabolic models that capture enzymatic cellular
activity. Despite significant progress in sequencing technology and model
reconstruction, there are many cellular enzymatic activities that remain
unknown. The hypothesis underlying this project is that undocumented promiscuous
activity of enzymes results in the formation of unexpected reaction byproducts.
This phenomenon is frequently observed by synthetic biologists, and sometimes
exploited during design through ad hoc experimental efforts. However, there are
currently limited ways to predict, analyze, or mitigate the effects of enzyme
promiscuity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops tools to predict
stoichiometrically balanced reactions that reflect undocumented promiscuous
enzymatic cellular activities. These reactions can be utilized to augment
existing metabolic models and improve design tools. Further, the project
experimentally validates the augmented models by engineering a microbial host to
synthesize desirable chemicals and then analyzing host-pathway interactions. The
proposed work is at the intersection of computer science and biology and will
advance the ability to predict and assess the impact of enzyme promiscuity on
biological systems. Training will be provided to graduate and undergraduate
students and the research will be incorporated into classroom teaching.
Underrepresented minorities in computing will be recruited to participate in the
research through various established national and local
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.