* 1909972
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: Identifying Functional Structure in Data
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Leonard Schulman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 420,580.00

Algorithms for unsupervised learning tasks are in constant use in science,
engineering, medical research, etc. Progress in optimization procedures for
these problems has therefore the potential for very wide adoption. One of the
primary research topics of this award is unsupervised learning methods for
determining causal effect in scenarios where one cannot, for practical or
ethical reasons, perform controlled experiments. At present, the theory for
deducing causal effects is somewhat brittle, since it relies upon unrealistic
accuracy in the mathematical modeling, and, for large systems, upon unrealistic
sample sizes. Scientists therefore do not have very reliable ways of advising
the public about "what-if" scenarios. This research aims to provide, and
characterize the performance of, causal-identification algorithms with the
following goals: (a) Algorithms that work under weaker assumptions than current
theory makes (in particular regarding the fidelity of the model to reality), yet
deliver still-useful guarantees; (b) Algorithms that work under stronger
structural assumptions than current theory makes and can use smaller sample
sizes as a result. A related research topic concerns approximation algorithms,
and inapproximability bounds, for optimization problems such as data clustering
and learning of mixture models. The investigator will train students and
postdocs in these and related areas of the theory of
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Causal-inference problems will be addressed
through the framework of directed probabilistic graphical models. Existing
causal-identification algorithms operate with a naive parameter size because,
for N-variate graphical models, the complexity parameter (and sample complexity)
is exponential in N. By contrast all algorithmic methods for clustering, for
learning mixtures of product distributions, or for topic models regard the
dimension (i.e., the number of variables N) as a parameter that should not
appear, or at worst appear poly-logarithmically, in the exponent. This project
aims to provide algorithms with such complexity; however, this is not only an
algorithmic question. The existing characterization of when causal
identification is even possible is stated under the assumption that one has
access to full knowledge of the joint distribution on the N variables. Therefore
a related, statistical but not algorithmic goal is to obtain a characterization
of graphical models in which causal inference is possible only from the joint
distributions of sets of variables of size small relative to N. A candidate
class of such models comes from mixture models, beginning with mixtures of
products and extending to mixtures of Markov models. Another question concerns
graphical models in which causal identification is not possible, yet the range
of causal effects consistent with the data is small. In such cases, an algorithm
which bounds the causal effect is an adequate replacement for full
identification; providing such guarantees is another goal of this work. Finally,
research will focus on clustering with squared Euclidean costs: both on the
inapproximability threshold and in improving approximation factors through
linear programming relaxations or other methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.