* 1909073
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Software-Defined Imaging for Energy-Efficient Visual Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Adrian Sampson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 166,000.00

Image sensors are becoming ubiquitous in daily life as they are incorporated in
future intelligent systems including autonomous navigation, health monitoring,
and robotics. A central challenge in these camera-driven applications is the
inflexibility of current sensor designs and their consequent energy cost. This
project designs a new category of image sensors which exploit hardware --
software co-design to attain better sensing at lower cost. The project advances
a vertically-integrated design from the mixed-signal sensor circuitry to the
computational architecture and the operating system software support. The
project's impacts are the creation of new, flexible image sensor systems that
can be used for a variety of visual computing applications. The project further
seeks to include broadening access to education and research through curriculum
material which emphasize smart cameras of the future, outreach to middle and
high school students in a summer program to discover imaging applications, and
industry engagement through workshops on software-defined imaging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on designing software-defined image
sensors, which offer new dimensions of configurability along with system support
and programming abstractions to support application-specific needs. To achieve
this, the project focuses on three main objectives: (1) Design and
implementation of configurable sensor primitives, including programmable regions
of interest with custom exposure, readout, and quantization, (2) architectures
to control these sensor primitives, and to accelerate image signal processing
and vision workloads, and (3) operating system services for scheduling the
memory needs for our new sensor primitives, and OS interfaces that enable low-
latency reactive sensor control for key applications. These innovations are
evaluated in an integrative evaluation testbed that includes a fabricated
software-defined image sensor prototype and a Field Programmable Gate Array
(FPGA)-based system to measure energy and performance for a set of end-to-end
visual applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.