* 1909547
* CIF: Small: Analytically Predicting Strong PUF Responses from Few Known CRPs
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Wenjing Rao, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2022
* USD 271,853.00

Physically Unclonable Functions (PUFs) are computer hardware circuits, or
hardware security primitives, that can easily be built into computer chips. They
are expected to become essential in securing next generation communication /
authentication protocols among Internet of Things devices. However, much PUF
research has been ad hoc and experimental in nature, with little fundamental
understanding of their strengths and limits. For example, while ideally the
behavior of a PUF should be unpredictable, thus unclonable, some "strong" PUFs
have been shown to be "machine learnable". This means that by overhearing a
large amount of the data exhibited by the PUF during communication phases, it is
possible to predict the behavior of the PUF with high accuracy, thus enabling an
attacker to mimic the PUF behavior, posing a dire challenge to the security
foundation. Why this is possible is not fully understood, and this project's
goal is to develop a new framework for understanding, in a systematic,
theoretically explained way, the fundamental limits and properties of PUFs. This
has the potential to transform how strong PUFs should be designed and used for
authentication in fundamental ways: ad hoc approaches will be replaced by
provably optimal designs built on sound theory to leverage the full potential of
these functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PUFs are promising as fundamental security
primitives that, when mass fabricated on chips, may provide devices with a low-
cost digital "fingerprint" by exploiting the random disorder in the
manufacturing process. This PUF "fingerprint" provides richer content than a
simple barcode by offering a unique output function that may be "challenged"
with an input bit vector. As each input interacts with the random elements in
the architectural configuration to produce a "response," such challenge-response
pairs (CRPs) provided by the PUF can be used to uniquely identify or
authenticate a device. The investigators aim to find out---analytically in
closed form expressions--- how predictable a PUF becomes given knowledge of a
(small) set of observed CRPs. This problem is approached through a new
collaboration between two female researchers with expertise in computer
engineering and information theory. PUFs will be modeled statistically, which
will allow for the derivation of conditional probability mass functions (and
associated provably optimal predictors) of the PUF response to one (or more)
challenge(s) given knowledge of the response to one (or more) other
challenge(s).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.