* 1909682
* Collaborative Research: Confirming and Characterizing Transiting Exoplanets around Bright Stars with Ultra-precise Ground-based Photometry
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Leslie Hebb, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2023
* USD 91,034.00

Many extra-solar planets ("exoplanets") are discovered today by tracking
precisely the light from the star they orbit. When the planet transits, or
passes in front of, the star, a tiny bit of the star's light is blocked. This
allows astronomers to determine many properties of the planet. The PI's team are
pioneers in using an optical device called an Engineered Diffuser. This device
significantly reduces sources of uncertainty in the light output of the star,
especially the effect known as scintillation ("twinkling," in a layperson's
term). They will use this technique to identify, confirm, and study planets down
to Earth's size around bright stars. They will also use the technique to study
the stars' magnetic fields by detecting spots analogous to sunspots on the
surface of the stars. Undergraduate and graduate students, and a postdoctoral
associate, will take part in the observations and data analysis. The
collaborators will also incorporate the results into their teaching and public
outreach at their institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ground-based observations
are subject to a number of limitations in their precision due to the day-night
cycle, atmospheric effects, scintillation, transparency variations, differential
extinction, seeing, and telescope-guiding effects which typically prevents them
from achieving the photometric precision of space-based missions. The larger
field of view offered by small aperture telescopes enables bright comparison
stars to be more readily found, however, the aforementioned challenges often
prevent small telescopes from matching space-based photometric precision. Larger
telescopes offer better averaging of scintillation. The group's implementation
of diffuser-aided photometry from the ground provides an improvement in
performance compared to de-focused small telescopes and they have demonstrated
on-sky photometric performance that rivals that of space telescopes at a
fraction of the cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.