* 1909582
* Wireless Imaging Intensity Interferometer for Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Elliott Horch, Southern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2022
* USD 333,983.00

Two or more telescopes that work as one can in principle make extremely precise
measurements of distances and angles. This project will extend the capabilities
of the Southern Connecticut Stellar Interferometer (SCSI), a two-telescope
instrument that can measure the sizes of bright stars. Because SCSI is based on
a different method than most multi-telescope instruments in use today, the
science that is enabled by the project will be different than what has been done
in the field to date. For example, SCSI can easily observe in blue light, a
wavelength range in which it is harder for other existing instruments to be
efficient due to the effects of turbulence in the air. The project will also
provide for the training of physics students and public observing events at
Southern Connecticut State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCSI yields
extremely high-resolution information about stars by precisely timing the
arrival of photons at each telescope station and comparing the data streams
after the fact, a technique known as intensity interferometry. The project will
yield three significant improvements to SCSI. First, it will increase the number
of telescopes used from two to three, something that is necessary in order to go
beyond measurements of stellar size and obtain a true imaging capability.
Second, new electronics will be used to attempt to demonstrate that the
instrument can be successfully used in a wireless mode. If this is achieved,
then the distance between the three telescope stations can be increased
dramatically, leading to the capability for obtaining much finer image detail.
Third, the sensitivity of the instrument will be significantly improved by using
more detectors and increasing the amount of light that can be collected. Fainter
stars will therefore be successfully observed. The education and public outreach
enabled by the award will help serve the need for highly-educated, research-
capable science and engineering professionals in Connecticut and the Northeast
and stimulate interest in science both among K-12 students and the general
public in the New Haven community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.