* 1909709
* Increasing the Spectral Resolution of Broadband Astronomical Imaging
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Tamas Budavari, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2024
* USD 313,593.00

The latest-generation telescopes and instruments are opening a new window on the
variable and transient universe. Forthcoming time-domain surveys will collect
thousands of observational epochs for most of the night sky. But these data
provide opportunities beyond the study of time series, and this project will
work towards realizing the promise of higher resolution shape measurement and
improving the inference of galaxy properties. Preliminary work has already shown
the promise of future success. Students in applied mathematics, computer science
and astronomy will join forces to tackle the challenges of real data and subtle
effects. Multi-epoch image and video analysis is arguably the fastest growing
topic in data science today. The images and methods created in this study are
ideal for inspiring and training students. The derived visual representations
are also an efficient vehicle for public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
science beyond the transient and variable cosmos comes firstly by oversampling
in overlapping, repeated exposures, which can produce higher spatial resolution
and shape measurements, thus improving weak lensing, cosmology and galaxy
morphology studies. Less obviously, introducing multiple effective sub-bands
within a broad passband will significantly improve the inference of galaxy
properties and the estimation of photometric redshifts. This study will work
towards the new methods needed to realize these opportunities, by (1) evaluating
the limitations of these ideas in real situations, including photometric
redshift estimation for the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST); (2)
developing optimal, efficient methods for reconstruction; and (3) implementing
production-quality code to make super-resolution hyper-color images from multi-
epoch astronomical observations. The approach of building on robust statistics
has already been successful in a monochrome setting, but multi-color will need
detailed modeling of differential chromatic refraction (DCR) in the atmosphere.
This will require a new method to leverage the color-dependent subtle shifts in
source directions due to DCR. Part of the created educational material will be
publicly available Jupyter notebooks in Python. Colorful renderings of
scientific data will be developed as live Jupyter notebooks and made available
on the SciServer for all to view and to modify, using just a
browser.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.