* 1909335
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Minimum-Cost Strategies for Sequential Search and Evaluation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Lisa Hellerstein, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 365,511.00

In many situations, tasks are performed sequentially. For example, a robot
searching a building for a hidden bomb will search room by room, in some order,
until the bomb is found. An automated medical diagnosis procedure might first
perform one medical test, observe its outcome, then perform another test, and so
forth, until the diagnosis becomes clear. It is becoming increasingly important
to improve the way intelligent systems operate in these types of situations.
This project will develop algorithms and software that systems can use to
determine the order in which to perform tasks, so as to minimize costs incurred
or time spent. Because the outcomes of tasks are often unknown until the tasks
are performed, the algorithms will be designed to enable systems to quickly make
dynamic decisions, based on new information obtained as tasks are performed. In
addition to the robot search and medical diagnosis applications described above,
this project has applications to many other areas, including determining network
connectivity, quality testing of manufactured products, and evaluating database
queries. The project will provide research opportunities to graduate and
talented undergraduate students, and the researchers will engage in outreach
activities, both at the college and K-12 levels, to students in groups that are
under-represented in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project research
will focus on fundamental sequential ordering problems for search and evaluation
in two settings. In the first setting, uncertainty about outcomes is modeled by
a known probability distribution, and the goal is to minimize expected cost for
the distribution. In the second, outcomes are determined by an adversary. Here a
robust solution is desired, which minimizes expected cost in the worst case.
This is equivalent to regarding the problem as a zero-sum game. In either
setting, the search environment could be a discrete set of locations or it could
have a more complex network structure. The project will bring together
approaches from algorithms, machine learning and game theory. Central goals are
as follows: (1) Developing intelligent and adaptable search and evaluation
policies that have good theoretical guarantees and can be easily implemented and
deployed in practice, (2) Developing algorithmic techniques that will constitute
an algorithmic toolkit for researchers working on search and evaluation
problems, and (3) Integrating insights and techniques from different areas to
give unified approaches to solving broad classes of related
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.