* 1909531
* Enabling Quantum Leap: Quantum algorithms for quantum chemistry and materials
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Garnet Chan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2019
* USD 88,364.00

This award is for a workshop "Enabling Quantum Leap: Quantum algorithms for
quantum chemistry and materials" to be held on January 22-24, 2019 in
Alexandria, Virginia. The workshop is co-sponsored by the Divisions of
Chemistry, Materials Research and Physics in MPS and the Division of Computing
and Communication Foundations in CISE. The workshop, organized by Garnet Chan
(California Institute of Technology), Bela Bauer (Microsoft Research) and Sergey
Bravyi (IBM T.J. Watson Research Center) brings together a diverse and highly
interdisciplinary group of experts to advance the science, collaboration,
education, and broader impacts of quantum computing as applied to the quantum
simulation of physical systems. One of the earliest and most compelling
applications for quantum computers is Richard Feynman's idea of simulating
quantum systems. Such systems, often with many degrees of freedom, can be
difficult to simulate accurately and efficiently on ordinary computers, even
supercomputers. This workshop has a focus on applications of quantum computers
to problems in chemistry and materials science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By its
nature, quantum simulation is an interdisciplinary science. Scientific progress
requires domain expertise in chemistry, materials science, physics, quantum
algorithms, as well as computer science. Also, given the broad societal impact,
stakeholders not only include educators, but also federal agencies, and industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the workshop are to:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Identify central problems in chemistry and materials science, in
the areas of electronic structure, quantum statistical mechanics, and quantum
dynamics, as target problems for quantum computers;&lt;br/&gt;2. Identify areas
for new quantum algorithms and critical aspects of current quantum algorithms to
improve for applications to the above problems. This includes understanding the
complexity of physical problems for quantum simulation, new and improved
algorithms for near-term hardware,including non-general purpose hardware such as
quantum annealers and quantum simulators, and ways to bridge classical
simulation algorithms with quantum algorithms;&lt;br/&gt;3. Bring together
active and interested workers in the fields of quantum chemistry, quantum
materials science, and quantum algorithms;&lt;br/&gt;4. Explore how to educate a
new generation of scientists who are trained both in the application areas of
quantum simulation as well as in quantum algorithms;&lt;br/&gt;5. Propose
concrete mechanisms that help advance the field and achieve convergence in
efforts from different disciplines;&lt;br/&gt;6. Interface academic and industry
efforts in theoretical algorithms, software, and hardware, for chemistry and
materials simulations;&lt;br/&gt;7. Prepare a workshop report for the community
on how to advance the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.