* 1909999
* CNS Core: Small: Harnessing Weight Repetition for Efficient Deep Neural Network Inference on General-Purpose Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Christopher Fletcher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Society is witnessing an explosion in the use of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
across all facets of daily life including health, finances, entertainment and
transportation. DNNs are used by performing DNN inference, which queries the DNN
with an input (for example, an image) to get an answer (for example, a
classification). Society relies on inference every day, where it is run on
devices ranging from cloud servers to personal computers. The goal of this
project is to develop new ways to make inference efficient (fast, low power) on
these devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach is to explore how a
new phenomenon, called weight repetition, can be applied to general-purpose
devices such as Central Processing Units (CPUs) and Graphical Processing Units
(GPUs). The idea is, when a DNN weight is repeated, DNN inference operations can
be simplified. The first project thrust will develop high-efficiency weight
repetition-aware software kernels that can run on un-modified hardware. The
second thrust will develop novel training techniques to co-design the DNN with
the weight repetition-aware kernels. Finally, the third thrust will explore what
point hardware modifications can be made to further improve efficiency in the
first two thrusts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By proving weight repetition's
effectiveness on general-purpose devices, this project will unlock innovation in
software, algorithms and hardware. The project will also amplify the improvement
possible from related, but orthogonal, techniques such as weight quantization
and weight sparsity. To support the cross-stack approach, the project will train
a new class of students and researchers who can work across high-performance
software, hardware and DNN training algorithms to build co-designed Machine
Learning stacks and, in the future, apply the lessons learned to other high-
impact problems that require cross-layer solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will store all publications, code and data-sets on public-facing
websites, hosted at the University of Illinois for at least 3 years after the
end of the project. This information will be made available via commercial
websites. Links to these websites will be mirrored at
http://cwfletcher.net/weightrepetition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.