* 1909846
* Models for Tear Film Structure, Dynamics and Parameter Identification
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Richard Braun, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 325,000.00

In 2008, nearly 5 million Americans age 50 or older suffered from moderate to
severe dry eye, and it is thought that dysfunction of the tear film plays a
major role in this condition. This project will develop mathematical models that
explain how parts of the tear film function, and the principal investigators
will work closely with leading optometrists to achieve this goal. One main
thrust of the project will use mathematical models as a way to identify the
conditions when the tear film fails, which is often called tear breakup.
Computer-generated answers to models that simulate tear breakup can be used to
determine local quantities in that cannot be measured experimentally; these
quantities are crucial to understanding the mechanisms behind tear breakup and
the causes for some instances of dry eye. The other main thrust will use two-
layer fluid models to understand the function of the layer much better than is
currently known. The lipid layer floats atop an aqueous layer; the lipid layer
is a more complex fluid than water, and the aqueous layer can be assumed to act
like water. New, more complex models for the floating lipid layer will be
developed: the lipid layer will be treated as a so-called liquid crystal. We
will solve models for the two layers together and compare them to experimental
results. We expect to explain some lipid layer patterns seen experimentally on
the eye, and we will solve new mathematical problems to obtain these
explanations. Both thrusts of the project will advance our understanding of the
tear film and dry eye, as well as advance applied mathematics. The award will
provide graduate student training through research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
will investigate the dynamics of thin fluid film models that may be applied to
the tear film on the human eye. The two-layer film there has an oily lipid layer
floating atop an aqueous layer. There is growing evidence that the floating
lipid layer is a liquid crystal in many instances. However, there are
essentially no models derived or solved for such two-layer films. In the first
main thrust of the project, we propose to develop fundamental models for nematic
and smectic A liquid crystals floating on water. In the second main thrust of
the project, we also develop parameter identification methods for tear film
models through a sequence of problems that will ultimately lead to identifying
physical processes responsible for observed physiological tear breakup in the
tear film. The project will draw upon the thin liquid film and liquid crystal
literature, solve new models for these films, and prove the effectiveness of
parameter identification methods on noisy data generated computationally. The
project will also involve optometrists to test the theories on observed data.
The PIs will combine modeling, analytical and computational approaches, together
with experimental data from our collaborators, to advance understanding of two-
layer films composed of liquid crystals floating on Newtonian fluids (water).
Deriving these complex models and solving them on stationary and moving domains
are substantial mathematical challenges. For example, the PIs are unaware of any
extensional flow thin film models for smectic A liquid crystals; we will derive
and solve models for both free and floating extensional layers. Applying
parameter identification approaches to determine parameters on noisy test data
for a hierarchy of film models will enable identification of parameters in these
complex fluid systems. Beyond significant results in dynamics of complex fluids,
the results of the project will enable ocular surface researchers to better
understand thin film dynamics and the function of the tear
film.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.