* 1909824
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Garden State LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Alexander Gates, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 02/29/2024
* USD 4,778,600.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United
States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the
talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in
STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The Garden State LSAMP
(GSLSAMP) program was established in 2009 in response to the need for a more
diverse and skilled technical workforce. That need still exists and is
particularly acute in the State of New Jersey. The eight public and private
institutions that make up the GSLSAMP are diverse and include one community
college and seven four-year institutions, including one private institution. The
institutions are Essex County College, Fairleigh Dickinson University, Kean
University, Montclair State University, New Jersey Institute of Technology,
Rutgers University New Brunswick and Newark, and William Paterson University.
The goal of the Alliance is to increase the number of underrepresented minority
(URM) graduates with STEM degrees by 60% over the next five years. This goal
will be accomplished by integrating GSLSAMP efforts and proven best practices
into institutional, local and regional efforts that encourage success in STEM
including learning communities, research experiences, academic bootcamps,
collaboration with the community colleges of the Northern New Jersey Bridges to
the Baccalaureate, research conferences and advisement. It will also increase
the number of urban minority students from GSLSAMP institutions pursuing
graduate education and international experiences by 20% through integrated
research experiences and graduate school preparation and advisement. These goals
support the National Science Foundation's strategic goal to "cultivate a world-
class, broadly inclusive science and engineering workforce, and expand the
scientific literacy of all citizens."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge
generating research study seeks to understand the factors and mechanisms related
to the GSLSAMP's successes in increasing the participation of URM students in
STEM from several common and uncommon sources and their subsequent graduation
with an undergraduate STEM degree. The studies will potentially reveal the
factors and mechanisms in the STEM academic pipeline that increase URM students'
interests and efforts in pursuing graduate training and a career in STEM, which
will lead to a more talented and diverse STEM workforce. An external evaluation
team will implement both quantitative and qualitative instruments to assess the
overall quality of the programs on the individual campuses as well as the entire
alliance related to the overall goals of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.