* 1909356
* CNS Core: Small: Significantly Improving Networked Applications using Congestion-Aware Transport Modeling
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Anshul Gandhi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,698.00

The performance of Internet applications such as Web and Video depends
critically on the underlying network conditions. Despite several advances in
networking technology, the performance problems of Internet applications have
not been fully alleviated. This is because, given the variability in the network
and the application workload, no one protocol or parameter setting works best at
all times. The goal of this project is to develop a novel, unified, and
practical modeling framework that can accurately predict the performance of
applications under different network conditions and
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will achieve its stated goals by
first developing a new congestion-aware TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)
performance model, and then extending this model to encompass the application
layer. At the TCP layer, performance will be modeled analytically, but will be
augmented by empirically observed relationship between congestion in the network
and the delivery rate. The model will use predictive and clustering techniques
bootstrap model parameters based on network information from existing or
historical flows in the vicinity of the target flow. For Web, this TCP model
will be extended to predict page load times while for video applications, TCP
throughput predictions will be used to drive the bitrate selection
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research targets a broad segment of the
population since video and web traffic makes up almost all of the traffic on the
Internet. This work is beneficial to startups and smaller companies by providing
means to systematically understand the effect of different protocols to improve
performance. The results of this project will be used to improve the Web
performance in developing regions as part of an ongoing collaboration. The PIs
will introduce projects based on Web and Video performance, network protocol
modeling, and measurement studies to undergraduate and high school students. The
PIs have a successful track record of engaging high-school students and
undergraduates in their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software designed as
part of this project will be released on a public site
http://www.cs.stonybrook.edu/~arunab/econ. Electronic data will be archived
internally. All data will be kept for at least 5 years after publication; likely
longer, depending on its size and outside interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.