* 1909199
* Are Active Galactic Nuclei accretion disks too big?
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Edward Cackett, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 06/30/2023
* USD 266,107.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All major galaxies appear to harbor a supermassive
black hole, millions of times the mass of our Sun, residing at their center.
These black holes have an important influence over the way their host galaxies
grow and evolve. An important way in which the black hole grows is through a
process called accretion, where hot gas spirals into the black hole via a disk.
Recent studies suggest that these accretion disks are several times larger than
expected by theory. As these objects are so distant astronomers cannot take
direct pictures of the disks themselves and so must use indirect techniques. In
this project, the PI will use a technique called reverberation mapping. This
uses echoes of light to determine the size of the accretion disks, much like
sonar uses echoes of sound to map the ocean floor. Using a dedicated robotic
telescope the PI will monitor approximately 10 supermassive black hole accretion
disks per year to test why accretion disks appear too big, and better understand
how black holes grow. In the area of Broader Impacts, the PI will integrate the
science of this project into local Detroit
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supermassive black holes play an important role in the
growth and evolution of the galaxies in which they reside. A principal way in
which they grow is via the accretion of gas via a disk. However, observational
probes of the structure of these accretion disks are rare, especially since they
are too small and distant to spatially resolve directly. In this project, the PI
will use a technique known as reverberation mapping which measures echoes of
light to determine the size scale of the accretion disks. Several recent studies
using this technique suggest that these disks are a factor of 2 - 3 larger than
expected. To better understand this we will use a dedicated robotic telescope to
monitor approximately 10 supermassive black hole accretion disks per year
building a substantial sample. Furthermore, the PI will apply novel analysis
techniques to further test of origin of the echoes, and test why these accretion
disks appear too big. In the area of Broader Impacts, the PI will integrate the
science of this project into local Detroit schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.