* 1909634
* AF: SMALL: Finding Models of Data and Mathematical Objects
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Shachar Lovett, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2022
* USD 499,999.00

A central mystery in the philosophy of science is "the unreasonable
effectiveness of mathematics." Why do natural phenomena seem to have simple,
elegant mathematical models? The success of machine learning raises an analogous
issue called "the unreasonable effectiveness of machine learning." Is the
success of both mathematical science and machine learning due to some common
elements in the phenomena studied? Is it due to the nature of the questions we
ask? Or is it a mirage due to cognitive bias, in focusing on successful uses and
ignoring failures? The aim of this proposal is to better understand this by
relating it to a similar phenomenon in mathematics and theoretical computer
science, where complex mathematical objects often have simple "models" that give
accurate estimates of many quantities of interest. By relating concepts in pure
mathematics to analogs in machine learning, the researchers plan to both use
powerful machine-learning techniques to prove new mathematical results, and to
use mathematical concepts to extend the scope of machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More precisely, the research team will explore a
deep connection between regularity lemmas in mathematics, hard core theorems in
complexity theory, and boosting in machine learning. At the core of it is the
following problem. Given a distribution D on some kind of data points, and a
class of hypotheses H, find a model M (namely, a distribution on the same
underlying set), that is&lt;br/&gt;(i) indistinguishable from D with respect to
the hypotheses in H;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) simple, in that it has a definition in terms
of a small number of tests in H;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) has as high entropy as possible
given the conditions above.&lt;br/&gt;With this goal in mind, this proposal will
address the following main questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. When do such simple, high
entropy models exist? In other words, what does it say about natural phenomena
that they have simple, accurate models? What does it say about the questions
being asked? This characterization will be studied both in terms of the
structure of the distribution D and the class H.&lt;br/&gt;2. What are the
quantitative tradeoffs between the different criteria above
(indistinguishability, simplicity, and entropy)?&lt;br/&gt;3. When such models
exist, can they be found efficiently? What algorithms would lead to the
discovery of such models?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.