* 1909105
* SHF: Small: Spectral Reduction of Large Graphs and Circuit Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Zhuo Feng, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Spectral methods are playing increasingly important roles in many graph and
numerical applications. This research plan will investigate a truly-scalable yet
unified spectral graph reduction approach that allows reducing large-scale,
real-world directed and undirected graphs with guaranteed preservation of the
original graph spectra. The success of the proposed research will significantly
advance the state of the arts in spectral graph theory, electronic design
automation (EDA), data mining, machine learning, as well as scientific
computing, leading to the development of much faster numerical and graph-based
algorithms. The algorithms and methodologies to be developed will be
disseminated to leading technology companies such as EDA software and network
companies for potential industrial adoptions. Spectral graph reduction
algorithms/software packages will also be made available to other researchers
through collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate a
truly-scalable yet unified spectral graph reduction approach by exploiting a
scalable (nearly-linear complexity) spectral matrix perturbation analysis
framework for constructing nearly-linear sized subgraphs that can well preserve
the key eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the original graph Laplacians. Unlike
prior methods that are only suitable for handling specific types of graphs (e.g.
undirected or strongly-connected graphs), this project uses a more universal
approach and thus will allow for spectral reduction of a much wider range of
real-world graphs that may involve billions of elements: spectrally-reduced
social (data) networks allow for more efficiently modeling, mining and analysis
of large social (data) networks; spectrally-reduced neural networks allow for
more scalable model training and processing in emerging machine learning tasks;
spectrally-reduced web-graphs allow for much faster computations of personalized
PageRank vectors; spectrally-reduced integrated circuit networks will lead to
more efficient partitioning, modeling, simulation, optimization and verification
of large chip designs, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.