* 1909848
* SHF: Small: Distributed DNA Computations Operating on a Collection of Cell Membranes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* John Reif, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The biological cell membrane is an interface to communicate with other cells and
its environment. This project seeks to enable DNA-based molecular-scale devices
to operate on the membrane of cells and to provide for communications between
these devices on distinct cells. The project has transformative potential for
nanoscale applications in cell biology and medicine, including molecular-scale
diagnostics and therapeutics. The ability to communicate between cells enhances
the range of applications. Educational outcomes of the project will include
course development, cross-disciplinary training and carefully supervised
mentoring of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing novel
molecular-scale distributed computational architectures consisting of DNA
digital circuits that operate on the membrane surfaces of a collection of cells.
Each logical gate of each circuit is a DNA hairpin nanostructure tethered to a
membrane protein on a cell surface. The DNA circuits take inputs and outputs
(e.g., from or to molecules within or on the cell, the solution buffer medium,
or DNA from DNA circuits of other cells) and perform computation tasks via DNA
strand-displacement reactions. Moreover the outputs diffuse in solution to other
cells, providing for communication between the DNA circuits of distinct cells.
The project tasks include design, simulations and experimental
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.