* 1909877
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative: Salvaging Commodity Operating Systems toSupport Emerging Networking Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Hui Lu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The networking landscape has changed dramatically along with two main advances:
(1) fast hardware has led to high-speed, high-bandwidth computer networks; (2)
new networking architectures, such as software-defined networking, have given
rise to a flexible way to operate networking services. Unfortunately,
traditional systems software, such as commodity operating systems, faces
critical challenges to efficiently support such high-speed networks and new
networking architectures. This project will conduct a holistic study of network
software stacks in commodity operating systems to identify critical bottlenecks,
propose new solutions to address these bottlenecks, and finally validate the
proposed solutions using real prototype
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project entails three
research thrusts: First, to maximize packet-level parallelism, it will develop a
stress-testing approach to locate the serialization bottleneck and design a
highly efficient pipelining process to parallelize packet processing in
virtualized networks. Second, to improve per-packet processing efficiency for
small packets, it will develop a multi-level packet coalescing approach,
including hardware interrupt coalescing, software interrupt coalescing, and
lossless packet coalescing. Third, to strike a good balance between parallelism
and data locality, it will design a holistic scheduling algorithm to optimally
multiplex in-kernel interrupts and user-level threads for virtualized network
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge developed in this project will
help to improve the key aspects of network performance in commodity operating
systems, thus benefiting all systems and applications running on these systems.
The research outcomes from this project will have influence on the design and
implementation of production networking systems and be integrated into core
computer science courses. This project will provide training to undergraduate
students, graduate students, and students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project mainly generates four types of data
including prototype implementations, software instrumentation benchmarks,
detailed reports of empirical evaluations, and curriculum materials. These data
will be maintained on the project website during the execution of the project
and for a minimum of three years after the project's ending date:
http://www.cs.binghamton.edu/~huilu/projects/CNets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.