* 1909346
* CNS: Core: Small: Elevating the Edge to be a Peer of the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Umakishore Ramachandran, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 515,600.00

Today, while mobile devices give users access to vast amounts of information,
all such information flows from the Cloud. The Cloud denotes a data center
endowed with hundreds-of-thousands of servers centrally located to achieve
economies of scale. Increasingly, sensor devices (such as those found in the
Internet of Things) are being deployed everywhere in the environment. These
sensors produce data 24x7, which must quickly be transformed into actionable
knowledge to better serve society. Unfortunately, sending these sensor streams
to the Cloud for processing is suboptimal for several reasons including latency
(i.e., time elapsed between sensing and actuation), saturation of the available
network bandwidth (due to the enormity of the sensor streams), lack of
actionable content (e.g., no action in front of a camera), and privacy concerns
for the collected data. Instead of sending the sensor data to the Cloud, there
is a need for having computational resources close to the sensors to quickly
process the sensor streams and quench the uninteresting sensor streams at the
source itself. Edge/Fog computing is a new paradigm that signifies such geo-
distributed computational resources (e.g., compute capability located in an
AT&amp;T cell tower) to extend the Cloud's centralized utility computing model
across the network edge, closer to where end-user devices and sensors operate.
To fully unlock the power of Edge computing, this project proposes research to
elevate the Edge to be a peer of the Cloud. To achieve this goal, we must
develop new technologies that enable Cloud-like functionality across a large
number of geo-distributed micro data centers instead of one large, centrally
located data center. The facets of the proposed research include geo-distributed
programming frameworks for facilitating the development of complex latency
sensitive applications that span the Edge-Cloud computational continuum; geo-
distributed data replication and consistency models that are resilient to
coordinated power failures; and support for rapid dynamic deployment of
application components while recognizing that both computational, networking,
and storage resources are limited at the Edge.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will enable the rapid prototyping of applications of societal
importance spanning healthcare, transportation, disaster recovery, and the like
that utilize sensor platforms in the Internet of Things (IoT) to convert sensed
information into actionable knowledge. When coupled with the proliferation of
IoT platforms, the Edge has the potential to be the next disruptive technology,
following in the footsteps of Cloud computing. In the Cloud computing
revolution, the availability of powerful software frameworks enabled the
development of complex applications such as search engines (e.g., Google, Bing),
e-Commerce (e.g., eBay), and social networking (e.g., Facebook, Twitter). This
proposal aims to spur the same revolution for Edge computing, thus unburdening
application developers from the complexities of managing geo-distributed
computational resources and freeing them to create next generation software.
Planned activities involve in situ studies via collaboration with the Georgia
Tech Police Department, which creates the potential for technology transfer and
direct societal benefits beyond technical
accomplishments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.