* 1909797
* FET: Small: Neuromorphic Spiking Neural Networks with Dynamic Graphene Synapses for Event-based Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Ryad Benosman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

With the emergence of social media and high-definition video streaming, there is
a growing need for a more efficient way to process streams of visual information
in terms of both bandwidth and energy. Currently, conventional image sensors
record visual information frame by frame, unnecessarily acquiring huge amounts
of redundant data since most pixels often may not change from one frame to the
next. Inspired by the human brain, this project will develop a neuromorphic
vision system, which is driven by the timings of changes in the dynamics of the
input signal instead of the conventional image-based stroboscopic acquisition.
This work will lead to transformative advances in bio-inspired neuromorphic
processing architectures, sensing, with major applications in self-driving
vehicles, neural prosthetics, robotics, and general artificial intelligence. The
project team will work closely with local communities to encourage participation
by students from all backgrounds including underrepresented group in computing
careers by fostering interest in neuromorphic computing and artificial
intelligence through outreach activities including lab demonstrations, summer
internships, and career workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to build a brain-inspired vision system by integrating a
neuromorphic, event-based silicon retina with a spiking neural network (SNN). In
most existing neuromorphic vision systems, the communication between the event-
based camera and the computing system is still limited by the memory bottleneck,
largely negating the benefits of the large bandwidth and low power consumption
of the neuromorphic camera. This project will: (1) build a spiking neural
network with realistic graphene-based dynamic synapses allowing advanced
computational capabilities; (2) develop a brain-inspired machine learning and
general computation capabilities; (3) connect the developed hardware with a
neuromorphic event-based silicon retina to demonstrate real-time operating
vision system with orders of magnitude better energy efficiency and
bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.