* 1909004
* CNS Core: Small: A Multi-Stakeholder Integrated Approach to Reduce Tail Latency Using Heterogeneity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Anand Sivasubramaniam, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

There are many different types of computer hardware. Examples include mobile
cell phone processors, machine learning accelerators, traditional server
processors, gaming platforms, and so forth, but these resources are specialized
and primarily utilized within a single domain. As cloud computing providers
broaden their markets and start offering more types of hardware, it opens an
opportunity to design heterogeneity-aware computing systems, which combine
different types of resources that are synergistic. This research will
investigate techniques for intentionally utilizing heterogeneity as a
controllable parameter for improving performance. Specifically, the research
will focus on the tail latency performance metric, which has been identified by
industry as an important performance metric affecting the responsiveness of
user-facing Internet services. To deploy and harness the right heterogeneity at
the right time, this research will consider the unique problems faced by three
key stakeholders (Application Deployer, Resource Manager, and Infrastructure
Provider). From the Application Deployer's perspective, the research will
consider how to decompose an application into phases/sub-components that can
benefit from different types of resources. From the Resource Manager's
perspective, the research will determine the right quantity and mixture of
resource types as well as how to schedule across these resources to minimize
tail latency. From the Infrastructure Provider's perspective, the research will
consider issues arising from sharing a mixture of different resources between
multiple applications. Additionally, the research will leverage cross-
stakeholder information towards a unified strategy for deploying and harnessing
heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be applicable to both
providers of data centers, such as cloud providers, as well as businesses that
use that infrastructure. For the provider, the research can improve the
performance and lower the cost of data centers, which are critical components of
the national infrastructure and economy. For the user, the research can enable
emerging interactive applications, such as complex data analytics and real-time
machine learning, to achieve high performance at low cost. This research
promotes using diverse mixtures of resources, which could spur the development
of new types of hardware and software. In addition to the broader research
impacts, there is a plan to enhance the undergraduate and graduate courses with
ideas and software generated by this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.