* 1909306
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards Intelligent Multi-User Augmented Reality with Edge Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Carlee Joe-Wong, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,995.00

Augmented reality (AR), which overlays digital content with the real world
around a user, has only recently become available to everyday users. AR
applications are finding initial adoption in multiple areas including education,
medicine, and gaming. Yet, the technology is currently in its infancy, limited
in its ability to adapt to user preferences and environmental conditions, and
offering restricted multi-user capabilities. Delivering adaptive multi-user AR
experiences poses challenges to existing mobile systems and adaptation
algorithms. From a mobile systems perspective, AR devices have strict energy and
computing constraints and may experience network failures. Algorithmically,
existing adaptation algorithms are often based on distributed machine learning,
which is not designed to run on constrained AR devices and may not cope well
with environment dynamics. This work will leverage edge computing as a solution
for the mobile systems challenges, designing system architectures optimized to
provide the similar but not identical user experiences required for multi-user
AR. The work will also quantify the performance of existing distributed learning
approaches under the constraints of multi-user AR, and will develop algorithms
that optimize the resulting performance tradeoffs. The work will finally result
in a dataset of AR-related inputs, outputs, and system and network resource
utilization characteristics, which will be released publicly for the use of a
wider community of researchers to validate their work on AR systems and
algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable AR capabilities not
possible with existing stand-alone or cloud-supported AR, and will extend the
scope of applications of machine learning in AR. The work will allow for the
development of new AR applications for education, medicine, retail, and gaming
that better engage users through delivering more personalized and dynamic user
experiences. The developed solutions will be tested in education-specific
settings at Duke Lemur Center, where AR will be used to educate visitors to the
center about endangered animals and conservation efforts. The research will be
integrated into course curricula at Duke and Carnegie Mellon and will be used as
the basis for several undergraduate and graduate independent research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.