* 1909177
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative: Coalescent Computing - New Theory, Mechanism and Platform for Adaptive Edge Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Yunhao Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 211,712.00

By moving computation to the edge of the Internet, the emerging edge computing
model promises to reduce application response time, improve user experience,
save bandwidth cost, and enhance data privacy. This project will establish a new
edge-computing theory called coalescent computing, where each application
program runs on an integrated virtual computing system, consisting of resources
from both edge devices and the cloud, which jointly support application
execution according to run-time conditions. The proposed research will establish
a novel framework of edge-cloud resource sharing, explore various implementation
mechanisms, deploy a hardware platform for experimental studies, develop
software tools to transform existing applications to their coalescent-computing
versions, and carry out two case studies. Its objective is to enable user
applications to seamlessly overcome the resource limitation of edge devices,
while keeping the benefits of low response time, communication reduction, and
data privacy that edge computing promises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
addresses the pressing need for a generic theory of adaptive edge computing,
with concrete implementation mechanisms that allow existing applications to take
advantage of edge computing without complete re-design. The proposed coalescent-
computing framework and its software tools offer a convenient way of
transforming existing application code into distributed software with enhanced
performance, response time, robustness and scalability, which all contribute to
better user experience. The integrated theoretical and experimental research
will advance our understanding of modern edge-computing systems. All software
tools developed from this project will be made open-source to help stimulate
other related research. The project also includes an education plan that
introduces edge computing into undergraduate/graduate courses, recruits from
under-represented student groups, and helps in club activities at the local high
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.