* 1909200
* Nonlinear Dynamics with Applications to Physical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mark Levi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 291,207.00

The project involves three directions. The first one deals with so-called twist
maps -- a basic building block in studying almost every kind of moving or
stationary physical system where friction is negligible. As an illustrating
example, a twist map can arise from the equation governing the distribution of
electrons in models of crystal lattices. Prior work by the investigator suggests
an unexpected mathematical effect; interpreted for the case of a crystal
lattice, this general mathematical result amounts to an unexpectedly low
electric resistance. The mechanism of this effect is not understood, and the
investigator works to develop a mathematical theory explaining it. The second
part of the project deals in particular with the recently discovered
"ponderomotive magnetism." Recall that any change in an electric field gives
rise to a magnetic field, as has been known since Faraday. Surprisingly, a
superficially similar effect takes place in mechanics (without electric fields
present), as was discovered only recently by the investigator and collaborators.
For example, particles in the gravitational field of a spinning (non-spherical)
asteroid behave as if they were charged and in the presence of a magnetic field
-- with neither charge nor the field actually present. This is a mysterious and
fundamental mathematical phenomenon. A goal of this project is to develop a
geometrical explanation of this effect using tools of differential geometry. The
third part of the project explores the recently discovered connection between
Hill's equation (ubiquitous in innumerable problems in physics and engineering)
on the one hand, and the "tire track" problem on the other. The main value of
this topic lies in unifying and simplifying two seemingly distinct areas of
mathematics, resulting in richer understanding of both, and perhaps in new
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves three directions unified
by use of geometry and analysis with physical motivation. The first direction
involves area-preserving twist maps of the cylinder; such maps arise in many
settings, e.g. the Frenkel-Kontorova (F-K) model of a crystal lattice. The
investigator studies whether the robustness of periodic orbits with respect to
certain perturbations (e.g., addition of a tilt to the periodic potential in the
F-K example) increases with the number of harmonics in the map. Two entirely
different (and slightly simpler) objects are known to show an analogous effect:
circle mappings and Mathieu-type Hill's equations. If successful, the project
would add a new class of systems to the latter two classes. The second direction
of research includes the goal to explain geometrically the recently discovered
"ponderomotive magnetism," in which rapid time-periodic oscillation of a
conservative force field gives rise to a Faraday-like effect discovered by the
investigator and collaborators through a normal-form computation: particles in
such a field behave as if they possessed electric charge in the presence of a
magnetic field, though neither an electric charge nor a magnetic field is
present. One of the goals is to explain the geometry underlying this effect. The
third direction explores questions raised by the connection between Hill's
equation (arising in many areas of mathematics and applications) on the one hand
and the geometrical "tire track" problem on the other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.