* 1909523
* CIF: Small: Super-Resolution for Imaging Science
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Rongrong Wang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Acton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 155,000.00

Images obtained using traditional approaches relying on hardware are limited by
the level of resolution achievable. However, there is an increasing demand for
high image resolutions to enhance medical diagnosis, seismic hazard monitoring,
and camera power saving that are limited by what hardware can support without
increasing cost. In order to break the resolution bottleneck imposed by
hardware, software-based super-resolution techniques that rely on machine
learning are being developed that achieve unprecedented performance. However,
even the most sophisticated techniques in this category lack solid theoretical
guidance about how to choose tuning parameters or about under what conditions
exact recovery and stability can be guaranteed. This project will address the
theory behind a certain class of techniques, called convex super-resolution
techniques for high-dimensional sensing geometries, and seek to determine
theoretical limits and performance guarantees for problems such as exact and
stable recovery. The successful outcome of this the project will help advance
super-resolution techniques in imaging science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imaging
techniques such as time-reversal suffer from a resolution bottleneck determined
by the physical conditions of the imaging modality including limited source
wavelengths, small azimuth in the acquisition geometry, and band-limited
characteristics of the receiver arrays. The proposed research lies at the
intersection of the fields of compressed sensing and inverse problems. Super-
resolution is a long-standing demand in inverse problems and imaging science,
while the involvement of sparsity is quite recent. Although sparsity is only
rigorously shown to be useful to the super-resolution of 1D signals under direct
Fourier measurements, the theory has the potential to be extended to high
dimensional settings and to partial differential equation measurements. In this
project, the Principal Investigator aims to build such a theoretical extension
and to demonstrate that the resulting high dimensional inversion scheme can
outperform a series of ad-hoc applications of the existing 1D inversion
algorithms to each column of the data matrix. More explicitly, the following two
types of optimization problems that lead to super-resolution will be analyzed:
1) the L1 norm regularized optimization framework for inverse source problems
with physics-driven particle differential equation constraints; and 2) the total
variation norm regularized optimization framework for image quantization under a
finite bit budget.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.