* 1909683
* AF: Small: Algebraic Methods in Codes and Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Eric Allender, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,956.00

This project investigates the power and limitations of algebraic computation and
algebraic techniques in computer science. Arithmetic circuits are a very natural
model of algebraic computation and most natural algebraic algorithms such as
matrix multiplication, fast Fourier transforms, algorithms for computing the
determinant, and others can be implemented via arithmetic circuits. This project
will investigate the complexity of algebraic computation via the model of
arithmetic circuits. In recent years algebraic techniques have shown up as an
extremely powerful tool influencing all areas of computer science, including
even the understanding of problems that are not inherently algebraic. Algebraic
techniques have also found striking applications in combinatorics, coding
theory, and pseudorandomness. Due to the profound impact of algebraic techniques
and algebraic algorithms, this naturally motivates a deeper understanding of the
power and limits of these methods, and this project aims to develop new tools
and techniques in order to do this. One of the focuses of the project will be to
harness algebraic techniques for the construction of efficient and local error-
correcting codes. Mentoring and training of young researchers is an important
part of the educational component of the project. Additionally, the investigator
will co-organize the Women in Theory workshop in the summer of 2020, which will
bring together women researchers in theoretical computer science from around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two main problems that this project will explore
are those of proving lower bounds for arithmetic circuits and the problem of
polynomial identity testing. These are some of the most central questions in
algebraic complexity theory, and this project aims to understand these via the
study of bounded-depth arithmetic circuits. The project will also study two
other very related problems of polynomial factoring and polynomial
reconstruction. In addition, the project will use algebraic techniques to
construct new families of error-correcting codes with extremely efficient
encodings and with sublinear-time decoding and testing algorithms. In
particular, the project will attempt to understand the optimal rate/query
complexity tradeoffs in the construction of locally decodable codes and locally
testable codes. This project will bring together ideas and tools from a broad
array of disciplines and has the potential to have significant practical
applications to information storage and retrieval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.