* 1909096
* III: Small: Partitioning Big Data for the High Performance Computation of Persistent Homology
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Philip Wilsey, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,344.00

New insights with machine learning exists across may domains, including, for
example, medicine, social media, image processing, biology, and computer and
network security. Machine learning is able to process large, high-dimensional
data sets that are beyond human capabilities. One emerging method of machine
learning is based on a branch of mathematics called topology that is sometimes
able to discover knowledge that is not available using conventional methods. The
field of topology is concerned with of the shape of an object and Persistent
Homology is the critical method in topology used to extract the features of a
shape. Persistent Homology will classify an object by the size and number of
holes and voids in that object. Unfortunately, computing the Persistent Homology
for an object requires significant amounts of memory and long run-times that
increases exponentially in the number of points that forms that object. This
project will treat the object formed by the data and subdivide it into smaller
regions for the parallel computation of Persistent Homology on each region. The
results from the regional analyses will then be assembled together and any
duplicate or missing results will be identified and restored in a post analysis
step. The computation on all of the regions will be completed in substantially
less time and in much less total memory than a single computation on the entire
data set. Testing of the methods developed will be performed using a variety of
synthetic and real-world data. The synthetic data will permit controlled studies
on performance and scalability. Realworld data from a variety of sources and
especially data where the small topological features are significant (such as
data from brain scans) will be used. This project will propel the application of
topology based analysis to discover new insights and meaningful information from
massive high-dimensional data. An expansion of student training in data mining
through topological-based methods will be achieved with the addition of classes,
projects (senior project, MS Theses, PhD Dissertations, and so on), seminars,
and research co-op training experiences. Students at all levels will be impacted
and special emphasis placed on minority and underrepresented student groups
participation. This project will also participate in the Women in Science and
Engineering programs at UC. The project investigators will engage local area
K-12 students, international exchange students and researchers at UC's
collaborative institutions, UC's Medical School, Cincinnati Children's Medical
Center, the Air Force Research Lab, and local industries with information and
seminars on this project investigations and results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes to combine the fields of Approximate Computing with Topological
Data Analysis to dramatically reduce the computational and memory requirements
to use Topological Data Analysis on very large data sets. In particular, this
project will develop approximate methods for computing Persistent Homology that
dramatically increase the sizes of data sets for which data mining methods based
on topological data analysis can be applied. This project expects to increase
the size of the input data set that can be analyzed by Topological Data Analysis
methods by at least 3-5 orders of magnitude. While approximate methods can
introduce error, the features identified by the approximate methods will
identify regions of the point cloud where an upscaling steps and regional
computations of Persistent Homology can be used (in parallel) to establish more
precise boundaries of those features. The project will develop algorithmic
improvements, formal statements on the correctness, error bounds, and
complexities of the algorithms and approximation techniques. These techniques
have important implications on the ability to apply topological data analysis
techniques to much larger data sets than currently
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.