* 1909516
* SHF: Small: Detecting the 1%: Growing the Science of Vulnerability Detection
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Timothy Menzies, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,998.00

Daily, news reports reveal the latest increasingly sophisticated security
attacks that threaten our national security, our cyber infrastructure, our
health, our finances, our children, and democracy itself. Yet, studies indicate
that discovered vulnerabilities can be very damaging but are rare, appearing in
about 1-4% of software files. Finding vulnerabilities has been described as
"searching for a needing in a haystack." But, protecting the American people,
the American homeland, and the American way of life means that software
organizations need to detect vulnerabilities so that they can be fixed before
the product is used by customers, which makes the vulnerabilities available to
attackers. This project will perform studies to understand the characteristics
and location of the most risky vulnerabilities so that special effort can be
spent and automated tools can be developed to detect the vulnerabilities. The
work will improve the ability of software organizations to produce secure
software products so that people can rely upon computer systems to perform
critical functions and to process, store, and communicate sensitive information
securely. The research project also involves the mentoring of PhD students and
innovation in software-security teaching for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making informed decisions on what code to review
and test can improve a team's ability to find and remove more vulnerabilities.
Therefore, security engineers looking to prioritize security inspection and
testing efforts may be better served by vulnerability-based detection techniques
and tools and effective vulnerability prediction. The goal of this project is to
aid software practitioners in detecting exploitable vulnerabilities through
empirical study of the characteristics of vulnerabilities and through the
development and evaluation of prediction models enhanced with recent research
from artificial intelligence. The project will explore characteristics of
vulnerabilities with a focus on those that pose the highest security risk.
Knowledge about the fundamental characteristics of vulnerabilities can be used
in the development of vulnerability-focused tools to aid teams in effectively
and efficiently detecting vulnerabilities. The fundamental vulnerability
characteristics can also be used to develop novel metrics and methods for
building vulnerability prediction models enhanced with recent research from
artificial intelligence. The project team will also provide a testbed and test
data to help other security researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.