* 1909631
* Toward Precision Cosmology on Small Scales: A Data-Intensive Approach
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Andreas Berlind, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 342,558.00

There is a wealth of information about both cosmology and galaxy formation
encoded in small scales, but the relevant physics is poorly understood and
computationally prohibitive. Halo-based models bypass this problem by
parameterizing the relation between galaxies and dark-matter halos, but contain
systematic errors and are not sufficiently accurate for reliable statistical
tests. A new data-intensive approach that this team has made computationally
tractable constructs realistic catalogs from simulations and measures clustering
statistics exactly as is done for real data. This work will move past proof-of-
concept to perform stringent tests of the Lambda-Cold-Dark-Matter (LCDM)
cosmological model on small scales. The result will be a software emulator that
uses a grid of simulations to predict galaxy clustering statistics as a function
of both cosmology and galaxy-halo parameters. All mock catalogs and analysis
codes will be publicly released, which will enable many additional projects. The
project also adds training in the critical area of statistics and data analysis
to the current Fisk-Vanderbilt bridge program that helps students from
underrepresented groups move into a PhD program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current system has already been used to test fixed cosmological models against
measurements in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, revealing significant tension with
the simplest form of the LCDM plus halo model. This next study will be carried
out by identifying optimal measurements, extending the parameterization of the
galaxy-halo relation to allow for subtle features (including non-Poisson
statistics, spatial and velocity bias, and galaxy assembly bias), and
strengthening the modeling pipeline. This will enable the most stringent tests
of fixed cosmological models, and probe those subtle features of the galaxy-halo
connection that have been added. The final ambitious part of the project is to
allow cosmological parameters to vary within the parameter search, by exploiting
approximate methods to use a single cosmology simulation to predict the halo
distributions of other cosmologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.