* 1909488
* CIF: Small: End to End Security-Oriented Optimization of Image Acquisition Pipelines
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Nasir Memon, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 505,800.00

Ensuring integrity of digital images is one of the most challenging problems of
our times. Increasing capabilities of digital media editing software has spawned
a torrent of shocking manipulation examples, including the infamous DeepFakes
which has been deemed a looming challenge for privacy, democracy, and national
security. Many solutions proposed to-date have fallen short and can be rendered
ineffective with very simple post-processing. In particular, strong compression
applied by social networks and photo sharing services render existing
authentication protocols unreliable. Moreover, increasing adoption of deep
learning and computational photography in imaging processors in digital cameras
creates new challenges even in native photo authentication. This project will
use modern machine learning techniques to pursue security-oriented design of
image acquisition and distribution workflows to ensure that image integrity and
provenance can be assured, thereby addressing an emerging problem in this
social-media driven world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to tackle:
1) optimization of the imaging pipeline to facilitate reliable forensic analysis
in the most challenging conditions; 2) design of training protocols that
generalize to various authentication problems; 3) optimization of the entire
acquisition and distribution workflow, including both the imaging processor and
lossy compression. Preliminary experiments indicate that by exploiting feedback
from post-distribution forensic analysis, the imaging pipeline can be modified
to facilitate content authentication. A neural imaging pipeline can learn to
introduce imperceptible artifacts, akin to digital watermarks, which
significantly increase manipulation detection accuracy, from 45% to over 90%.
Further gains will result from the explorations on this project along the
thrusts noted above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.