* 1909035
* Algorithms and Analysis for Models in Materials Science, Fluids, and Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jeremy Marzuola, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 338,686.00

The project will span applications to problems in physics, chemistry, materials
science, and data science; ideas from several mathematical disciplines,
including partial differential equations, microlocal analysis, and harmonic
analysis, will be used. Mathematics from these areas has made great strides
recently on a variety of applications related to molecular structure in quantum
mechanics, dynamics of atoms depositing on a surface, partitioning networks into
clustered groups, stability of complex phenomena in fluid dynamics, and more.
The research here is based largely on newly-developed theories from partial
differential equations and probability, though several components of the work
will be devoted to implementation of computational algorithms and analysis.
Projects will involve training researchers at all levels, including
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars, as well as
collaboration with researchers from statistics, physics, computational
chemistry, scientific computing, and network science. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research project is aimed at the study of several important
interdisciplinary topics ranging from fundamental questions about molecular
structure to explorations of algorithms in data analysis. For instance, the
principal investigator will continue work on bifurcation theory in models from
density functional theory, as well as on finding numerical and analytic tools
for studying nonlinear bifurcations of topological lattice models arising in
quantum optics. A substantial part of the project will be done in collaboration
with students and colleagues developing numerical methods for fast, accurate
computation of fluid flows in complicated geometries, with the intention of
making experimental predictions. Special attention will be paid to highly
nonlinear models and applications of tools from spectral theory. Beyond physical
applications, spectral theory can also play important roles in data analysis,
specifically in spectral clustering. Along these lines, using ideas from
probability, optimization and harmonic analysis, the investigator aims to
develop algorithms for sub-graph detection in networks, and more generally
Markov chain partitioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.