* 1909555
* III: Small: pCAR: Discovering and Leveraging Plausibly Causal (p-causal) Relationships  to Understand Complex Dynamic Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* K. Selcuk Candan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 493,466.00

Today, successfully tackling many urgent challenges in&lt;br/&gt;socio-
economically critical domains (such as sustainability, public&lt;br/&gt;health,
and biology) requires obtaining a deeper understanding of
causal&lt;br/&gt;relationships and interactions among a diverse spectrum of
entities from&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional data. For example, the emergence and
propagation of an&lt;br/&gt;epidemic involves a causally complex interplay of
entities, including&lt;br/&gt;individuals and their social-interactions,
physical short-range and&lt;br/&gt;long-range networks of mobility, and
intervention decisions (such as&lt;br/&gt;school closures or restrictions on
mobility) by decision makers. With&lt;br/&gt;the aim of filling this important
hole and enabling applications and&lt;br/&gt;services with significant economic
and public health impact, the project carries&lt;br/&gt;out research on
causally-aware data-driven science and engineering,&lt;br/&gt;including data-
supported causal analysis. The project also contributes&lt;br/&gt;to workforce
growth, provides an excellent context for doctoral,&lt;br/&gt;master's, and
undergraduate level research and teaching. Future&lt;br/&gt;researchers that
have the skills in both data analysis and management&lt;br/&gt;are being trained
and students are being introduced to career pathways&lt;br/&gt;through their
participation in research, publications, and partnerships&lt;br/&gt;with domain
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research team hypothesizes
that data analysis provides&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for identifying
relationships that can potentially be&lt;br/&gt;causal. They further hypothesize
that data can be used for strengthening&lt;br/&gt;and weakening causal
assumptions, and for pruning relationships that are&lt;br/&gt;certainly not
causal. To validate and leverage these hypotheses, they&lt;br/&gt;introduce the
novel concepts of 'plausible causality' (p-causality) and&lt;br/&gt;'plausibly
causal (p-causal) relationships' and they develop&lt;br/&gt;techniques to (i)
discover p-causal interactions and relationships, (ii)&lt;br/&gt;maintain these
p-casual relationships in systems where causality itself&lt;br/&gt;evolves over
time, and (iii) use discovered p-causal relationships to&lt;br/&gt;support
efficient and effective data analytics to study complex,
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;systems. In particular, they develop new models to
capture&lt;br/&gt;context-sensitive plausibly causal (p-causal) relationships in
complex,&lt;br/&gt;dynamic systems and design novel and scalable causally-
aware&lt;br/&gt;data analysis algorithms that leverage known or hypothesized
p-causal&lt;br/&gt;relationships among entities within different and potentially
evolving&lt;br/&gt;contexts to deal with data sparsity, imprecision, and
noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.