* 1909291
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Acceleration Algorithms for Large-scale Nonconvex Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yingbin Liang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Non-convex optimization problems are ubiquitous in data science, machine
learning and artificial intelligence. Non-convexity, together with the high
dimension of the model parameters and the large volume of uncertain data,
presents significant challenges for solving these problems. Although popular
methods have been proposed to speed up optimization algorithms for solving
practical large-scale problems, these algorithms do not necessarily converge for
non-convex problems, and some of them do not even converge in the convex
setting. The primary goal of this project is to develop principled approaches
for designing acceleration algorithms with provable theoretical convergence
guarantees and superior practical performance for large-scale non-convex
optimization. The developed algorithms will be applicable to big data problems
in various domains, including deep learning, computer vision, medical image
processing, social network learning, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
design novel, fast, and scalable acceleration algorithms for solving a variety
of large-scale non-convex problems including constrained, composite, and saddle
point optimization problems. This will include the development of both novel
direct acceleration methods inspired by Nesterov's approach, and of indirect
acceleration methods via proximal point methods for different types of problems.
The performance of these acceleration methods will be explored when combined
with randomization methods in order to enhance their scalability with data
dimension and volume. Comprehensive numerical validations will be conducted for
application problems arising in large-scale data analysis. This project will
contribute to a synthesis of optimization with data science, and will be
incorporated into curriculum development, and in the training of students and
future big data researchers and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.