* 1909121
* CHS: Small: Rethinking Haptic-Based Remote Communication Leveraging the DeafBlind Community's Tactile Intuitions
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Terra Edwards, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

How would persons with 2 sensory losses - vision and hearing - communicate? They
have to rely on another sense for that - touch. In contrast, the current
environment is saturated with communication technologies that are skewed toward
the visual and auditory channels. Individuals talk on mobile phones, chat via
video conferencing, or message through various texting applications. Without
being physically present with one another, individuals can connect in a variety
of ways. Despite advances in new technologies, rich touch feedback is largely
missing in remote communication tools. Most often, touch feedback is used as a
cueing mechanism such as through vibrations that alert the user about the
arrival of a message but convey little of its content. The omission of touch
feedback prevents many new technologies from capturing the social and emotional
dimensions of the experience and leaves new technologies inaccessible to those
who rely on touch as a primary means of communication. This project rethinks
touch-based, remote communication by leveraging the tactile intuitions of the
protactile DeafBlind (DB) community. From this innovative community, a new
language is emerging that enables humans to communicate with one another solely
through touch. This project, in partnership with the DB community, aims to
understand the core functions of intuitive, touch-based communication signals.
Findings will inform the design of new wearable devices that attempt to
replicate these touch-based profiles for richer remote communication experiences
for all individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of this project
are to (a) understand how core components of local and remote interaction can be
re-routed through the tactile sensory channel and (b) design technology which
will support such re-routings by expanding and reinforcing the tactile
capacities of its users. To accomplish these aims, anthropological approaches to
communication are synthesized with engineering to drive the design of a wearable
haptic device that enables core functions of communication via tactile feedback.
Using rapid ethnography coupled with haptic systems design, this work will
establish guidelines for tactile-based communication schemes while creating a
platform from which independent remote communication among DB individuals can
evolve and richer communication experiences for all individuals are possible.
This project will increase the general understanding of the tactile channel as a
primary mode of communication. It will also advance understanding of human
abilities to communicate in multimodal ways, promoting optimal information
transfer when all senses are available and promoting higher standards for access
of information when sensory differences exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.