* 1909534
* WoU-MMA: Collaborative Research: Constraining the Nuclear Equation of State and Neutron Star Astrophysics Through Multi-messenger and Multi-object Observations of Neutron Stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Richard O'Shaughnessy, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2023
* USD 405,734.00

The revolutionary discovery and multi-messenger follow-up of the first known
merging binary neutron star (GW170817) has demonstrated the unique opportunities
that observations and analysis of such mergers can provide. A scientific
collaboration between Rochester Institute of Technology and the University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, will develop the research infrastructure needed to exploit
gravitational wave (GW) observations and electromagnetic observations in order
to determine the nature of dense matter. The research team will develop a
flexible procedure to self-consistently infer the nuclear equation of state
(EOS) for neutron stars (NS), directly from multiple measurements of many NS,
using GW measurements of mergers, X-ray observations of galactic NS, and light
curves and spectra from the resulting kilonova explosion. An EOS is an equation,
like the ideal gas law of physics, which describes the state of matter under a
given set of physical conditions. Using the tools derived to understand the
nuclear EOS, the investigators will determine if binary mergers are responsible
for the observed r-process elemental abundances. The rapid neutron-capture
process (r-process) is a set of nuclear reactions by which many of the atomic
elements heavier than iron are produced in astrophysical settings. The project
will include the training of young researchers as the first generation of truly
multi-messenger astrophysicists, and the principal investigators will create new
course materials for introductory general relativity, to educate the next
generation of scientists in results from GW astronomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program has two major goals: to constrain the nature of dense nuclear
matter and to determine whether NS mergers alone explain the abundances of
r-process elements. The research team will create new high-precision surrogate
models for kilonova light curves and spectra, calibrated to detailed radiative-
transfer calculations. To draw inferences with data from multiple messengers and
multiple objects, where each data source is connected to the EOS in a different
way, the researchers will create a unified Bayesian inference engine, called
Concordance. This inference engine will constrain dense nuclear matter and the
composition of the neutron star core. It will also infer the NS merger rate,
ejecta mass, and ejecta composition, which will allow the scientists to predict
the element-by-element r-process abundances in the present-day local universe
due to the observed population of binary NS mergers. They will compare their
prediction to observations; determine whether and what kind of missing
population (like black hole (BH)-NS) would be required to reconcile observations
with element abundances; and see whether that missing population is consistent
with formation scenarios and observational constraints. This project advances
the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.