* 1909858
* A Leap in Sensitivity for CHARA/CLASSIC Optical Interferometry for Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Theo ten Brummelaar, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,327,673.00

Optical interferometry uses an array of smaller telescopes connected together to
achieve the angular resolution of telescopes many hundreds of meters across.
Such interferometers have the resolution of extremely large telescopes but have
the sensitivity of small telescopes. They can see stars in exquisite detail but
can so far only see relatively bright stars. The main goal of this project is to
improve the sensitivity of one of these interferometers called the Center for
High Angular Resolution Astronomy (CHARA) Array, which is located at Mount
Wilson Observatory. Renovations to the camera, optical glass, and data recording
will enable studying stars 10 times fainter than currently possible. Such
improved sensitivity will enable investigations that may inform whether life may
exist elsewhere in the universe, and open up new areas of research. This program
will also include new facilities in the CHARA visitor center, which hosts 15,000
visitors each year, and a collaboration with the American Museum of Natural
History to display current science bulletins at the CHARA visitor
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CHARA Array longest baseline yields angular
diameter measurements as small as 0.7 mas in K band improving to 0.2 mas at R.
CHARA can resolve stellar disks all along the main sequence from O- to M-types,
whereas there will be no main sequence stars resolvable by the next generation
of single aperture telescopes. The most significant problem in ground based
interferometry is sensitivity. This program will increase the limit of the
CLASSIC/CLIMB beam combiner by 2 magnitudes in the near infrared. This will be
achieved by replacing the 20-year-old PICNIC detector with a modern SELEX MOVPE
SAPHIRA based detection system. This upgrade will also include spectral
resolution in both H and K bands, simultaneous observation in both bands, and a
polarization split. With enhanced sensitivity it will be possible to survey a
much broader range of stellar diameters and temperatures, the disks around young
stars, winds from massive stars, interacting and detached binary stars,
transient events, as well as open up new opportunities for guest observers
through the community access program funded by NSF/MSIP. More sensitivity will
also vastly expand the ability to observe the cores of Active Galactic Nuclei
(AGN). The CHARA could directly confirm or deny a binary structure in an AGN
core for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.