* 1909715
* NSF-BSF: SHF: CCF: Small: Collaborative Research: Hardware/Software Design of Durable Data Structures and Algorithms for Non-Volatile Main Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Tali Moreshet, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 112,639.00

Memory is said to be non-volatile if it does not lose its contents when it loses
power (i.e., crashes). Hardware for non-volatile memory is advancing fast, and
soon it is expected to displace volatile DRAM for main memory in many
architectures. This project entails developing concurrent data structures and
software that can exploit emerging forms of non-volatile memory that provide
simple, faster, and more energy-efficient crash recovery. This research has the
potential to benefit society by enhancing the robustness and fault-tolerance of
systems on which modern society increasingly depends. The results of this
research may also significantly improve energy-efficiency, since such systems
would require smaller caches and fewer accesses to energy-hungry secondary
storage devices. New curriculum development activities are also planned as part
of this project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how to make
common data structures, such as queues, skip-lists, hash maps, and others,
durable. Different levels of durability are considered, with special emphasis on
high performance and ease of programming. The project also evaluates several
memory architectures, including both conventional multilevel memory and emerging
near-data processing architectures. A complementary effort investigates hardware
primitives needed to flush caches, and to move data between volatile and non-
volatile memory regions. Building on these efforts, the project will produce a
collection of performance and energy-efficient durable concurrent data
structures, packaged as software libraries that allow for easy adaptation by
programmers. Evaluation will be done on synthetic benchmarks as well as
concurrent applications such as concurrent key-value stores, work-stealing
schedulers, and concurrent memory management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.