* 1909562
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative Research: A Stochastic Resource Allocation and Task Assignment Framework for Mobile Edge Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Marwan Krunz, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Mobile edge computing (MEC) is an emerging platform for supporting rapidly
growing low-latency mobile applications and Internet of Things (IoT) systems. It
involves deploying nodes with computing, storage, and communication capabilities
at the edge of mobile networks and utilizing client mobile devices for computing
and data processing services near the end users. This project addresses the
challenges of resource allocation and task assignment in MEC systems, enabling
horizontal and vertical cooperation among edge nodes, remote cloud data centers,
and mobile users for performance optimization of multiple services with
different quality of service (QoS) requirements. Specifically, a stochastic
framework for cooperative resource allocation and task assignment in MEC systems
is designed using deep learning, stochastic game, and optimization techniques.
The research agenda includes several synergistic thrusts. First, the complex
interactions among the various entities of an MEC system will be investigated,
new optimization problems will be formulated, and novel centralized and
distributed algorithms will be developed. These algorithms enable a service
provider to optimally orchestrate its computational tasks under stochastic and
time-varying network states and task arrivals. Lightweight heuristic algorithms
will also be designed and compared with the optimal solutions. Second, network
slicing and resource allocation schemes will be developed so as to allow
multiple service providers to dynamically share a virtualized heterogeneous MEC
network infrastructure and jointly optimize resource utilization and task
assignment for different services. Third, an experimental testbed will be
instrumented and used to validate through proof-of-concept prototyping the
algorithms developed under this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MEC solutions
developed in this project are expected to significantly enhance user experience
for many emerging low-latency mobile services such as intelligent transportation
and smart cities. The research outcomes, coupled with industry collaboration,
will provide fresh ideas for technology transfer and will impact related
industry standards. The proposed research is fully integrated into the
educational plan to train undergraduate and graduate students. The project will
also broaden participation of underrepresented groups by reaching out to various
organizations. Project outcomes, which include technical reports, presentations,
results, datasets, software, and other artifacts, will be made available online.
A data repository will be maintained during the course of this project and for
at least five additional years after its completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.