* 1909055
* Development of a roughened inner sphere for the three-meter model of the Earth's core
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Daniel Lathrop, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2023
* USD 591,439.00

Our planet's magnetic field directly affects near-Earth radiation during solar
storms. This makes it important to understand the process that generates the
magnetic field, and also to develop our capacity to predict its changes. This
Division of Earth Science Instrumentation and Facilities Program award supports
a project which aims to better understand the origin and changes of the Earth's
magnetic field. Since these ongoing changes are a result of processes deep in
the planet's outer core, it is difficult to do direct studies. The investigators
have developed an NSF funded laboratory model of the Earth's outer core: the
three-meter liquid sodium experiment. This project will involve a major design
modification to the sodium experiment that is needed in order to better mimic
the Earth's core, produce model magnetic fields, and enhance our ability to
predict magnetic field changes. The project also serves to encourage public
appreciation and understanding of geomagnetism through TV and web based
documentaries, as well as videos posted on the research group's YouTube channel
(www.youtube.com/user/n3umh); to open efforts and activities to non-scientists
through frequent tours of the laboratory to a broad range of audiences; and to
educate a new generation of scholars in geophysics experiments, including
undergraduate mentoring and graduate student training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Earth's main magnetic field is central to making our planet a habitable home.
During solar maximum, solar storms produce deadly charged particle radiation.
The geodynamo magnetic field, along with the Earth's atmosphere, serves to
shield us from the worst of these. Nonetheless, solar storms can affect radio
communications, the power grid, and spacecraft operations. Thus, we are
motivated to understand the origins of the Earth's magnetic field, explore its
dynamics, and potentially forecast its behavior. While we know the field changes
dramatically over time, including through erratic reversals, there is no
reliable predictive science for the weather occurring in the core and no full
understanding of the Earth's dynamo generation. An NSF-funded three-meter (3-m)
laboratory model of the Earth's core produces induced magnetic fields from
rotating turbulence, modeling the dynamics of the Earth's core, and can be used
for testing dynamo magnetic field forecasting. One second of experiments mimic
approximately 5,000 years of core turbulence (based on the relative magnetic
dipole diffusion time scales), allowing observations of detailed magnetic field
evolution not possible for the Earth. While previous experiments have yielded
important results in hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics since operations
began in 2008, the 3-m experiment now requires significant design modifications
to increase magnetic field gain. This will be critical for continued studies,
including those that directly address questions related to dynamo generation and
sustenance. This project will undertake a major modification of the 3-m liquid
sodium system that will allow attempting dynamo magnetic field action, and open
the parameter space of the system to expand the potential of
magnetohydrodynamics experiments. The project also makes direct contributions to
the public appreciation and understanding of geomagnetism through TV and web
based documentaries and frequent facility tours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.