* 1909664
* Macromolecular crowding in vitro and in cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Gary Pielak, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 968,151.00

Protein-protein interactions regulate all cellular functions, yet they are
almost always studied in water rather than in the complex and crowded
environment that exists inside cells. The results of this project will fill a
key gap that prevents a complete description of metabolism. The goal of moving
quantitative biophysics from simple solutions to crowded environments, including
inside living cells, is a major challenge with important outcomes. The knowledge
gained will add to both the fundamental understanding of biology and inform
efforts to produce and stabilize protein-based reagents. The work will also
facilitate the training of undergraduate and graduate students in the practice
of cutting-edge research. All these efforts are key to building the US
bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to gain
broadly-applicable knowledge about protein-protein interactions under
physiologically-relevant conditions. The focus is on homodimeric interactions in
vitro, in Escherichia coli cells and in zebrafish (Danio rerio) oocytes. The
overarching hypothesis is that electrostatic interactions between cosolutes and
protein complexes dominate the effect of hard-core excluded volume under
physiologically-relevant conditions. More specifically, electrostatic
attractions between cosolutes and protein complexes are expected to decrease
stability of the complexes, whereas electrostatic repulsions are expected to
increase stability. The supported research will also deliver to modelers and
theoreticians the information required to produce accurate simulations of
cellular processes. This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics
Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.