* 1909559
* Modeling Light Filamentation Science
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Alejandro Aceves, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 169,989.00

Thanks to major advances in laser technology, there is an ongoing interest in
the study of light interacting with matter, in particular for intense laser
beams propagating long distances in the atmosphere. Laser pulses exceeding tens
of gigawatts power can be used in many applications including remote sensing
through Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR), lightning and weather control and
free-space optics communication. Current research on free space optical
communications (FSO), both classical and quantum, is intended to facilitate
exchange of information within a network of satellites, between the Earth and
satellites and between the Earth and drones. This and other aspects to be
studied, such as diffraction control, are in line with topics within Quantum
Leap, one of the NSF's 10 Big Ideas. In searching for optimal performance, it is
critical to seek better understanding of a range of spatial and temporal effects
that take place while light interacts with molecules in the atmosphere. For
this, proper mathematical and numerical modeling assist experimentalists to for
example consider novel modes of propagation (optical filaments versus vortex
filaments) and the possible coexistence of multi- color (multi-frequency)
filaments. Research performed under this award will have a strong synergy with
experimental groups, enriching the interdisciplinary nature of the project and
enhancing the learning experience of applied mathematics graduate students to be
trained in a multifaceted approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the general theme
of light matter interactions, the PI and students will investigate
spatiotemporal dynamics of light propagation in nonlinear media. The research
addresses well defined questions related to the characterization of highly
nonlinear optical modes of different types (filament modes, vortex modes and
combinations) in three different media: air (Kerr media), carrying two
frequencies (typically ultraviolet and infrared), nonlinear crystals (quadratic
media) where little is known on the theory of filament formation at phase
mismatch and on the formation of filaments in discrete/continuum nonlinear media
with fractional diffraction and quadratic dispersion. The first two topics
represent significant extensions of ongoing research in filament science, based
either on recent experimental observations or potential new experiments on which
the PI has been and will be directly involved. By the nature and objectives of
the research, the effort supported by this award will benefit from continuing
interactions with several experimental teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.