* 1909028
* CHS: Small: Appearance Modeling by Synthesis
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Pieter Peers, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,931.00

Appearance modeling aims to create digital representations of materials, ranging
from imaginary materials drawn by artists to reproductions of physical
materials. To date, the most successful methods for creating realistic digital
materials have been data-driven, where data captured from a physical material
sample is used to reconstruct a digital representation. Most prior work assumes
that the measurements fully constrain the reconstruction process. This project
will explore a new paradigm that views appearance modeling as a constrained
synthesis process instead of a reconstruction / interpolation process. This
change in paradigm requires a rethinking of fundamental appearance modeling
assumptions. First, constrained synthesis produces a distribution of possible
solutions rather than a single most likely solution as in classic appearance
modeling methods. This creates opportunities for users to participate in the
appearance modeling process (for example, by selecting the "best"' solution
according to subjective or artistic criteria). Furthermore, instead of building
up a solution with additional appearance measurements, constrained synthesis
reduces the solution distribution with each additional measurement; that is to
say, it promotes a subtractive approach to appearance modeling. A constrained
synthesis approach to appearance modeling also offers an elegant and scalable
solution to reproducing a material's appearance from insufficient or incomplete
data. This research builds on methods from computer vision and machine learning,
and has the potential to advance the state-of-the-art in both fields. More
broadly, the reconstruction and synthesis methods developed will be applicable
to fields that model high dimensional data and for which it is difficult to
obtain samples. The results from the proposed research activities will be
incorporated in new and existing courses, recruitment activities at the graduate
and undergraduate level, and outreach activities promoting STEM to
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance constrained synthesis
as a new paradigm for appearance modeling through three research thrusts that
explore generative adversarial networks (GANs) for: (1) unconstrained material
generators, (2) constrained material generators, and (3) empowering users to
author new material generators. In each of these research thrusts, the concept
of a (potentially non-linear) projection that provides a mapping from the high
dimensional target distribution to one or more lower-dimensional source
distributions plays a central role. Associating a discriminator with each
projection yields novel GAN architectures that decouple the spaces of the
training data, conditions, and the target distribution. Building on the concept
of projections and the resulting decoupling of distribution spaces, each of the
three research thrusts endeavors to contribute to a different subfield in
appearance modeling: (1) synthesizing novel instances of spatially varying
materials, (2) reconstructing a material from a variable number of observations
or from incomplete measurements, and (3) designing novel material generators by
restricting the output of a general material generator based on user
preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.