* 1909850
* CHS: Small: Building Mutual Expertise for Physical Accessibility in Workplaces
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Erin Brady, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 487,550.00

People with disabilities are less likely than people without disabilities to be
hired for jobs or remain employed. Part of the reason for this disparity is that
employees with disabilities encounter accessibility problems that make
workplaces inaccessible to them. Many of these accessibility problems are
solvable: for example, a blind employee cannot view a computer screen, but can
install screenreading software to read digital text aloud to them. However, not
all employers are aware of the accessibility problems that exist in their
workplaces, and they may not know how to implement specific accommodations that
would be useful for employees with disabilities. In this project, the
researchers will study how people with disabilities and employers currently
exchange knowledge with each other to collectively create accessibility in
workplaces. Based on these findings, they will identify opportunities for new
technological solutions to enable collaborative accessibility problem-solving.
The project will lead to a deeper understanding of how groups can use technology
to identify and resolve problems through knowledge exchange, and how to improve
workplace accessibility practices and cultures. Additionally, the researchers
will work alongside community partners to disseminate their findings widely,
helping employers and designers gain more knowledge about accessibility problems
and solutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this proposal is to
identify and evaluate principles for socio-technical systems which facilitate
knowledge exchange to solve accessibility problems in the workplace. This
investigation will begin by identifying existing practices and attitudes of
people with disabilities and employers around problem-solving for accessibility
through individual interviews with disabled employees and job-seekers, and co-
workers and employers without disabilities. Then, the researchers will model
intellectual gaps in accessibility problem-solving among individuals with
varying levels of knowledge about accessibility, and identify strategies for
overcoming those gaps, by facilitating a series of small collective access
groups where workplace stakeholders with and without disabilities collaborate to
brainstorm about solutions to accessibility problems. Building on the knowledge
generated through these activities, the researchers will generate and validate
principles for mutual knowledge exchange in socio-technical systems by designing
lightweight technology probes to evaluate strategies for knowledge exchange
around accessibility. This research will contribute to our understanding of how
disability impacts experiences in the workplaces, and how technologies can be
designed to improve these experiences through building mutual
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.