* 1909374
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: New Image Resampling Techniques for the Mapping Nearby Galaxies at Apache Point Observatory in the NASA Sloan Atlas
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* John Moustakas, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 06/30/2022
* USD 59,366.00

Observations of a large population of galaxies in the local universe allows us
to learn about how galaxies grow through star formation. Both star formation and
the interaction of gas with the central black hole can have positive and
negative feedback on the rate at which stars form in galaxies. This project will
develop a new analysis tool for combining data taken from many different
observatories on the ground and in space. The data will be used to produce a
uniform catalog of nearby galaxies with images in wavelengths from ultraviolet
to infrared, as well as spectra taken from some individual galaxies. The catalog
will be of value to researchers who study galaxy
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mapping Nearby Galaxies at APO (MaNGA) survey
is providing spectroscopy across the face of 10,000 nearby galaxies selected
from the NASA Sloan Atlas. This data enables a broad range of science on
dynamics, star formation histories, active galactic nuclei, and more. The most
productive use of this new data set is to use tin conjunction with the
multiwavelength imaging data sets available for these galaxies from the
ultraviolet through to the infrared. The project will produce images
consistently sampled in position across all of these wavelengths and within the
spectra, and will publicly release the data set. They will develop a better
analysis technique that minimizes the negative effects of resampling. The
technique may have broad application inside and outside astronomy. An algorithm
exploiting this technique will also be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.