* 1909678
* CIF: Small: Enabling Dynamic Error Cancellation in High-Resolution RF DACs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Ian Galton, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

By 2025, next-generation (5G) mobile communication systems are expected to
handle an astonishing 1000-fold increase in data traffic, a 100-fold increase in
subscribers, and a several orders of magnitude reduction in energy consumption
relative to existing systems. While the potential economic benefits of 5G
communication systems are enormous, fully realizing the benefits will require
overcoming key technological limitations, most of which relate to operating at
far higher maximum frequencies and over far wider bandwidths than existing
systems. The multi-decade exponential scaling trend of integrated circuit (IC)
technology toward extremely high-density and low-power digital circuitry has
enabled powerful digital signal processing (DSP) techniques that will play a
large role in overcoming these limitations. Yet no matter how much DSP is
applied, the signals to be transmitted are ultimately analog, so analog signal
generation, usually via radio frequency digital-to-analog converters (RF DACs),
is always required. Unfortunately, RF DACs with high-enough accuracies and
bandwidths for next generation communication system infrastructure, such as 5G
base stations, are beyond present day capabilities. Solving this problem is the
focus of the project, thereby helping realize the full potential of advanced
wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address the problem by
developing and experimentally validating a new class of mixed-signal calibration
techniques for RF DACs. While prior calibration techniques are widely used to
enhance the performance of many critical RF and mixed-signal communication
system circuit blocks, such as analog-to-digital converters and frequency
synthesizers, they have had limited success to date in improving RF DAC
performance. This is because RF DACs are limited by both static and dynamic
errors, but prior calibration techniques only address static error. As dynamic
error tends to increase with an RF DAC's bandwidth, it presents a fundamental
limitation in high-speed communication applications. In contrast, the
calibration techniques to be developed under this project adaptively cancel both
static and dynamic error. Three related calibration techniques will be developed
that together cancel the most significant types of error in RF DACs: those
caused by 1) clock skew and component mismatches, 2) inter-symbol interference,
and 3) signal-dependent output impedance. The techniques will be validated
experimentally via the development of two IC prototypes that target RF DAC
performance well beyond the present state-of-the-art. The primary focus of the
project is theoretical: the development and optimization of enabling new signal
processing techniques and their rigorous mathematical analyses. Nevertheless,
the IC development portion of the project is essential in that it will provide
feedback to guide the theoretical work and will provide a definitive means of
evaluating the project's success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.