* 1909099
* CNS Core:Small: Prescriptive Software Caching Using Leases
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Chen Ding, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 547,816.00

The cost and performance of a modern system depend on its memory hierarchy.
Manual management of the memory hierarchy is complex and not portable. Automatic
management is sub-optimal - it reacts to program behavior but does not directly
utilize program knowledge. This research seeks a middle ground with a new type
of cache called Lease Cache. It enables prescriptive caching by utilizing
program knowledge, variable cache sizes, and multi-policy
caching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prescriptive caching takes a principled approach
building on theory and optimization. It connects programming and caching
directly with programming abstractions and program analysis. The research solves
four problems. (1) Lease cache theory, ensuring performance no worse than Least
Recently Used (LRU) cache when there is no program knowledge and optimal when
there is program knowledge. (2) Lease cache optimization, including statistical
caching as well as optimization for multi-policy and multi-granularity caching.
(3) Locality analysis, combining static analysis and run-time sampling to
analyze program locality. (4) Lease cache system, with efficient lease
management including the use of approximation to reduce the
overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Caching techniques are widely used in today's
computing infrastructure from virtual memory management to server cache and
memory cache. Lease cache is a new paradigm where an application can directly
control cache management. Under this paradigm, future efforts by the research
community and industry may substantially improve the utilization of computer
memory for practically all applications and systems. Beyond its technical
content, the project will develop material to teach locality theory and
optimization and strive to increase the diversity and participation in computing
research and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce software
and data from experiments for research papers. Source code, experimental data
and metadata will be maintained in version-controlled repositories using open-
source software (git and/or Mercurial). Source code will be made available
through the Internet on the University website and on publicly-accessible source
code repositories such as Github and/or Bitbucket. The repositories will be
maintained as long as the research is on-going and remains relevant and at least
for three years after the end of the project in 2022. The project page is
https://roclocality.org/2019/04/12/nsf1909099/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.