* 1909182
* RI: Small: Robust Model-Based Identification, Navigation, and Control of Underactuated Underwater Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Louis Whitcomb, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,677.00

Over 70 percent of the Earth's surface is hidden by its oceans, which are
believed to be the cradle of life on Earth. Yet, less is known about the sea
floor and oceans than about the surface of the Moon. Scientific exploration of
the oceans is critical to the understanding of the Earth's climate and life
forms. However, most of the oceans are inhospitable to humans due to the immense
depth, low temperatures, and the absence of light. Since the 1960's,
oceanographers and engineers have worked towards the development of remotely-
controlled underwater robots, with the goal of exploring the depths of the
oceans. The fact that GPS does not work underwater makes underwater navigation
especially challenging for autonomous robots. This project seeks to advance
underwater exploration by developing new navigation and control methods to
enable earth-science, commercial, and national-security missions that are beyond
present capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop
improved navigation and control methods for autonomous underactuated underwater
vehicles (UUVs) through the development of novel approaches to model
identification, model-based vehicle state estimation, and model-based adaptive
control. The goal is to improve the accuracy of present-day underwater vehicle
navigation by one to two orders of magnitude, down to sub-meter accuracy. Our
approach is to develop novel robust RANSAC Nullspace-based Least-Square (NBLS)
algorithms for the experimental identification of dual-model (surfaced and
submerged) plant and actuator parameters of 6-DOF plant dynamic models for
underactuated UUVs in the presence of sensor noise and outliers, to use these
plant models in 6-DOF state estimators for underactuated UUVs to improve vehicle
navigation precision, and to investigate switched nonlinear model-based adaptive
controllers for underactuated UUVs to improve vehicle control precision. The
stability of the proposed algorithms will be evaluated analytically and their
performance will be evaluated both in simulation and in experiments with robotic
hardware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.