* 1909367
* Collaborative Research: RAPID--Forensic Analysis of Flood-Wind-Rainfall Interactions during Hurricanes Florence and Michael
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Yu Zhang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jielun Sun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 30,611.00

This research project will address how flood from hurricane landfalls impacts
weather forecast models by collecting and analyzing field, radar, satellite
observations of wind, rainfall, and flood. To extend the observation coverage
beyond the government operated weather and hydrological stations, the scientists
will collect data from non-regular government-operated weather stations in the
area that was affected by Hurricanes Florence and Michael. The project could
potentially provide observational evidences to improve weather forecast models
for better heavy rainfall forecasts after hurricane landfalls. Improvement of
weather forecast models for hurricane landfalls will benefit hurricane
preparation especially for the states along the coast lines, leading to reduced
damages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of researchers at Colorado State
University and University of Texas at Arlington will work together with a
graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow to collect and compile near-surface
wind data from in situ, radar, and satellite observations present along the
North Carolina coast, and in particular the areas surrounding Albemarle Sound
and Pamlico Sound, which encompasses the downstream estuaries of Chowan River,
Pamlico River, and Neuse River, and was impacted by both Florence and Michael.
In addition, they will use satellite observations in combination of the surface
hydrological observations to estimate surface roughness changes. By comparing
spatial variations of surface roughness changes and wind, they will investigate
flood-rainfall-wind interactions. The significance of the interaction and the
magnitude of the surface roughness change between pre-inundation and maximum
inundation will provide useful information on whether these factors will be
included in numerical forecast models for hurricane landfalls.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will recover and maintain time-critical wind
data sets especially datasets in private sectors which are often not well
maintained or broadcasted. The investigators will engage science community and
agencies through meetings and web broadcast, and educating and training a
graduate student and a post-doc research associate on conducting researches. The
team will publish the data set in the CSU web portal, present their results at
science conferences, work with agencies, in particular NOAA, to ensure that the
forecasters are aware of the availability of the
dataset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.