* 1909292
* Engineering Interfaces for High-Performance Oxide Superconductor Nanocomposite Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Judy Wu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 622,749.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Superconductors are materials that can carry electric
currents without loss, which is one of the most exotic physical phenomena in
nature and is described quantitatively by the superconducting critical current
density Jc. Therefore, superconductivity offers applications such as quantum
computing to meet future computing needs and restoring the reliability of the
power grid alongside increasing its capacity and efficiency. The discovery of
oxide high temperature superconductors (HTSs) provides possibilities for
superconductors in applications at liquid nitrogen temperature and presents a
fascinating research topic due to their unusual electronic structure and layered
crystalline structures which gives profound effects on their physical
properties, especially Jc. Raising Jc in HTSs has been the focus of world-wide
efforts in the field of applied superconductivity. Growth of nanoscale
artificial pinning centers (APCs) provides a powerful approach to raise Jc in
nanocomposites, and the method can be directly implemented to large-scale HTS
devices for commercialization. This project investigates the strained
interfaces, the key driving force in strain-mediated self-assembly of APCs and
the determining factor of the APC's pinning efficiency and hence Jc in
nanocomposites. The goal is to achieve controllable APCs with precisely designed
morphology, orientation, density, and interfaces. The scientific knowledge
developed through this project will broadly impact future electronic and
electrical applications. Nanoscale control of interfaces applies to computing,
sensing, catalysis, and energy production/storage. The integrated modeling-
synthesis-characterization approach can be extended to a range of nanocomposites
beyond HTSs including ferroelectric, multiferroic, magnetoelectrics and
semiconductors to produce novel and unprecedented properties. Both undergraduate
and graduate students are gaining the cutting-edge research experience in
preparation for careers in science and engineering. Students, especially those
from underrepresented groups, are recruited through on campus programs (such as
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site and APS Bridge programs),
collaborators and alumni. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project
focuses on understanding and manipulating interface strains towards controllable
growth and high pinning efficiency of nanoscale artificial pinning centers
(APCs) in REBa2Cu3O7 (RE-123, RE for rare earth elements Y, Gd, Sm, etc.),
aiming at high critical current density (Jc) in a strong magnetic field (H) in
the APC/RE-123 nanocomposites. The project has four topics. Topic 1 investigates
the pinning efficiency of c-axis aligned one dimensional (1D) APCs, especially
the effect of the strained interfaces on Jc and pinning force density Fp. Topic
2 explores schemes, particularly multilayered 1D nanocomposites by insertion of
the Ca-substituted RE-123 spacers, for repairing the defective interfaces for
enhanced pinning efficiency. Based on theoretical predictions, topic 3 searches
for new 1D APCs with small diameters approaching the coherence length and self-
repairing functionality. Topic 4 explores APCs of mixed morphologies for
H-orientation independent Jc using microscopic control of the strain field in
nanocomposites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.