* 1909467
* CHS: Small: A wave optics foundation for predictive materials in computer graphics
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Steve Marschner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,763.00

Simulating how light reflects from surfaces is crucial to rendering realistic
computer-generated images. Rendering is increasingly being used in applications,
from product design to advertising to mass customization, that require
representations of specific materials that are accurate enough to use for design
and purchasing decisions, but current research on increasing accuracy and detail
in reflection models is running up against fundamental limits of the ray optics
approach that is traditionally used in computer graphics. This research aims to
build a new foundation for materials in computer graphics based on the more
accurate physics of wave optics, creating a new set of reflectance modeling
tools that can be used to make existing models more accurate and to develop new
models where they are needed. Renderings that can truly predict the appearance
of new materials from their physical structure will have broad impact by
enabling new and deeper integration of computer graphics into design,
engineering, and manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New applications of
computer graphics increasingly require models that can accurately predict light
scattering based on information about the small-scale structure and optical
properties of a material. In a great many cases these predictive models cannot
be obtained using the traditional ray (geometric) optics approach, because
materials have geometric structure at scales that overlap with the wavelengths
of visible light. On the other hand, the traditional models developed for
animation, visual effects, and games can effectively describe, though not
predict, the appearance of many materials. These models need not be abandoned to
achieve predictive appearance modeling, but principled ways to get from material
descriptions to model parameters are needed. This work will put appearance
models for graphics on a solid foundation of wave optics simulations that will
clearly establish which materials can be accurately modeled using traditional
models directly, which require adjustments to the parameters of those models,
and which require new or generalized models to be able to render them
adequately. Methods for finding model parameters to match given structures will
be developed, as well as new models for phenomena that can't be described by
existing ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.