* 1909085
* SHF:Small:Collaborative Research: Test-Centric Architecture Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Tingting Yu, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 239,157.00

Software architecture and software testing are both important areas of research
and practice in software engineering. Research in software architectural
modeling and analysis has focused on providing general guidance in software
design, development, and maintenance. Research in software testing has examined
a broad spectrum of endeavors, ranging from development testing to regression
testing for maintenance. However, the two areas have long been disjoint from
each other. That is, architecture modeling and analysis techniques are largely
agnostic to the unique design features of test code, whereas software testing is
conducted without leveraging any architectural guidance. This project aims to
build a novel architecture-modeling framework to bridge the gap between software
architecture and testing. The project will enable the synergy between
architecture and test efficiency across the long lifetimes of modern software
systems that can provide theoretical advances and practical solutions in both
fields. Practitioners will be able to use the output instruments to understand,
evaluate, and improve the architecture of a system to benefit software testing
and maintenance. Researchers will be able to leverage the techniques, tools, and
data created in this project to support a variety of gap-bridging research
efforts. Software-engineering educators will be able to rethink and rejuvenate
the way that software architecture and software testing topics are taught.

To achieve the above vision, the research team will create a family of first-of-
its-kind architectural modeling and analysis techniques that centers on testing
and amplifies benefits to both software architecture and software testing. More
specifically, this modeling and analysis framework includes 1) A test-centric
architecture modeling approach to help developers and practitioners understand
and evaluate the architectural design of test code, e.g., whether the design is
good or bad, easy or difficult to maintain and test; 2) A test-centric
architectural-analysis approach to detect and analyze architectural anti-
patterns centered around test code that hinder maintenance and increase costs on
test code; and 3) An architecture-guided testing approach that provides cost-
effective regression-testing techniques, including regression-testing selection
and prioritization, built upon the high-level architectural modeling. This
project directly contributes to the stated goals of the Computing and
Communication Foundations program of addressing problems fundamental to
improving software quality and, thus, benefits all segments of society that
depend on software.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.