* 1909450
* CNS Core: Small: Towards a Knowledge Plane for Coordinating Network Policies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Anduo Wang, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 478,970.00

There has been an increased interest in applying knowledge management concepts
and methods in computer networking research. While existing work centers around
network data (i.e., the state of the network), this project asks if and how
knowledge management systems can handle network semantics (i.e., the meaning of
the network). To understand the benefits of semantic network knowledge
management, this project investigates network policy coordination. The solutions
will substantially improve the predictability, flexibility, manageability, and
security of network policies, offering a fresh perspective to advance the policy
infrastructure for modern communication networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
contribution of the project is to develop network knowledge plane, an
orchestration infrastructure for disparate, potentially conflicting network
policies that can interact in complex ways: in the first thrust, the project
introduces data integrity constraints (ICs) as a unifying abstraction to lift
the policies out of the network, creating a common framework for policy
reasoning; next, by leveraging connections to IC maintenance, the project will
develop an orchestration service for software defined networks (SDNs); finally,
by leveraging connections with semantic query transformation, the project will
develop a negotiation facility to coordinate policy makings by independent
stakeholders of the global Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
project will offer significant gains to areas that are the most critical
challenges to policy-based networking. It will make network policies easier to
understand, predicate, reuse, manage, and evolve. Moreover, the project will
have broad impact for two ways: (1) the orchestration framework will be broadly
applicable, facilitating the SDNs to move beyond their initial deployment, and
accelerating the deployment of new policy extensions to evolve the Internet, (2)
the novel use of knowledge representation and reasoning techniques in networking
will open up a new research space that arranges policies around logical
properties, creating an opportunity to rethink the fundamental policy issues of
communication networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project website (https://ravel-
net.org) will be maintained to disseminate the progress of the project.
Specifically, supporting tools will be made open-source. Source code will also
be available on the github server (https://github.com/ravel-net) with online
documentation to facilitate independent validation. Networking traces and real-
world dataset will be collected and made public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.