* 1909244
* SHF: Small: Enabling New Machine-Learning Usage Scenarios with Software-Defined Hardware for Symbolic Regression
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Ann Ramirez, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,519.00

Despite the widespread success of machine learning, existing techniques have
limitations and/or unattractive trade-offs that prohibit important usage
scenarios, particularly in embedded and real-time systems. For example,
artificial neural nets provide sufficient accuracy for many applications, but
can be too computationally expensive for embedded usage and may require large
training data sets that are impractical to collect for some applications. Even
when executed with cloud computing, neural nets often require graphics-
processing unit acceleration, which greatly increases power costs that can
already dominate the total cost of ownership in large-scale data centers and
supercomputers. Similarly, linear regression is a widely used machine-learning
technique, but generally requires model specification or guidance by the user,
which is prohibitive for difficult-to-understand phenomena and/or many-
dimensional problems. This project shows that symbolic regression complements
existing machine-learning techniques by providing attractive Pareto-optimal
trade-offs that enable new machine-learning usage scenarios where existing
technologies are prohibitive. These symbolic-regression benefits come from three
key advantages: 1) automatic model discovery, 2) computational efficiency with
minimal loss in capability compared to existing techniques, and 3) lower
sensitivity to training set size. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite being studied
for decades, symbolic regression is generally limited to toy examples due to the
challenge of searching an infinite solution space with numerous local optima.
This project presents a solution that significantly advances the state-of-the-
art via two primary contributions: 1) 1,000,000x acceleration of the symbolic-
regression exploration process, and 2) fundamentally new exploration algorithms
that are only possible with such significant acceleration. To accelerate the
symbolic-regression exploration process, the investigators introduce software-
defined hardware that re-configures every cycle to provide a solution-specific
pipeline implemented as a virtual hardware overlay on field-programmable gate
arrays. Although this acceleration by itself improves upon the state-of-the-art
in symbolic regression considerably, the more important contribution is the
enabling of new exploration algorithms that are not feasible without massive
increases in performance. The investigators use this performance improvement to
introduce a new hybrid exploration algorithm that performs multiple concurrent
searches using different configurations of genetic programming and deterministic
heuristics, combined with two new prediction mechanisms to avoid local optima:
sub-tree look-ahead prediction and operator
correlation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.