* 1909247
* Relativistic Gravitation and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Clifford Will, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The recent detections of gravitational waves by NSF's LIGO observatories and by
astronomers of the motions of stars and gas near supermassive black holes, such
as the one at the center of the Milky Way, have opened the possibility of
testing Einstein's theory in realms where the warping of spacetime is extreme.
Yet in order to test Einstein's great theory, it is essential to know what it
actually predicts for real measurements. This project continues a program of
research to provide concrete links between the abstract beauty and complex
mathematics of Einstein's theory and the real world where measurements are made
by physicists and astronomers. These links are established by finding
approximate, yet accurate solutions of the equations in forms that are practical
and usable. The outcomes of this research will be used by data experts at the
gravitational-wave observatories to perform better tests of general relativity
using newly detected signals, and will be used by astronomers to probe how
general relativity affects complex systems such as stars orbiting supermassive
black holes, or three-body systems involving bodies ranging from black holes to
exoplanets. Einstein's theory is a topic that fascinates the general public, and
the PI will continue to give public lectures on topics related to this research,
bringing understanding of Einstein's ideas to the broader community.

Specifically, this project will contribute to the ability of ground-based
gravitational-wave observatories such as the LIGO-Virgo network to test general
relativity, by computing the equations of motion for binary star systems, along
with the emitted gravitational waveforms, as predicted by an important
alternative theory, known as Einstein-Aether gravity, to high accuracy in the
so-called post-Newtonian approximation. It will provide accurate waveforms
predicted by this theory in a format that can be adapted to LIGO-Virgo data
analysis methods. Another important question that will be addressed is whether
the evolution of binary orbits with general relativistic effects included leaves
any residual orbital ellipticity in the final stages, leading to observable
modulations of the gravitational signals emitted. The project also extends
recent work of the PI on incorporating the effects of Einstein's theory into the
dynamics of three-body systems, such as a star-exoplanet system in the presence
of a third body, or a binary-black-hole system in a galactic core with a
supermassive black hole at its center.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.