* 1909101
* Preparing and Releasing the La Silla QUEST Variability Survey Data
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Paolo Coppi, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2022
* USD 311,956.00

Data mining is a very effective method for doing scientific studies. The La
Silla QUEST Survey (LSQ ) made for the detection of Supernovae and Kuiper belt
objects, can be repurposed to give a very useful history of the variable sky in
the southern hemisphere. In its six years operation, roughly half the sky was
imaged an average of 200 times (several hundred square degrees over 1000-2000
times), making it suitable for variability timescales studies from hours to
years down to faint visibility magnitudes. The data will be particularly useful
in the areas overlapped by current and future variability surveys by extending
their time baseline. The available light curves for both transient and
persistent variable sources will be placed in a database accessible via the
Internet with precomputed "signatures information on the variability and
position". The pipeline reprocessed imaged data will also be made available.
This data will be available to the citizen scientists like the American
Association of Variable Star Observers (AAVSO), the Zooniverse, and the
WorldWide Telescope by providing them with a plug-in to the AAVSO that lets
their software access to LSQ light curves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will
preserve the valuable data from the La Silla Quest Variable Survey (LSQ) for
future time variable studies of stellar phenomena. The data collected by the LSQ
will be fully calibrated, cleaned, and reprocessed to correct for errors in
photometry and astrometry caused by the CCD performance, charge effects for
bright stars, and effects caused by the PSF. It will provide a global set of
reference stars to improve differential photometry and provide light curves for
persistent sources with accurate error bars. The light curve data will be made
data searchable as well as in postage stamp "movies" for any location on the
Southern Hemisphere sky with access to raw files and made accessible to the
astronomical community and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.