* 1909020
* CNS Core: Small: BehavIoT: Modeling and Controlling Internet of Things Behavior Using Netowork-Inferred State Machines
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* David Choffnes, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2022
* USD 506,571.00

An increasing number of smart interconnected objects, known as the Internet of
Things (IoT), are becoming affordable, popular, and rich in functionality. While
these devices enabled a wide range of societal benefits including health,
safety, accessibility and sustainability, they also present important security,
privacy, and management challenges due to the large set of diverse services they
offer. The fundamental problem that opens the door to such behavior is that IoT
systems are traditionally closed systems that provide consumers and
investigators with little-to-no information about whether a device (or set of
devices) is behaving in ways that might violate expectations such as privacy,
security, and correctness. To address this problem, this project will
investigate how to automatically determine when IoT systems compromise privacy,
security and correctness, and how to mitigate such problems. The key idea is to
focus on information gleaned from the network traffic that such devices
generate, since network traffic is the common platform that all such IoT systems
ultimately rely upon. Specifically, the project will develop technology that
models the behavior of an IoT system from its network traffic, then use these
models to identify unexpected behavior. To mitigate unexpected behavior, the
project will identify in-network strategies such as isolating, changing, and/or
blocking such traffic. By understanding and modeling device behavior and
addressing unexpected behavior from IoT devices, this project has the potential
to improve safety and security for users. Further, by raising awareness of new
and existing threats, our proposed work can encourage device manufacturers to
improve the privacy, security, and correctness of their
deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore the
extent to which network-inferred behavioral analysis of IoT deployments,
combined with control over the network traffic they generate, can identify and
mitigate misbehavior in IoT systems. Our key insight is that IoT devices are
particularly amenable to state-machine analysis, as they tend to have a limited
set of functionality (i.e., states such as "camera recording", "microphone
listening", etc.) that is triggered by a limited set of events. To address the
fact that one cannot rely on source code to build such models via static
analysis, this project will instead treat IoT devices as black boxes and
inferring state-machine models that describe their behavior using the one
externally observable signal all IoT devices generate: net- work traffic. After
building such inferred state machines (and their transition probabilities), the
project will analyze their evolution over time to identify misbehaviors -- when
a device transitions between states in unexpected or unwanted ways (e.g., due to
compromise, data exfiltration, or misconfiguration). To provide coverage of a
wide range of misbehaviors, the project will (i) detect behaviors that never
before encountered by relying on unsupervised classification techniques; (ii)
consider the behavior of the system as a whole by combining in our model the
behavior of individual IoT devices, thus capturing the cause of any emergent
global system behavior; (iii) produce a system-wide behavior model that is easy
to understand and analyze in practice, such as a state machine in which states
represents changes in the behavior of individual IoT devices, and transitions
show temporal dependencies expressed as probabilities. Finally, the project will
employ middleboxes to actually use state machine models as a way to protect a
whole IoT system from both individual and global misbehavior. An advantage to
this approach is that it is naturally platform-independent by relying on the
common denominator in IoT systems, i.e., Internet traffic; further, an in-
network solution can be immediately deployed (e.g., in a home or enterprise
gateway) for broad impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.