* 1909509
* FET: Small: A Portable and Intelligent Testing System for Power-efficient and Accurate Foodborne Pathogen Detection
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Lei Jiang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,808.00

Foodborne illness is a common, distressing, and even life-threatening problem
for millions of people around the world. Food testing is becoming a common need
for our daily lives, i.e., a sensitive and cost-effective detector can guarantee
the safety and quality of food to fulfill strict food legislation and consumer
demands. However, current electrochemical sensors not only require lengthy and
complex sample processing, but also need expensive equipment for an adequate
level of purification and enrichment. Meanwhile, low-cost sensors produce noisy
signals that require computationally expensive machine-learning models for
noise-robust processing. To remedy these issues, this research project is to
develop an intelligent food-pathogen detection system, which is portable and
affordable, yet accurate. The success of this project will enable affordable,
portable and accurate food-borne pathogen detection, including food analysis,
food safety, food-borne illness detection and therapy, water measurement, and
many microbiome-related environmental monitoring. This project will provide an
intellectual foundation for portable, disposable, intelligent foodborne pathogen
detection expanding the burgeoning biosensor, machine learning and hardware
accelerator design research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
project aims to develop (1) a portable electrochemical sensing system detecting
foodborne pathogens in contaminated foods, (2) hardware-friendly bitwise machine
learning models for de-noising and recognition of real-samples and (3) an ultra-
low power and portable accelerator for bit-wise machine learning inferences. The
three aims are to improve the recognition performance in a collaborative
fashion, where affordable sensing technology is backed up by machine-learning-
based signal processing, while the hardware-algorithm co-design controls system-
level efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.