* 1909688
* SHF: Small: Foundations of Software Testing Representations of Natural Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Myra Cohen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,961.00

Over the past 20 years, scientific computing has become a staple for exploration
and reasoning about natural processes. For instance, researchers in
bioinformatics routinely use computational tools to understand the relationship
between a genetic sequence and the behavior of an organism with that sequence.
Research questions concerning natural processes range from decoding biological
pathways to determining if a mutation can lead to cancer. During this same time,
novel computation techniques have been investigated, such as programming DNA via
chemical reaction networks (CRNs). Many new programming environments, simulation
platforms, and tools have been developed to support these new research
directions and are now widely used. Since these programs are being employed to
advance scientific discovery and to perform critical tasks, there is a need to
ensure they behave correctly. This project develops foundations for software
testing of these natural computing systems using natural representations. It
focuses on developing quality test suites, handling error rates in test outcomes
and validating behavior in the absence of known answers. Research topics from
this project will be incorporated into courses on software testing and molecular
programming. Undergraduate students will participate in this research and
encouraged to compete in the International Genetically Engineered Machine
competition.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Bioinformatics tools, and programming via
chemical reaction networks (CRNs), result in simulations of a natural process
such as an organism's growth, the interactions between molecules as reactions
execute over time, DNA alignment, etc. CRNs themselves are representations of a
naturally occurring process (a set of chemical reactions in solution), that can
be provably manipulated to perform computations. While these types of
abstractions form a powerful and growing computational paradigm, these are
encoded as software programs, which simulate the natural processes, and hence
they are prone to faults. Thus, they need to be tested to ensure they behave as
expected. There are several characteristics that make these representations
challenging to validate. First, the inputs and outputs may not be clearly
defined as in traditional software systems, and the connection between inputs
and execution of paths in the software is often unclear. Second, the use case
may determine the expected results, and the expected results may be sets of
information, rather than a single property or value. Third, they may compute a
result stochastically, which is correct most of the time, yet incorrect within
an allowed error. Fourth, these systems are often simulated using complex sets
of options that when modified can change both the non-functional behavior as
well as the functional answers returned. This project develops foundations for
software testing of natural representations. More specifically, it develops
techniques for test generation with measurable code and model coverage. It
creates testing methods that infer oracles and utilize metamorphic relations.
Finally, it designs configuration-aware testing and optimization techniques to
guide end-users who depend upon the results of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.