* 1909718
* Collaborative Research: Dynamical Tides in Close Stellar Binaries and Exoplanetary Systems
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2019,10/31/2020
* Nevin Weinberg, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 10/31/2020
* USD 481,538.00

Tides are an important factor in many astrophysical settings. Tides can affect
life, like tidal cycles on Earth; they can affect geology, as in the intense
tidal pull of Jupiter on Io; and can even influence the evolution of stars in
binary pairs. A research collaboration between Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) and the University of Virginia (UVA) will analyze tidal
friction in close star-star and star-planet binaries and assess the importance
of nonlinear fluid dynamics on tides in these systems. Fluid dynamics is the
science of how gases and liquids flow, and a nonlinear system is one in which
the change in the output has a complicated (not simply linear) mathematical
relationship with a change in the input. The principal investigators (PIs) have
developed the basic theory and computational methods to study both weakly and
strongly nonlinear tidal fluid dynamics. The proposed calculations will advance
the state of the art in order to provide physics-based prescriptions for tidal
friction over a range of stellar types, evolutionary stages, and degree of
nonlinearity of the tide. The detailed calculations and numerical simulations
will be distilled into simple prescriptions which may be useful for future
investigations by astrophysicists. The MIT PI will serve as a research mentor in
the study of tides to a student each year in the MIT Summer Research Program
(MSRP). MSRP began as an MIT initiative to address the issue of
underrepresentation of African Americans, Mexican Americans, Native Americans
and Puerto Ricans in engineering and science in the US. It seeks to identify
talented undergraduate students from US institutions who are underrepresented
minorities and might benefit from spending a summer (nine weeks) at MIT working
in a research group. The UVA PI will mentor undergraduate participants in the
Virginia-North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, which
seeks to broaden participation of underrepresented minority populations in STEM
disciplines.

Three projects are proposed: (1) Orbital decay of hot Jupiters driven by weakly
nonlinear wave-wave interactions. Previous work on solar-type stars will be
expanded to include a range of stellar masses and evolutionary states. (2)
Circularization and orbital decay in the strongly nonlinear limit, where wave
breaking occurs for gravity waves. Again the goal is to expand previous
calculations to the observed range of main sequence stars, as well as sub-giant
and red giant branch stars. (3) Nonlinear wave interaction effects on the tide
raised in the star and in the planet during high eccentricity planet migration.
For each project, a detailed comparison of theoretical predictions to available
data will be carried out. This includes close stellar binaries, the hot Jupiters
and Neptunes around a variety of main sequence stars, and evolved stars with
substellar companions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.