* 1909379
* OAC Core: Small: Enabling High-fidelity Turbulent Reacting-Flow Simulations through Advanced Algorithms, Code Acceleration, and High-order Methods for Extreme-scale Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Matthias Ihme, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Accurate numerical simulations of turbulent flows are of practical importance
for several applications, including gas turbines and internal-combustion engines
for power generation and transportation, the risk mitigation associate with
reactor safety, and for scientific discovery of novel energy-conversion
strategies. However, commonly employed software employ simplifications and
exhibit deficiencies in accurately representing the underlying physical
processes. The so-called discontinuous Galerkin (DG) methods have been
identified as a promising alternative. These methods are characterized by
utilizing a formulation that significantly improves fidelity. Other advantages
are the flexibility in representation complex physical processes and the
excellent performance on high-performance computing systems. While the potential
of these DG-methods has been recognized, major roadblocks to adoption include
the lack of suitable cyberinfrastructure (CI) methods and tools for scientific
discovery and engineering analysis as well as the need for innovative
programming techniques to enable scalable simulations on modern machines. This
project addresses these research challenges and develops novel numerical methods
and advanced programming paradigms for high-performance simulations of turbulent
reacting flows. Integrated into this research are several education and outreach
activities that address the need for training the next generation of
interdisciplinary scientists and engineers. High-school students participate in
several research activities, and a mentoring program is established that brings
together students from engineering and computer science to work together on
interdisciplinary research problems. This project, thus, serves the national
interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of science and to
secure the national defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long runtime costs of
simulating turbulent flows inhibit explorations and studies of realistic flames
and the engineering analysis of complex combustion geometries. The approach to
improving the quality and performance of turbulent flow simulations is to use
high-order discontinuous Galerkin (DG) methods backed by high-performance
algorithmic implementations suitable for execution on heterogeneous compute
platforms. The work specifically uses task level parallelism coupled with load-
balancing and adaptive techniques to achieve high throughput simulation
capabilities on heterogeneous hardware. Research on advanced CI-ecosystems is
conducted to develop task-based programming techniques for accelerating multi-
physics flow simulations on heterogeneous computing systems. To this end, Legion
is employed for the dynamic runtime mapping of compute-intense kernel functions
to heterogeneous processors under consideration of computational load, data
complexity, and heterogeneity of the computing system. Novel integration schemes
and advanced adaptation techniques are developed to enable efficient simulations
of turbulent reacting flows. These techniques are incorporated into a multi-
physics DG-method that is made available to the research community as an open-
source software platform for scientific discovery and engineering analysis. The
close collaboration of graduate students with national laboratories and
industrial partners facilitates an effective transition of the numerical methods
and programming techniques that are developed in this project into other
software environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.