* 1909924
* Modern Approaches to Modeling and Predicting Bridge Instabilities
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Igor Belykh, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 478,754.00

Modern pedestrian and suspension bridges and other large mechanical structures
are designed using industry-standard packages, yet disastrous resonant
vibrations are observed, necessitating multi-million dollar repairs. The main
research objective of this project is to contribute to experimentally-validated
dynamical systems approaches to understanding mechanisms of the dynamical
instability of bridges and other complex mechanical structures interacting with
pedestrian loads. The investigator develops predictive methods and engineering-
scale, yet mathematically tractable, biomechanical models of humans' responses
to bridge motion and vibrations of grandstands. He implements new dynamical
assessment criteria to inform the development of software packages that can
substantially improve both the design of new bridges and other mechanical
structures and the assessment of serviceability of existing structures. Results
from this research may lead to improved safety and economic benefits. Graduate
and undergraduate students are engaged in the research of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to a rigorous high-
dimensional approach to the collective dynamics of non-smooth oscillators. It
aims to improve existing inverted pendulum models of pedestrians' response to
lateral bridge motion and to combine stability theory with multi-scale
asymptotic analysis to reveal the true cause for the onset of pedestrian-induced
bridge instabilities. It also targets a largely unexplored area in modeling and
predicting bridge instabilities that includes bidirectional vertical
interactions between humans and oscillating mechanical structures. At the
interfaces between rigorous mathematical and computational theories, structural
engineering, and human behavior, the project offers a transition from a rigorous
mathematical theory to practical engineering analysis where predictive methods
and pedestrian models can be used as "crash test dummies" to probe specific
bridge designs. Graduate and undergraduate students are engaged in the research
of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.