* 1909522
* Large Wave Events in a Changing Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Noboru Nakamura, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2023
* USD 922,503.00

At the altitude of the jet streams the atmospheric circulation over the middle
latitudes tends to be quite wavy, with high and low pressure centers moving
westward roughly along the jet axes. But at times the waves slow down and grow
quite large, forming a "block" in the jet-level flow. The blocked flow results
in a stagnation of weather systems, which can lead to prolonged cold spells,
excessive precipitation, and other forms of extreme weather. Naturally blocking
has been a topic of intensive research for some time, but a satisfactory
explanation for it has been elusive. One reason is that that much of the
relevant wave dynamics theory assumes that the waves have small amplitudes,
which is not the case for blocking. To remedy this mismatch the PI and his
colleagues have developed a bulk measure of the waviness around a latitude
circle called Finite Amplitude Wave Activity (FAWA), along with its
longitudinally varying counterpart, Local Wave Activity (LWA, see AGS-1563307).
FAWA and LWA are well suited to the study of blocking because they can be
applied throughout the lifecycle of a block, even when the blocking pattern is
quite pronounced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently the PI and his group developed a
simple theory of blocking based on the relationship between mean jet speed and
LWA. The idea of the theory is that an increase in wave activity slows down the
jet stream, which slows down the propagation of waves along the jet. The
slowdown leads to a pile-up of LWA which increases waviness and further slows
down the jet. The formation of blocks by accumulation of LWA is analogous to the
formation of a traffic jam, in which a slow-down on a highway leads to
accumulation of cars which further slows highway speed until a jam is produced.
The analogy is exact in the sense that the formation of a block by the piling up
of LWA can be modeled using the classical traffic flow equation derived in
papers from the the 1930s and 1950s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here the PI uses his
traffic jam theory of blocking to perform a diagnostic study of wave-mean flow
interactions leading to blocks, using concepts from traffic flow theory to
understand block formation. For instance the "capacity" of a jet stream, meaning
the amount of LWA that can travel along a jet without initiating a slowdown in
wave propagation, can be defined in analogy with the capacity of a highway for
traffic. Quantities like capacity can be easily calculated from weather maps and
from model simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further work applies the FAWA/LWA
framework to Sudden Stratospheric Warming (SSW) events, in which the
stratospheric vortex circling the North Pole breaks down and stratospheric
temperatures rise dramatically, sometimes over 100F within a few days. SSWs are
thought to occur because the vortex is disrupted by upward-propagating waves,
thus SSWs are a logical target for analysis using the FAWA/LWA
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to the extreme
weather associated with blocks and the impact it has on human activities.
Blocking events are difficult to predict, and simulations from state-of-the-art
forecast models are generally deficient in blocking. The understanding developed
in this work may thus be important for improved simulation and prediction of
blocking. SSWs are equally challenging from a forecast perspective, and they can
also affect surface weather in various ways. Codes for the calculation of FAWA
and LWA from meteorological data are made available to the research community
via github to promote their adoption and use. Education and outreach are
conducted through a biennial summer school and a local community science center.
In addition, the project supports two graduate students and a postdoctoral
fellow, thereby fostering the next generation of scientists in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.