* 1909423
* NSF-BSF: CIF: Small: Self-adapting Code Generation in Rate-distortion Theory, Machine Learning, and Channel Coding
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Kenneth Rose, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,869.00

This project builds on the investigators' early information-theoretic results,
establishing a mechanism called 'natural type selection' for source coding,
which adapts a randomly generated code and is shown to be asymptotically
optimal. Fundamental expansions of this framework will be pursued to develop
universally applicable methodologies, and thereby yield contributions to
information theory itself alongside powerful learning techniques in other
application fields, including wireless communications, content delivery, social
media, artificial intelligence, and others. From the educational perspective,
the project offers a training opportunity for graduate students to experience,
first-hand, an international and interdisciplinary research collaboration, which
combines theoretical depth with practical impact. It further offers
opportunities for extensive curriculum enrichment, and to produce accomplished
researchers and practitioners with capacities and skills that are in high
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel approaches to
learning, which employ universal self-adapting mechanisms for random code
generation, designed to asymptotically achieve optimality for unknown source
distributions. Research will be pursued, in terms of both theoretical analysis
of performance bounds and powerful optimization approaches, along three main
thrusts: i) Extension of the natural type selection framework to encompass
continuous spaces and sources with memory, leveraging the concept of "parametric
type" for continuous alphabets, which would expand applicability to virtually
all practical scenarios of interest. ii) Applications in machine learning, where
supervised learning (e.g., classification, regression) is reformulated as the
rate-distortion problem of seeking the minimal amount of information to be
learned from a source such that a desired output at the prescribed fidelity can
be read from a random codebook; and, on the unsupervised learning side, where
the "information bottleneck" method is reformulated universally in a self-
adapting codebook generation setting. Both will leverage the optimization
framework of deterministic annealing. iii) Applications in communications where
stochastic mechanisms are developed for optimal channel input adaptation,
including an important extension to multi-user communications which requires the
development of a "distributed natural type selection" framework. This project is
a collaborative effort between researchers in the US and Israel, with funding
for Israeli researchers provided by the Bi-National Science Foundation
(BSF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.