* 1909733
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Modeling of Amorphous Solids - Energy Landscapes to Failure Prediction
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Christopher Rycroft, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2022
* USD 219,782.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education to advance understanding of how amorphous materials fail
or break under mechanical stress. Amorphous solids are a category of materials
that share the distinction that they do not exhibit any crystal structure.
Examples include colloidal pastes, foams, gels, silicate glasses, like window
glass and Gorilla(R) glass, and many consumer plastics. This research will lay
the groundwork for understanding how these materials respond to stresses and
eventually fail so as to guide the use of existing materials as well as the
development of new materials. The research focuses on metallic glass as an
exemplary amorphous solid. Metallic glasses are an extremely promising emerging
class of high strength metallic materials, but their application is limited by
their failure mechanisms and the current inability to predict their behavior
when subjected to mechanical loads. Improved predictive capabilities are
necessary for guiding the design and utilization of failure tolerant metallic
glass alloys that will have broad application in medicine, defense and consumer
goods. This research will build mathematical descriptions of metallic glasses
based on simulations performed on the atomic scale. Computational methods to
implement these mathematical descriptions will then be developed so as to
estimate both the material behavior and the reliability of the predictions that
result. The techniques developed will be broadly disseminated through open
source computer codes. Additionally, the project will be integrated with
educational research and outreach activities of the investigators, which include
broad systemic engagement within Baltimore City elementary schools, improvement
of introductory computing education, outreach focused on improving participation
of women and URM students at both the high-school and undergraduate levels in
engineering research, and public lectures at
libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research, and education to advance
understanding of how amorphous materials fail under mechanical stress. The
research team aims to develop physics-based multiscale models of failure
processes in amorphous solids, with metallic glass taken as an exemplar
material. The physics accessible via atomic scale models of glass structure will
be analyzed to obtain statistics of the shear transformation zone defects that
control plastic deformation. These will be related to statistical mechanics
models of effective temperature that characterize the degree of glass disorder
so as to build a constitutive model of plastic deformation. The constitutive
model will in turn be incorporated into a high-fidelity 3D viscoplastic finite
differencing scheme that adapts techniques originally developed for solving the
Navier-Stokes equation. A novel machine learning algorithm will guide the
parameterization of the constitutive model from atomistic data so as to inform
the continuum method and provide uncertainty quantification. The simulation
methods will be pushed to increase the scales on which failure can be modeled by
developing a statistical representative-volume element approach incorporating
adaptive meshing and resulting in true multiscale simulations of failure in
amorphous solids. In doing so, this research is aimed to broadly advance
fundamental understanding of how the macroscopic mechanical response of
amorphous solid materials is informed by their atomic scale structures. The
research will result in the development of methods for making direct connections
between atomic scale data and theories applicable on the continuum scale. These
will include novel machine learning methods and new numerical schemes for
failure prediction that incorporate uncertainty quantification. Ultimately, this
work will result in an improved understanding of how amorphous microstructure
controls failure on the macro scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.