* 1909425
* III: Small: Computational Methods for Ancestry Inference In Genetics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Yufeng Wu, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 411,141.00

Many people are interested in their ancestry. Traditionally, historical records
are the main sources of information for knowing one's ancestry. In the age of
Genomics, analyzing one's genome is becoming the most popular way of ancestry
test. Companies now offer such tests to millions of customers. The influx of DNA
ancestry tests now make people know not only something about themselves, but
also more about their ancestors. Interesting questions have been raised about
how much one can learn about his or her recent ancestors from one's own DNA.
Recently, the investigator has been working with a population geneticist on
developing computational methods for inferring recent ancestors from an
individual's genome. Imagine that a little girl, Alice, has both European and
Native American heritage and wants to know something about her recent ancestors.
Existing commercial ancestry tests provide estimates of genetic composition on
Alice's genome (e.g., percentage of Alice's DNAs or long genomic segments that
can be traced to Native American origin). The problem considered by the
investigator and his collaborators, on the other hand, concerns the inference of
the genetic composition of recent ancestors from Alice's genome. That is, the
investigator aims to answer questions such as "I only have my own genome but I
want to know about my recent ancestors. Are my parents 50%-50% European and
Native American? Or one is unadmixed European and the other is unadmixed Native
American? How about my grandparents?" Such questions have not been rigorously
addressed in the literature before, even though these questions may be of
interests to both geneticists and consumers of genetic tests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, the investigator will work on
new computational methods for DNA-based ancestry inference. The investigator
plans to build on his recent research on this subject, the PedMix approach,
which can infer the ancestry of recent ancestors (e.g., parents and
grandparents) from a focal individual's genome. At present, PedMix is the only
publically available method for inferring recent ancestors from a single
individual's genome. In this project, the investigator plans to conduct research
on the general subject of ancestry inference. The first objective is to improve
the performance of PedMix to obtain more accurate inference results. This can
make PedMix more applicable and practical to real genetic tests. The second
objective is developing ancestry inference methods which can learn ancestry
information for more distant ancestors. At present, due to computational
difficulty, PedMix can only work for great grandparental inference at most.
Finally, this project also aims to study new ancestry inference formulations
which haven't been rigorously studied before. The key technical aspect of this
project is computational efficiency. Successful completion of the research in
this project will produce new efficient and accurate algorithms that are
implemented in practical software tools and enable new ancestry inference from
large scale genomics data. Developed software tools will be made available
freely to the multidisciplinary research community, and are expected to enable
novel biological applications in DNA-based ancestry
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.