* 1909660
* CIF: Small: Super-Resolution Imaging in a Heavily Scattering Environment Enabled by Spatiotemporal Data
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 504,819.00

In this project, a mathematical and computational framework will be developed to
allow the precise location of signal emissions in a heavy scattering domain
using sensor data measured at various locations as a function of time. While the
application space can span all wave types, the primary focus of this project is
to directly image neuron activity throughout the mammalian brain for the first
time using fluorescence. It is currently impossible to image at a depth of much
more than about one tenth of a millimeter in tissue using light, and other ways
of measuring brain activity, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of blood
oxygen and of manganese, are unable to provide details of activity at the same
time-scale as that of individual neuron activation. Therefore, despite
multifaceted research efforts to date, much remains unknown about the brain. The
project presents a path towards whole-brain imaging using spatio-temporal
optical reporters designed to monitor changes in calcium ion concentrations
associated with neuron activation. This approach has a substantial potential to
impact neuroscience and the treatment of brain disorders. For instance, the
effort could provide a means to obtain new information that is relevant for
developing an understanding and hence a treatment of Alzheimer's disease and
Parkinson's disease, as well as epilepsy. More generally, the project could lead
to a means to image protein conformation inside tissue, thereby providing a
window to many central nervous system diseases involving protein mis-folding and
aggregation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying principle to be investigated
is the use of temporal data obtained at a set of spatial positions to obtain the
precise locations of a large set of emitters in a complex, multiple scattering
environment. Measured fluorescence from calcium reporters as a function of time
and position around the brain provides the necessary spatio-temporal data that
would allow the in-vivo imaging of neuron activity throughout a mammalian brain
for the first time. A point fluorescent emitter constraint enables the
description of the calcium ion reporters within a localization framework. Prior
work suggests that a spatial resolution of tens of microns through centimeters
of tissue may be achievable, allowing neuron-scale resolution in the brain.
There are two primary aims. First, a high-resolution neuron activation reporter
localization method for whole-brain imaging will be developed. Simulated and
measured spatio-temporal data from realistic printed phantoms will be
incorporated into a nonlinear optimization framework with a diffusion equation
forward model and solved using a multi-resolution analysis, both in the photon-
counting regime and where there is ample signal at the detectors. Second, data
will be obtained from microscope measurements of neurons with calcium channel
labeling. This will yield local signaling and prior model information that could
be incorporated into an in-vivo approach. Neuron signaling data will also be
obtained under controlled amounts of scatter to investigate localization
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.