* 1909499
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Generative Adversarial Networks: From Art to Science
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Jiantao Jiao, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

In the modern era of big data, although the cost of labeling and analyzing a
single data sample has been decreasing rapidly, it is usually outpaced by the
unrivaled fast growth of dataset size, which makes it particularly timely to
design unsupervised learning algorithms that are able to discover meaningful
structures of data without extensive human efforts. Recently, Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) have emerged as a thriving unsupervised machine
learning technique that has led to significant advances in various fields such
as computer vision, natural language processing, and others. GANs can generate
high-quality realistic images based on unlabeled natural images and perform
sophisticated tasks such as synthesizing photos from sketches and coloring
images. However, there also exist challenges that need timely solutions. The
training of GANs has been reportedly observed to be challenging, unstable, and
not easily reproducible. This project seeks to conduct a systematic study of
GANs through the fundamental formulation, generalization and optimization
issues. The transformative potential of the project is in the development of
foundational tools and practical guidelines through novel combinations of
optimal transport, information theory, convex geometry, and empirical process
theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is four-fold: (1) develop
a theoretical framework for analyzing the generalization properties of GANs in
high-dimensions; (2) suggest principled approaches to design GANs to achieve
optimal statistical properties; (3) diagnose GANs when issues such as mode
collapse or discriminator winning occur; (4) develop computationally efficient
algorithms that can attain the statistical limits of well-designed GANs. The
theory and algorithms developed within this projection will have impact on
various engineering and scientific applications and provide insights for the
proper usage of GANs in the real world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.