* 1909869
* New Approach to Inverse Problems for Differential Equation Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Sergei Avdonin, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 210,000.00

The main goal of this project is to solve some important problems on
identification, observation and control of differential equation networks
(DENs). DENs are metric graphs with differential equations defined on the edges
coupled by matching conditions at the vertices. DENs play a fundamental role in
many problems of science and engineering. On the atomistic scale, physicists
work with quantum dots and quantum waveguides. On the nanoscale, chemical
engineers are interested in mechanical properties of nanorods. On the mesoscale,
fiber networks modeled by strings and beams are crucial for tissue engineering,
whereas on the macroscale grid structures involving pipes, plates and shells
appear in civil and mechanical engineering. Control and inverse theories of DENs
constitute an important part of the rapidly developing area of analysis on
graphs. Being tremendously important for applications, these theories have not
been, however, sufficiently developed. Control, observation and identification
problems were studied almost exclusively for trees, i.e. graphs without cycles,
although general DENs, which may contain cycles, are more important for
applications. The project provides excellent training opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the principal
investigator (PI) and his collaborators will develop a unified approach to
control, observation, and identification of general DENs. This approach is based
on the Boundary Control (BC) method in inverse theory, which uses deep
connections between observability and identifiability of dynamical systems. The
main results of the project will be: (a) uniqueness and stability conditions for
solving inverse problems for DENs and effective algorithms for identifying the
systems' parameters; and (b) controllability and observability conditions of the
dynamical systems described by DENs and the methods for constructing the
corresponding control and observation. The central idea is a proper choice of
observations in the form of directional derivatives of the solutions to PDEs on
graphs at some boundary and internal vertices to guarantee observability and
identifiability of the corresponding systems. For general DENs, we will specify
the sets of vertices where sensors and/or actuators should be situated. Another
component of our approach is a new effective leaf-peeling (LP) method for
solving inverse problems for differential equations on trees that has been
recently developed by the PI and his collaborators. In the current project we
plan to extend this method to general graphs with cycles. Based on the BC and LP
methods, numerical algorithms for solving inverse and control problems for
general DENs will be developed and extensive numerical experiments will be
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.