* 1909198
* The Extreme Galaxy Reference Sample: Low Metallicity Galaxies Across Cosmic Time
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Dawn Erb, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 381,351.00

Faint, low-mass galaxies are a population of cosmological importance: numerous
at high redshifts, they are the most likely source of the photons that re-
ionized the universe. Characterization of such galaxies remains one of the key
problems in astrophysics. This project will create a publicly-available
reference sample of the most highly ionized galaxies, the Extreme Galaxy
Reference Sample (EGRS). The EGRS will be used to quantify the diversity in the
properties of low-metallicity galaxies and their surrounding gas, in the local
universe and at the peak epoch of star formation. The most extensive knowledge
of the physical conditions in the galaxies that likely re-ionized the universe
comes not from studying reionization-era sources directly, but from detailed
examination of plausibly similar objects at low and moderate redshifts. The
project includes a multi-layered strategy of sharing science with many
audiences, from the general public to undergraduate students, and including
curriculum development, outreach, and mentoring of students from under-
represented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outstanding questions include the
factors that enable the escape of ionizing radiation, the intrinsic ionizing
spectra of the most extreme and highly ionized galaxies, and the role of
feedback in shaping the properties of the circumgalactic medium (CGM) and
enabling ionizing photon escape. The EGRS has two pieces: 1) the Extreme Census
of the Local Universe (ExCLU), an imaging survey using four wavelength-adjacent
narrowband filters to cover an extraordinarily wide area of 26,470 square
degrees that will find tens of thousands of the rarest and most extreme galaxies
in the local universe, and enabling studies of their halo masses, evolutionary
states, stellar populations, intrinsic ionizing spectra and feedback-related
properties, and 2) comprehensive studies of a smaller, carefully selected sample
of galaxies at redshift about two, to map the CGM with Lyman-alpha emission and
quantify feedback with deep rest-frame ultraviolet imaging, supplemented by
higher signal-to-noise, higher resolution studies of gravitationally lensed
galaxies. EGRS will provide the community with a baseline for the study of low-
mass, low-metallicity galaxies across cosmic time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.