* 1909048
* CNS Core: Small: Ultra-Low-Complexity Switching Algorithms for Scalable High Network Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Jun Xu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2022
* USD 432,691.00

The volumes of network traffic across the Internet and in data-centers continue
to grow relentlessly, thanks to existing and emerging data-intensive
applications. To transport and "direct" this massive amount of traffic to its
respective destinations, network switches capable of connecting a large number
of input-output ports (these switches are called high-radix) and operating at
very high speeds are badly needed. A switch has to compute, for each time slot
(say 10 nanoseconds in duration), a matching that specifies the set of
simultaneous connections through the switch between the input ports and the
output ports, each of which allows for the transmission of a packet between the
corresponding port pair and out the switch toward its destination. A major
challenge in designing fast high-radix switches is to develop algorithms that
can compute high-quality matchings within the duration of a time slot, even when
the switch size (radix) N is large. However, existing matching (switching)
algorithms are not computationally efficient nor scalable enough for future fast
high-radix switches. This project will bridge this gap via investigating next-
generation matching algorithms that run much faster yet have excellent
throughput and delay performances. This project will also develop new
mathematical techniques that are necessary for analyzing the throughput
guarantees of such algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on
and extend three recent research breakthroughs made by the principal
investigator and his students. The first breakthrough is an add-on algorithm
called Queue-Proportional Sampling (QPS) that can be used to boost the
performance of existing matching algorithms, such as SERENA and iSLIP, at
virtually no additional computation cost. The second breakthrough is QPS-r, a
distributed matching algorithm that runs a constant r rounds (iterations) of QPS
to compute a matching. In just a single iteration (i.e., when r = 1), QPS-1
outputs a matching that is in general not even maximal, yet has exactly the same
quality as maximal matchings, which are much more expensive to compute. The
third breakthrough is SERENADE, which effectively parallelizes SERENA and has a
low computational complexity of O(log N) per port. This project will develop
among others Small Batch QPS (SB-QPS), a batch matching algorithm that builds on
QPS and QPS-r and appears to have all the desired properties of next-generation
matching algorithms. This project will also develop new mathematical techniques,
within the framework of Lyapunov stability theory, for determining and proving
the throughput guarantees of several existing or next-generation matching
algorithms such as QPS-iSLIP, QPS-r, SB-QPS, and O-SERENADE.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an important educational component of this project, the
PI is writing the second edition of a textbook on a topic that contains the
design and analysis of such algorithms as a subtopic. The PI will work closely
with leading networking solution providers, such as Cisco, to facilitate the
transfer of technology. The PI will further broaden the participation of under-
represented groups, such as women and minority, in research and higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.