* 1909339
* Collaborative Research: First Science with the Michigan Young STar Imager at CHARA (MYSTIC)
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Theo ten Brummelaar, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2023
* USD 32,158.00

The number of exoplanets--planets around stars other than the Sun--has grown
into the thousands in the past decade. The vast majority of the known exoplanets
have been found closer to their star than the Earth is to our Sun. At the
distances of stars, this is too small a spacing to be easily resolved. The
investigators plan to use a new technique (infrared interferometry) and a new
instrument (MYSTIC), to study how Earth-like planets form and develop.
Preliminary studies of planets suggest a gap in planet size distribution between
1.5 and 2 times the radius of the Earth, and the investigators will seek to
confirm or disprove that result. Graduate students and undergraduate students
will be involved in the research. The investigators will also team with the Ann
Arbor Hands-On Museum to 1) create mobile versions of museum displays that will
travel the state of Michigan and 2) create a hands-on exhibit and booth to
travel to NASCAR events in Michigan in order to provide science outreach to an
audience that might not currently be seeking STEM
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The region inside 1 au around young stars is
physically small on an astronomical scale. However, the physics in this region
has an out-sized impact: this is where mass accretion onto the star is
regulated, the initial conditions for terrestrial planet formation are set, and
the migration of giant planets moving through the young gas-rich disk are
controlled, Exoplanet demographics of the inner au now reveal a gap in the
planet size distribution and also suggest the budget of solids available may not
be enough to explain the known Kepler planets, at least using current disk
models. To directly address the intimate connections between planet-formation
theory and exoplanet demographics, spatially-resolved imaging of the inner au of
young stars is needed. This can only be reached through infrared interferometry.
Using the Georgia State University CHARA Array (the longest-baseline
optical/infrared interferometer in the world) the investigators will image young
stars with milliarcsecond angular resolution at wavelengths from 1.1-2.5 microns
for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.