* 1909831
* Collaborative Research: The impacts of massive Black Hole formation and evolution pathways on Gravitational Wave sources
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mark Vogelsberger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 51,603.00

This award is part of a collaborative project to understand how massive black
holes form and grow in galaxies in the early universe. The team will use
computer simulations of the birth and growth of galaxies in the early universe
with different black hole formation models. They will then look for differences
in the predicted gravitational wave events between models. They will also search
through the simulations for expected optical events that would be associated
with the growth of black holes and possible gravitational wave
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will look at three
different black hole seeding mechanisms in cosmological simulations with galaxy
formation models as in the IllustrisTNG simulations. These will be traced
through hydrodynamical cosmological simulations to determine the astrophysical
information that can be extracted from gravitational wave detection of merging
massive black holes and electromagnetic observations of galaxies at high
redshifts. The data from the simulations will be made
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows
on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.