* 1909711
* Spatially Resolving the AGN Broad Emission Line Region
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jason Dexter, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 394,052.00

Black holes millions to billions of times the mass of the sun occupy the centers
of most galaxies. Hot gas falling onto these supermassive black holes radiates
light, which can be bright enough for Astronomers to detect out to large
distances corresponding to early stages in the history of the Universe. The mass
of the central black hole informs our understanding how galaxies and black holes
form and grow. The current method used to measure it depends on the assumption
that fast moving gas is in orbit around the black hole. This project will test
this basic assumption using data with sufficiently high angular resolution to
see the gas motions directly. It will determine whether the gas is falling onto
and growing the black hole, or flowing outwards and escaping. The observations
will be assisted by monitoring using telescopes on the CU Boulder campus. The
monitoring observations will be used to train students both inside and outside
the classroom in astronomical observing, and particularly to provide early
research experiences for undergraduates from traditionally underrepresented
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI and team will use new
data from the Very Large Telescope Interferometer beam combiner instrument
GRAVITY to spatially resolve the kinematics and structure of the broad emission
line region for a sample of 11 bright Type 1 AGN. Using kinematic models, they
will measure the broad emission line radius and establish an interferometric
radius-luminosity relation as an independent comparison to those obtained using
reverberation mapping. From the modeling results they will infer the emission
line region structure and the central black hole mass. In a few cases where both
types of measurements exist, they will combine their results with those from
velocity-resolved reverberation mapping to carry out detailed studies of the
broad emission line structure and kinematics. The same data provide measurements
of hot dust structure, which will be used to study the physical connection
between the hot dust and atomic gas on sub-milliarcsecond scales. They will also
develop and apply kinematic models of disk winds, including where the line
emission is optically thick, to determine whether the dominant emission line
kinematics is a result of a continuous outflow, or part of the inflow feeding
the supermassive black hole. The VLTI/GRAVITY observations critically depend on
visible AO performance, which is related to the variable optical brightness. The
investigators will use visible wavelength monitoring observations using two 20"
telescopes at the Sommers-Bausch Observatory on the CU Boulder campus to assist
in target selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.