* 1909468
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Between Shannon and Hamming
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Anand Sarwate, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 256,500.00

Over the last 70 years, information theory and coding have enabled communication
technologies that have had an astounding impact on everyday lives. This is
possible due to the match between encoding/decoding strategies and corresponding
models of the communication channel. Traditional models fall at two ends of a
spectrum. Models which assume that the channel is random, such as those
involving channel noise governed by a memoryless stochastic process, take an
average-case view of the channel: such models are the basis of Shannon theory.
At the other extreme, "Hamming"-like models take a worst-case view of the
channel: the noise can be chosen adversarially with respect to the communication
scheme. However, for several existing and emerging communication systems, the
Shannon/average-case view may be too optimistic, whereas the Hamming/worst-case
view may be too pessimistic. This project takes up the challenge of studying
models that lie between the Shannon and Hamming extremes. The outcomes of this
research will inform the design of codes for a multitude of practical settings
where average-case interference models may be too optimistic and worst-case
models may be too pessimistic, such as wireless multiple-frame communication
systems in vehicular networks (VANETS) or the Internet of Things
(IoT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common way to view the distinction between
average-case and worst-case analysis is operational: it is a difference in error
criterion. This project takes a different perspective: the difference is in how
the interference can depend on the transmitted codeword. This is modeled by
assuming the interference is controlled by a jammer. A dependent jammer
corresponds to the Hamming model while an independent one corresponds to that of
Shannon. Restricting how jammer interference can depend on the codeword
transmitted gives rise to models that lie between those of Shannon and Hamming.
The project develops theoretical foundations for the study of communication
models in which the jammer acts under varying degrees of uncertainty, and
identifies new channel models, code designs, and capacity concepts. The project
will develop a unified treatment of channel models that lie between the Shannon
and Hamming model and abilities to (a) design optimal rate coding schemes that
utilize the limitations posed on the jammer; (b) design secure communication
schemes that leverage the jammer's constraints to improve traditional tradeoffs
between capacity and security; and (c) inform the design of future practical
codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.