* 1909030
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Skyrmion Mediated Eenergy-efficient VCMA Switching of 2-Terminal p-MTJ Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jayasimha Atulasimha, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

State of the art magnetic memory devices use electrical current to switch the
magnetization of a nano-magnet from 'up' to 'down' state or vice versa and thus
encode the binary bits 1 and 0 respectively. Unlike devices based on widely-used
CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor) technology, such a device, based
on technology called spin transfer torque random access memory (STT-RAM), is
non-volatile, a significant advantage. However, these devices consume about 1000
times the energy that CMOS devices use for switching. If electrical field is
used to control magnetization, these devices could be a hundred times more
energy-efficient. However, development of such control methods are impeded by
the level of errors introduced due to the presence of material defects and room
temperature thermal noise in the material. This project seeks to demonstrate new
techniques that makes the switching and control process robust to such defects,
thus achieving the energy savings needed for this technology to be competitive
with CMOS devices. The project would also help mentor undergraduate summer
research, various K-12 workshops (including a K-12 research experience for
underrepresented sections in partnership with Richmond Minorities in Engineering
Program) on nano-magnetic computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
demonstrate that forcing the magnetization through an intermediate so-called
"magnetic skyrmion state", where the magnetization spirals from pointing up/down
at the core to pointing down/up at the periphery of a circular nano-magnet,
makes the switching process extremely robust as well as eliminates the need for
any extra magnetic field. The development of such device, if successful, could
make the energy efficient Voltage Control of Magnetic Anisotropy (VCMA)
switching technique viable for practical memory devices while needing only
modest changes to existing STT-RAM fabrication process. The key technical
approach in this research project will address gaps in knowledge as well as
demonstrate a proof of concept for skyrmion mediated nano-magnetic memory
device. The project plans to 1) investigate the growth of various material
systems and interfaces and characterize their magnetic properties to develop an
optimized memory device that is energy efficient, scalable and has low switching
error, 2) demonstrate proof of concept VCMA switching of a nano-magnetic memory
cell ~100 nm diameter mediated by a skyrmion state and characterize its
switching error, and 3) perform rigorous modeling of skyrmion mediated
magnetization dynamics in the presence of thermal noise and defects to
understand why the intermediate skyrmion state makes the magnetization reversal
robust and study further scaling of these devices. Students will be trained on
complementary thin film growth, nano-fabrication, magnetic characterization and
micromagnetic modeling in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.