* 1909875
* III:Small: Towards Cross-Model Query Optimizations for Multi-model Heterogeneous Data Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Amarnath Gupta, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2023
* USD 443,183.00

Large-scale analysis of complex, heterogeneous datasets is now an integral part
of various social and natural sciences, digital journalism, law, enterprises,
and numerous other application domains. Users in such fields are increasingly
grappling with the need to perform holistic integrated analytics spanning a
variety of data models beyond just structured or semi-structured data to include
graph data, text data, etc. Such multi-model data repositories are also growing
in volume due to the widespread availability of online data sources such as
social media and news media, which have opened up new avenues for insight in
various domains. To take advantage of these opportunities, it is necessary to
develop joint understanding and processing of at least three data models -
relations, graphs, and text - including their evolution over time. This project
aims to enable faster and scalable cross-model data
analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An emerging information architecture for such
heterogeneous data problem is the "polystore" approach that uses multiple "uni-
model" backend engines such as RDBMSs, graph DBMSs, Solr, etc., and provides a
translation layer in the middle to farm out different parts of a cross-model
query to different engines. This approach is gaining popularity because it
allows us to exploit the full functionality and native performance of uni-model
engines for the corresponding parts of the queries. Amongst polystores, there
are loosely-coupled solutions that have a very thin processing layer whose task
is to "stitch the parts" together, and primarily provide support for data
placement, movement and transformation. This project will focus on the query
architecture and optimization principles for a tighter-coupled polystore. A
usable, efficient, and scalable data analytics platform for queries spanning
three data models, viz., relations, graphs, and text (including temporal
evolution), that arise from social media and other sources, will be designed. A
cross-model dataflow optimizer will be created for this "tri-store" setting to
study fundamental systems optimization principles and will be implemented within
the AWESOME polystore system. Further, several novel cross-model query
optimization techniques will be devised to exploit the semantics of these three
data models. Special attention will be paid to the temporality of data such that
the optimizations treat temporal evolution of the data as a first-class
primitive and support such queries efficiently on top of the existing engines
even though they may lack native support for temporal
queries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.