* 1909612
* AF: Small: Sublinear Algorithms for Visual Properties
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Sofya Raskhodnikova, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The area of sublinear algorithms aims to establish algorithmic foundations for
processing big data. Sublinear algorithms produce quick, approximate answers
after examining only a tiny fraction of their input. This project focuses
specifically on sublinear algorithms for visual and geometric data, with the
goal of laying foundations for studying such data in the sublinear context. This
requires the development of new tools and will open up new connections as well
as new areas of applications. Effectively exploiting big data can provide
significant societal benefits. The research pursued by this project contributes
the theoretical foundations necessary to take advantage of big data. It has the
potential to change how visual data is processed and analyzed. The results of
this research will be integrated into the investigator's graduate course on
sublinear algorithms.

The primary goal of this project is a systematic investigation of visual data in
the sublinear context. Whereas there are established and successful lines of
research in sublinear algorithms and property testing on functions, codes (and,
more generally, algebraic properties), graphs, and discrete distributions,
several potential applications of sublinear algorithms require working with
visual and geometric data. Specifically, sublinear algorithms that can test
basic visual properties, such as symmetry, convexity, and low genus have the
potential to dramatically speed up image processing applications. Some of these
properties have not been studied at all in the context of sublinear algorithms.
This project investigates fundamental problems in testing visual properties,
considers problems in higher dimensions, and studies new computational tasks
with a focus on robustness. To achieve their full potential, sublinear
algorithms need to be able to handle geometric and visual data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.