* 1909038
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Topology-Aware Image Understanding using Deep Variational Objectives
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Chao Chen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 244,999.00

Image segmentation, which extracts objects of interest from given images, is a
fundamental computer vision task. This project develops novel image segmentation
methodology combining classic mathematical foundations and modern deep neural
networks. In particular, the developed methodology will achieve high quality in
segmenting fine-scale object instances, as well as their topology. Correct
segmentation of fine-details and topology such as connectivity between parts is
critical for downstream analysis such as reasoning about affordance of objects -
what actions can be made on them - and biomedical image analysis. This project
not only bridges the gap between principled mathematical theory and the
practical deep image segmentation framework, but also trains the next generation
of researchers and educators. Through a carefully designed integrated
educational and outreach plan, the principal investigators will engage
undergraduate students, high school students, women, and other underrepresented
students in the research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies
deep variational relaxations of segmentation problems, namely, consider the
segmentation task as a continuous valued prediction problem and employ
variational functionals as training loss functions for deep neural networks. The
introduction of deep learning allows highly nonlinear functions to be estimated
and greatly improves the capability of variational approaches such as the
Mumford-Shah functional and the persistent homology, in segmenting instances
with sharp boundaries and with correct topology. Applications on robotic
affordance and influence prediction and medical imaging will improve state-of-
the-arts in those areas. The resulting techniques and software will be validated
on image segmentation, affordance and medical imaging datasets, in order to
provide quantitative assessments of the proposed
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.