* 1909769
* CNS Core: Small: Bridging the Silos of Edge Computing with Connected Namespaces
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ketan Bhardwaj, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Edge computing provides opportunities to process data closer to its sources, on
computing elements embedded in the data network path. It can be transformative
for many important classes of latency-sensitive and data-intensive applications,
such as Smart City, autonomous systems and transportation, augmented and virtual
reality (AR/VR), visual analytics, etc. However, realizing the potential benefit
of edge computing is not trivial, because it relies on the ability to make
timely decisions across diverse resources and services, disaggregated across
many siloed providers, and governed by dynamically changing operating
conditions. For applications seeking benefits from edge computing, this presents
challenges in obtaining the right set of available resources. For stakeholders
contributing resources to edge computing, this presents challenges in
maintaining desired degree of control over their resources. To address this
problem, this project develops a new Decentralized Edge Exchange that builds on
a new system-level abstraction, called connected namespaces, to enable dynamic,
fine-grained, and cross-stakeholder resource orchestrations in edge computing.
Importantly, the exchange natively integrates use of tailored cryptographic
techniques, namely, multi-party computation (MPC), to achieve full privacy while
meeting all the real-time performance requirements of the complete system.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The technologies developed in this project permit edge
computing applications to utilize the best available edge resources, even when
those are fragmented across and owned by multiple parties, while still providing
each stakeholder with controls regarding their resource use and sharing
policies. The ability to deliver on performance without sacrificing
confidentiality and controls removes critical concerns about edge computing,
which otherwise hamper its adoption. As a result, this research presents a path
for future developments in the new edge infrastructure tier, support for
important classes of emerging applications, new execution platforms comprising
novel hardware and software technologies for the edge, and catalyzes the
adoption of edge computing as a new source of revenue streams and economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.