* 1909837
* Collaborative Research: Using Brown Dwarfs to Understand Exoplanetary Atmospheres: Spectral Inversions of an Analog Population
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Emily Rice, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 176,541.00

Astronomers are beginning to directly image exoplanets and obtain spectroscopic
data. One of the chief barriers in interpreting the data is a complete
understanding of condensate clouds. Typically, the data from exoplanet
atmospheres are not good enough (and the sample size is too small) for direct
determination of cloud properties. The standard technique involves 'forward-
modeling' of planetary atmospheres from first principles using a grid technique.
This work will use isolated, young brown dwarfs as analogs for massive exoplanet
atmospheres. The team will use spectral inversion techniques on data from this
population to make direct interpretations of brown dwarf atmospheres. These
brown dwarfs typically have properties very similar to imaged exoplanets:
temperature, luminosity, age, color, spectral features. However, they lack an
obscuring parent star. This makes the spectra greatly easier to collect and
allows for a much larger sample size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will examine
a set of 26 young (5-130 Myr) isolated brown dwarfs from the same stellar
associations in which large exoplanets have been discovered and imaged. They
will use the BREWSTER code, developed by one of the team collaborators, to
conduct spectral inversions. These inversions, along with empirical spectral
energy fits and forwarding modeling using the BT SETTL code, will be used to (1)
derive and compare fundamental parameters, (2) assess the dependence of cloud
dynamics on environment, color and spectral features of the source object, and
(3) examine compositional variations among directly-imaged exoplanets and
exoplanet analogs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.