* 1909111
* AF: Small: Relative Fault Tolerance in Network Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Michael Dinitz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Fault tolerance is crucial for every computer system, particularly networked and
distributed systems where computational and communication components can fail.
Every network (e.g., internet, electric power grid, mobile phones or road
networks with traffic/closures) needs to be resilient to component failures or
malfunctions. It is crucial that quality of service is maintained in
catastrophic events where there can be many failures. This project is about a
new notion of fault-tolerance that is relative to some underlying
system/network, which allows for more refined and powerful guarantees than
traditional definitions. The PI will develop the theory of relative fault-
tolerance, fundamentally improving knowledge of the capabilities and limitations
of these new definitions and leading to improved reliability of networked
systems. This project incorporates mentoring and including underrepresented
undergraduates and high school students in the more applied aspects of this
work, as well as outreach to middle schools in Baltimore through existing
mathematics-based programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the project will
be on network-design problems, where the system is a network which is either
supposed to stay connected after faults or is supposed to both stay connected
and preserve distances in the network after faults. The traditional notion of
fault-tolerance is absolute: a network is fault tolerant if it can withstand
some number of failures. But this notion is limiting if we are building on top
of an already existing system; if the underlying system is not very fault-
tolerant, then our system cannot be very fault-tolerant. To get around this
limitation, the PI will study algorithms for designing networks and systems with
relative fault tolerance, where the requirement is that the system be robust to
faults which the underlying system is also robust to. More formally, a network
is f-fault tolerant not if it can withstand f faults (the traditional
definition), but if it has the same behavior after f faults as the underlying
system. The two main problem types in this project are the
following.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Survivable Network Design, where the goal is
to find a subgraph of a given network where the connected components of the
subgraph after faults are the same as the connected components of the full
network after faults.&lt;br/&gt;- Graph Spanners, where the goal is to find a
subgraph of a given network where the pairwise distances in the subgraph after
faults are a good approximation of the pairwise distances in the full graph
after faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For both of these types of problems, the PI
will design efficient approximation algorithms for the main problems and their
variants, in the traditional centralized model of computation as well as in
distributed and parallel models. In order to do this, it will be necessary to
develop new algorithmic techniques that are based on but go beyond the
techniques that have been used for related problems (iterative rounding for
survivable network design, randomized rounding for
spanners).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.