* 1909897
* Collaborative Research: A Multi-Dimensional View of the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jon Holtzman, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2023
* USD 217,277.00

Galaxies are the main building blocks of the Universe. Our home galaxy, the
Milky Way, provides a special opportunity to learn about how galaxies form and
change with time. New astronomical surveys, such as the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
(SDSS), are now measuring the chemical element "fingerprints" of hundreds of
thousands of stars across the Milky Way. The investigators will analyze these
chemical fingerprints along with ages and positions of stars, to learn the
history of the Milky Way and about the nuclear furnaces of stars that produce
these elements. They will also develop new methods to improve the SDSS
measurements of stellar temperatures and chemical compositions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use maps of multi-element abundance
ratios to empirically infer the element yields of supernovae and to identify
other major channels of chemical enrichment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will enhance the educational component of the SDSS by developing a
new "expedition" on stellar spectroscopy for the SDSS Voyages portal, which is
aimed at high school students. They will develop new planetarium shows about the
origin of the elements and the history of the Milky Way. They plan extensive
public engagement activities, including public lectures and programs for the
Ohio State Planetarium. These activities are tied specifically to their research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.