* 1909171
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Fundamental Optimization Problems in Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Lenwood Heath, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 06/30/2023
* USD 458,000.00

Geometry is everywhere. An average person will unknowingly generate geometric
data in various applications, for instance while using location services or even
conducting a financial transaction. Processing such geometric data quickly is
integral to providing a fast response. For example, a navigation system requires
an efficient algorithm to provide an optimal route. Similarly, taxi companies
require a fast algorithm to match cars to customers in order to minimize wait
time and travel distance. Despite decades of effort, however, existing
algorithms for many such geometric optimization problems are either slow or
produce low-quality solutions. In this project, the PI will introduce new
techniques and provide a roadmap to design efficient algorithms for select
fundamental geometric problems. Given their wide applicability, the PI and his
students will not only design algorithms for these problems but also implement,
test, optimize and make the code public for the benefit of researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study a number of fundamental
optimization problems in computational geometry. These include computation of
the Geometric Transportation problem, Geometric Bottleneck Matching, Capacitated
Server Allocation, Minimum Weight Triangulation and the Minimum Weight Steiner
Triangulation problems. State-of-the-art geometric optimization techniques have
severe limitations with respect to these problems. This project will explore
three new techniques to make progress on solving these fundamental problems.
First, the PI will introduce a new graph-partitioning technique to assist in the
design of fast algorithms for matching and transportation problems in geometric
and metric settings. Second, the PI will generalize the Hungarian Algorithm to
other server-allocation problems and propose to design fast exact, approximation
and online algorithms in geometric and metric settings. Third, the PI will
explore a probabilistic approach to design polynomial-time approximation schemes
for the well-known minimum-weight triangulation and Steiner triangulation
problems. This project will also introduce and integrate several novel
techniques from various areas including computational geometry and optimization
that will assist in bridging the gap between the upper and lower bounds for
these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.