* 1909238
* I-Corps:  ESTAT Electroadhesive Clutch
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Carmel Majidi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be reducing
the required weight and power consumption of robotics hardware. A particularly
promising field is in the domain of human-machine interaction, including
prostheses, haptic devices, exoskeletons, and other wearable technologies
designed to assist users with disabilities or augment the performance of able-
bodied users. Current devices are severely limited by the weight, power
consumption, and power output of conventional actuators and transmissions. Using
clutched springs to improve the performance of these devices could dramatically
reduce their weight, leading to more comfortable and effective motion
assistance. Products based on the company's electroadhesive clutch could also
offer improved energy efficiency and versatility in industrial robot arms. Much
of the energy consumed by large industrial arms stems from supporting the body
weight and moving the arm?s inertia. Using electroadhesive clutches and springs
to provide adjustable gravity cancelling and to harvest and return kinetic
energy would significantly reduce energy costs. Additionally, electrically
controllable transmissions could enable control mode switching for performing a
wider range of tasks, potentially reducing the amount of time required to
manufacture products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will focus on
the commercial potential of the company's novel electroadhesive clutch prototype
that weighs 10 times less and consumes 1000 times less power than other clutch
technologies. Conventional clutches operate using electro-magnetic solenoids or
magneto-rheological fluid, both of which require heavy components and
significant electrical power to operate. The company's electroadhesive clutch
uses thin, lightweight materials and operates with a fundamentally different
technique, allowing us to transmit up to 180 N of force with a device that
weighs 15 grams, consumes 3.2 mW of power, and activates at 320 V DC. The
activation/deactivation times of the company's electroadhesive clutch are 20 ms,
which is comparable with the best conventional clutches. We have also performed
a fatigue test demonstrating more than 3 million loading cycles. The company
recently conducted an extensive experimental study of the effects of design
parameters on these performance metrics, and now has a strong understanding of
the appropriate design of clutches for a broad range of applications. The
company's clutch has the potential to improve the performance of existing
products that use clutches and enable new designs that would be infeasible when
subjected to the limits of traditional clutches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.