* 1909209
* The Formation of Giant Planets on Wide Orbits
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Brendan Bowler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2023
* USD 310,326.00

This work will focus on understanding how large planets form in the outer
reaches of a solar system. Planet formation in the inner regions of a solar
system is reasonably well understood. Further out - up to thousands of AU away
from a parent star - there is no established model to explain recent startling
discoveries of massive planets in these areas. The researchers will analyze
recently-gathered survey data from the Keck Observatory to establish if and how
the number and mass of planets in the outer reaches of a solar system depends on
the mass of the parent star. The form of this dependence (or its lack) might
shed light on the new Disk Instability model as a potential formation mechanism.
The survey data represent 400 young, low-mass red dwarf stars, and comprises the
largest survey in this stellar mass range. The team will include a graduate
student, as well as three undergraduate summer students. These students will
participate through UT's TAURUS program, which makes research opportunities in
Astronomy available to under-represented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
will analyze Keck NIRC2 coronagraph data of 400 young, low-mass stars to
directly image planetary companions in far orbits. The survey data incorporate
previously unknown young K- and M- dwarfs that the team identified using a new
methodology to locate members of nearby young moving groups. There are three
phases involved in this work: (1) the team will establish the ages and kinematic
group membership of the sample using high-resolution spectroscopy combined with
new parallaxes from Gaia DR2; (2) the team will carry out PSF subtraction for
all coronagraphic observations using a large reference library they will compile
comprising thousands of NIRC2 PSF templates; and (3) they will measure the
relationship between giant planet frequency and stellar host mass through a
meta-analysis of the program together with published surveys in the
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.