* 1909641
* Hunting for Black Holes with Astrometric Microlensing
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Jessica Lu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 05/31/2023
* USD 368,701.00

Black holes are one of the most exotic phenomena in astrophysics and are places
where the most fundamental physics: gravity and quantum mechanics are tested.
The Milky Way Galaxy likely contains between ten million and a billion stellar-
mass black holes: those with masses a few times larger than the Sun. Estimating
this number and the true distribution of black hole masses can provide important
constraints on how black holes form, the existence of primordial black holes
from the early universe, and the interpretation of recent gravitational wave
detections of merging black hole pairs. To date, no isolated stellar-mass black
holes have been definitively detected and only a few dozen black holes have
measured masses -- all in binaries. Microlensing, an effect of general
relativity where a black hole's gravity lenses the light of a background star
observed from Earth, provides a method to detect isolated black holes and
measure their masses. A research team at the University of California-Berkeley
will carry out sensitive observations of microlensing events to measure both the
magnified brightness and the shifted astrometric position, allowing them to
precisely measure the mass of the lensing object and determine if it is indeed a
black hole or simply a chance lensing event between two normal stars. The
outcome is expected to be the first unambiguous detection of an isolated black
hole in the Milky Way. As part of the project, the principal investigator (PI)
will also enhance the training and diversity of the next generation of
scientists and engineers by improving the training for the teachers who will
educate them. The PI will start a U. C. Berkeley chapter of the Institute for
Scientist and Engineer Educators, which provides a professional development
program that enables junior researchers to receive training in inquiry-based
teaching methods and education pedagogy. New inquiry activities developed as a
result will be also freely disseminated to a broad community of astronomers to
multiply the impact of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop a new high-precision astrometry experiment to observe long-duration
microlensing events and detect and measure the masses of isolated black holes
for the first time. Using astrometric observations obtained from the adaptive
optics system on the W. M. Keck Observatory, a sample of approximately seven
long-duration microlensing events (i.e. candidate black holes) will be monitored
in order to measure their lens masses. The expected accuracy on the lens mass is
~10% for a ten solar mass black hole and the predicted black hole detection rate
is ~50%. The resulting black hole detection frequency and masses from the
proposed survey will be used to constrain the total number of black holes in the
Galaxy, their binary fraction, and kick velocities. Finding these isolated black
holes would reduce the orders of magnitude uncertainty on the total number of
black holes in the Galaxy and constrain theories of black hole formation and
evolution. The proposed development of astrometry techniques, needed for
astrometric microlensing, will also lay a foundation for new explorations in
many areas of astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.