* 1909821
* RI: Small: Lightly Supervised Deep Learning for Multi-Frame Visual Motion Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Carlo Tomasi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This project addresses the fundamental video analysis problem of determining the
motion of every image point at every point in time in a video sequence. While
apparently effortless for people, this problem is still a challenge for
computers, especially when objects move fast, in large numbers, or in complex
ways. The field of computer vision has made tremendous strides on this problem
in the last few decades, but there is still ample room for improvement. This
project draws on recent developments in machine learning to improve the accuracy
and reliability of the estimates of point motion in video. In addition to
graduate students, the project will involve undergraduates under the auspices of
the Bass Connections program at Duke University. This program reaches out to
students in their first college years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thrusts of the
project include the development of suitable representations of motion, the
design and training of deep learning architectures, and performance evaluation.
The representational challenge is paramount: While the motion of a point between
two frames is a simple vector connecting the start and end point of the motion,
it becomes a trajectory when multiple frames are involved. Trajectories of
nearby points are often similar when they belong to the same object, but they
are different when they are on different objects, and this thrust will develop
the mathematics for the piecewise continuous fields of trajectories that arise
as a result. Deep learning architectures and corresponding learning algorithms,
at the center of the second thrust, will be re-thought to take best advantage of
relations between motions at different points and times. Finally, performance
evaluation will provide a nuanced understanding of the trade-offs, strengths,
and weaknesses of the algorithms being developed, and will help determine what
methods and parameter settings work best for what type of
video.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.