* 1909700
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Shared Mobility Systems to Address Transportation Barriers of Underserved Urban and Rural Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Patrick Shih, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2023
* USD 297,768.00

This project will lead to a novel understanding of effective design strategies
for shared mobility systems for underserved rural and urban communities. Due to
advances in networked information systems and ubiquitous connectivity, use of
shared mobility systems is increasingly common. Underserved communities
typically have the greatest needs for low-cost and high-quality shared
transportation services. Yet, these communities experience financial, technical,
skill-based and social barriers to their use. The study will result in a shared
mobility system that leverages community strengths, addresses potential
obstacles to use, appeals to community members, and uses a service model that is
sustainable after the grant period. Furthermore, the study will advance the
design of timebanking systems by accounting for the unique properties of
transportation as a service and of rural settings. This work could lead to a
broader set of participants in timebanks, and an expansion of the timebanking
model to include new approaches involving nonprofit and healthcare
organizations. Results can also inform policy efforts to promote transportation
models that are equitable and inclusive for residents of underserved
communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project involves collaborations among
two academic universities and 14 representatives of non-profit organizations in
two geographic areas, and it has three primary aims. Aim 1 is to assess
transportation needs and barriers and to generate participatory design ideas for
a shared mobility system using the timebanking concept. Sessions will focus on:
trust, reciprocity, design for skill development and access for people with
limited computer skills and Internet access. Patients at partnering healthcare
agencies and potential drivers will be interviewed, and participatory design
sessions will be conducted with these groups and third-party intermediaries. Aim
2 is to develop and implement a shared mobility system for healthcare
transportation; new features based on Aim 1 will be integrated into an existing
timebank platform. This aim will involve a pre-pilot field study. Aim 3 is
evaluation of the feasibility and preliminary impact of the system on the
primary outcome of missed appointments at healthcare organizations. This will
involve a four-month pilot study using an interrupted time series quasi-
experimental design. Analyses will leverage electronic health record data,
timebank platform server log data, user surveys, and observation at healthcare
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.