* 1909193
* New Vistas in Weak Lensing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Scott Dodelson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 02/28/2023
* USD 648,513.00

Light rays are bent by gravity as they move past massive objects, in a way that
was first predicted by Einstein. When astronomical objects are massive enough,
such as whole galaxies, then the light bends enough that it can be brought to a
focus, creating what is known as a "gravitational lens". Since Einstein's
prediction, the study of gravitational lensing has grown enormously, and indeed
gravitational lensing is one of the main reasons that we know that "dark matter"
exists. Even though all light is affected in this way, so far only two sources
of light have ever been used to study gravitational lensing: light from
individual galaxies, and the left over light from the Big Bang, known as the
Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB). This project will greatly increase the domain
over which gravitational lensing is studied. In particular it will add three
different new lensed fields to the two currently observed. These are (1) clouds
of gas in intergalactic space (which we can view in three dimensions), (2)
groups and clusters of galaxies, and (3) the field of time delays measured from
CMB light seen in different directions on the sky. The last one, CMB time delay,
is caused by the fact that light slows down as it passes through a gravitational
lens, so that light arrives at an observer later when a lens is between them and
the edge of the observable universe (where the CMB originates). The project aims
to lead to an understanding of the theory behind these new fields, how best to
measure the lensing effects and how to use them to make accurate maps of the
dark matter in the Universe. These concepts, related to the length scales and
contents of the cosmos will also be spread by the project to elementary through
high school students. This will be done with educational video games, including
development of "Minecraft" astronomy lesson plans, and explorable computer
models of quasars and intergalactic space and the chemical constituents of the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weak gravitational lensing is arguably the best
way to map out the dark side of the Universe. Billion dollar class surveys and
satellites will use distortions of galaxy shapes (galaxy shear) caused by
lensing to do this. The more recent adoption of lensing of the Cosmic Microwave
Background (CMB) as a cosmological probe has shown the advantages of a different
tracer of lensing distortions, with different strengths and systematic errors.
These observations of weak lensing are only the beginning, however - any
background light sources will undergo the same distortions and there is a rich
phenomenology yet to be discovered. The work will expand the use of lensing
anisotropies of clustering to three new areas, the Lyman-alpha forest, the
galaxy correlation function, and CMB time delay. None relies on measurement of
galaxy shapes which can make precise galaxy shear determinations difficult, but
two can be measured to high significance with current data and one has potential
implications for future surveys. The PI and Co-I have developed some of the
first ideas on these topics, and the time is ripe for a concerted effort to
unlock their full potential. The project will formulate estimators to derive
lens parameters from raw data, and make use of realistic simulated datasets to
test and develop them in the presence of non-linearities and non-Gaussianity.
These estimators will be applied to data from surveys of the intergalactic
medium and the distribution of galaxies. Statistical errors on the matter
fluctuation amplitude at the few percent level are expected, but the true gains
will be in the differing systematic errors to shear and the new ways the data
can probe cosmology. These techniques will offer a new route to measuring the
neutrino mass and the evolution of structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.