* 1909759
* Collaborative Research: Kinematics and Chemistry of M33 - Determining the Past, Present and Future of the M31/M33 System
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Puragra Guha Thakurta, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 379,116.00

This project will use the Keck telescope to study individual stars in M33, a
companion galaxy to the Andromeda galaxy (M31). Using spectroscopy, they will
obtain information about the motion and star formation history of the disk and
potential halo of M33. They will use this information to learn if its
interactions with M31 have influenced its evolution. The science program is
integrated with a high school research program that will introduce students to
cutting-edge research on M33's formation history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a
mass ten times lower than M31's and a star formation rate 10 times higher, M33
is the best local analog for high z galaxies. Spectroscopic observations of
resolved stars in M31 will provide measurements of the line-of-sight stellar
velocities and dispersion and quantitative comparisons of the dynamics of the
stellar and gas disk components. It will also produce the first iron and alpha-
element abundance distributions for stars in M33. Finally, it will definitively
determine of M33 has a stellar halo. This chemo-dynamical analysis will provide
critical observational constraints on internal and external heating mechanisms
affecting low-mass stellar disks. It will also constrain models of M33's orbit
around M31, yielding insights into whether M33 is on first infall or has
interacted substantially with M31 in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.