* 1909109
* A Study of Stellar Pulsations in Eclipsing Binary Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Andrej Prsa, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 386,443.00

Among the ways by which astronomers measure fundamental properties of stars
(such as mass, radius, temperature, and luminosity), two stand out: by using
closely observing binary stars orbiting each other, and by studying oscillations
in stars -- asteroseismology -- akin to how geologists study the Earth through
seismology. This team at Villanova University seeks to bridge the two techniques
by incorporating the physics of stellar pulsations into their eclipsing binary
star computer code known as PHOEBE. The project will provide the opportunity to
better understand pulsating stars by studying their properties within eclipsing
binary systems, and also the other way around, to learn how pulsations influence
binarity. The astronomy group at Villanova has a long tradition of involving
undergraduates in their research programs. The project will involve two
undergrads per year in this research. Two community workshops will provide
training in the use of PHOEBE for early career scientists, with special
consideration given to geographic diversity, gender balance, and representation
from traditionally underrepresented groups. The research team will provide a
PHOEBE interface to the virtual reality infrastructure CAVE (Cave Automatic
Virtual Environment) at Villanova, and to off-the-shelf VR headsets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PHOEBE works on the premise that binary component surfaces
can be approximated by a mesh of triangles where each triangle has an assigned
set of local quantities (temperature, surface gravity, velocity, emergent
intensity, etc). This mesh effectively describes physical circumstances across
distorted surfaces and accounts for many effects we see manifested in binary
star light curves: gravity brightening due to tidal interaction and rotation,
surface brightness variation due to reflection, heating and limb darkening,
prominences such as spots, and, through this project, stellar pulsations.
Asteroseismologists are able to recover detailed information on stellar
properties from the power spectra of the observed light curves, which are in
turn used to deduce fundamental parameters of stars by way of the so-called
scaling relations. Incorporating stellar pulsations into PHOEBE will provide
fundamental stellar parameters of pulsating stars to 1% or better, thus
validating asteroseismic scaling relations while providing asteroseismologists
with accurate parameters for their models of stellar pulsation
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.