* 1909040
* CNS Core: Small: VIQI: Video Quality of Experience Inference Using Network Measurements
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Mostafa Ammar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Consumer video dominates Internet traffic and shows no signs of abating. In
addition to being a popular source of entertainment, Internet video and its
associated Quality of Experience (QoE) directly affects citizen engagement with
society, from news that informs citizens of current events and issues to
lifelong skill development that provides economic opportunity. Content providers
can monitor end-user QoE on their apps and use these measurements to optimize
the streaming service design. It is, however, challenging for Internet Service
Providers (ISPs) to obtain end-user video QoE information as they lack access to
streaming apps on user devices, the device itself, or the servers. The goal of
this project is to develop scientific approaches that enable end-user ISPs to
use network measurements to infer video QoE. Through collaboration with two
real-world network operators, a Mobile Network Operator network and the Georgia
Tech campus network, the project will enable large scale inference of video QoE
across many different video services, end-user devices, and network data types.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most video services deploy HTTP Adaptive Streaming (HAS)
techniques that require no special network provisioning or resource
reservations, and instead dynamically probe bandwidth availability and adjust
video quality up or down based on bandwidth fluctuations. For such services,
video service quality is practically and usefully estimated through video QoE
metrics that are generally believed to correlate with user satisfaction, such as
average bandwidth and number of video stalls. ISPs, where the end-user attaches,
seek an in-depth understanding of the relationship between end-user QoE and ISP
performance. This work will (1) develop QoE inference techniques for a variety
of available network measurement data from different network types; (2) explore
the use of session modeling as an approach to QoE inference; (3) develop a novel
machine learning approach to inference that is informed by insights from
session-based modeling; (4) investigate scalability techniques that tradeoff
accuracy of inference with real-world feasibility; and (5) develop a framework
for continuous calibration and training. This project will enable large scale
inference of video QoE, leverage and develop partnerships between industry and
academia, and will produce tools and data available to researchers and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project web page is
http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~ammar/VIQI.html. Georgia Tech Smartech
(https://smartech.gatech.edu) will be used as a long term repository. This will
be linked through the project web page above. The goal is to preserve the
project data for at least 5 years beyond the end of
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.