* 1909739
* RI: Small: RUI:  Automated Reasoning about Time -- Methods and Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Luke Hunsberger, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 402,920.00

This project will enhance the ability of computer systems to effectively (and
automatically) reason about time in a broad variety of contexts. Such temporal
reasoning is relevant to the automation of any business process. As an example,
medical organizations must carefully manage the flow of patients through complex
treatment pathways whose twists and turns typically include critically important
timing constraints, tests and treatments with uncertain durations, and tests
whose outcomes can dramatically affect which path to follow. This project will
enable computer systems to reliably and efficiently automate the management of
such complex pathways by providing algorithms that verify that all timing
constraints can be satisfied no matter how the various uncertainties play out.
In addition, this study seeks to improve the theoretical foundations for
general-purpose workflow management systems used in business process modeling.
The project engages a diverse group of undergraduate students in the new
Temporal Reasoning Lab at Vassar College to generate and test new algorithms
that will be stored in a public repository. The project will benefit society by
making workflows more effective and reliable in a wide range of sectors. It will
benefit the research community by strengthening the theoretical foundations of
workflows, providing a repository for implemented algorithms and benchmark
problems, and hosting an instance of the International Symposium on Temporal
Representation and Reasoning.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Workflows that are currently
being used by businesses to automate their manufacturing or other processes
currently lack a solid theoretical foundation, especially with regard to their
handling of timing information. This project will focus on the use of temporal
networks, a formalism for representing and reasoning about time, to solidify the
theoretical foundations of workflows, and to generate new algorithms for
managing the temporal constraints in workflows. Different variations of temporal
networks accommodate features such as actions with uncertain durations, test
actions that generate new information, constraints that depend on the results of
those tests, disjunctive constraints, probabilistic constraints, and choice
points. Undergraduate students working in a new Temporal Reasoning Lab will
begin by implementing and empirically evaluating existing algorithms from the
literature on temporal networks. Subsequent research aims to generate new
algorithms for networks that include novel combinations of features that are
especially relevant to workflows in the medical domain, while proving the
correctness and analyzing the complexity of each new algorithm. To demonstrate
the scalability of the new algorithms, the project will develop a software test-
bed with a broad suite of benchmark problems to be made available to the wider
research community. The resulting repository of new algorithms, theoretical
analyses, benchmark problems, and empirical studies will fill an important gap
in the research on temporal networks, while also enhancing the capabilities of
workflows in the medical domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.