* 1909316
* MK-STYX as a regulator in stress granule clearance
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Shanta Hinton, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 900,000.00

Cellular stress may lead to harmful conditions that alter or prevent the
completion of a normal routine; therefore, a dynamic response must be
established to maintain balance of cellular functions under stressful
conditions. This project investigates how cells adapt to a stressful environment
to return to normal. The researchers involved in this project will be
undergraduate and graduate students who will participate in independent projects
to determine the mechanisms of how genetic information is stored and influenced
by a specific protein under normal and stressful conditions. They will have the
opportunity to continue their research in Canada at the Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum
Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario). Their findings will be presented at
local, national, and international conferences such as at William and Mary
(Williamsburg), San Diego, and Greece. In addition, these students will develop
and use a children friendly workshop to teach local summer camp students and
their parents about the importance of cells keeping a balance, under toxic
conditions. This research will also allow selected students at William and Mary
and Hampton University to travel to a leading research facility, Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory (Long Island, NY), to engage and build networks with
scientists highly active in various disciplines. Thus, the overall scope of this
project allows undergraduates and Master's students to integrate education and
research in the stress response field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells have
protective mechanisms to safeguard stalled mRNAs from harmful conditions. They
form stress granules (SG). SG are large (100-200 nm) cytoplasmic RNA-protein
complexes that transiently form under stress and disassemble upon return to
normal conditions. When SG coalesce for too long, they become toxic, disrupting
cellular homeostasis, highlighting the importance of understanding SG clearance.
Investigators in this project previously reported that SG assembly was decreased
by the signaling protein MK-STYX (MAP kinase serine/threonine/tyrosine binding
protein; a unique catalytically inactive phosphatase), whereas the active mutant
of MK-STYX induces SG. The mechanism by which MK-STYX decreases SG remains
unclear. The current project explores the molecular mechanisms by which MK-STYX
regulates SG by addressing the following questions: 1) Which domain of MK-STYX
elicits a decrease in SG? 2) What are the effects of MK-STYX on HDAC6 and the
motor protein dynein? 3) Does MK-STYX have a role in autophagy, which clears
stress granules? Investigators have identified a phenotype that will allow
substantial structural and functional assays of MK-STYX, including
identification of the MK-STYX domains and the important protein interactions of
MK-STYX that lead to a decrease in SG. Various fluorescent protein-tagged
mutants of MK-STYX, such as truncated domains and the active mutant (catalytic
activity restored), will be overexpressed in HeLa and HEK/293 cells stably
expressing the SG nucleator G3BP1, and observed for SG, and analyzed further
through proteomics. HDAC6 is a critical component of SG; its deacetylation
activity is required for SG. Colocalization, immunoblotting for acetylation and
ubiquitination (important for HDAC6 function), immunoprecipitation, and
deacetylation activity assays will address whether MK-STYX affects the activity
of HDAC6. Dynein is required in conjunction with HDAC6 for SG. Thus, it is
important to determine the effects of MK-STYX on these proteins. Since autophagy
and MK-STYX each negatively affect SG formation, it is important to determine
the effects of MK-STYX on autophagy. A combination of TEM, immunoblotting
(LC3-autophagsomes marker, ubiquitin, etc.), radioactive pulse chase analysis,
tandem mRFP/mCherry-GFP colocalization microscopy, and autophagic sequestration
assays (autophagy inhibitors) will be used, resulting in the development and
integration of computational analysis. The long-term objective of this research
is to understand how MK-STYX regulates signaling
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.