* 1909221
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative Research: Context-Assisted Interactions in the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Christine Julien, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,981.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) promises "smart spaces" that sense and respond to
individuals' needs. However, today's IoT applications fall short of this grand
vision. Applications are often not personalized, do not respond to dynamics, and
require manual intervention and knowledge to work. This project builds a
"middleware" that sits between a user's application and the IoT devices that the
application uses. This middleware has three components necessary to the long-
term vision of a personalized IoT. First, the project develops mechanisms to
authenticate and authorize individuals and their applications to use devices
embedded in the surroundings. This allows applications to operate even in
completely new environments, without requiring the user to perform complex
manual steps to set up the IoT devices. Second, the project creates algorithms
and protocols to automatically select the IoT devices in the surroundings that
an application should use, based on the context of an application's request,
including the physical nature of the environment (e.g., the built environment or
the user's movement). This allows applications to delegate the act of directly
using particular IoT devices to the middleware. Third, this project constructs
feedback pathways between applications and IoT devices. These pathways collect
successes (and failures) of applications' uses of IoT devices. This allows both
the devices and the middleware to learn and adapt over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IoT is central in everyday environments. However,
the state of the art prevents users from personalizing the behavior of spaces,
especially spaces they do not "own". This project's research is on the critical
path to the vision of personalized and immersive IoT experiences. To make an
application's use of the IoT implicit, IoT devices must transparently and
efficiently authenticate users and their applications. To avoid a global catalog
of all IoT devices, applications must dynamically discover contextually-relevant
IoT devices. These are key efforts in this project. To demonstrate its
contributions, this project will deploy a set of micro-testbeds that will
validate the results and generate a general-purpose data set for IoT
applications. The project also includes student-led research projects designed
to transition to museum quality interactive exhibits showcasing the potential of
the IoT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.