* 1909937
* SHF: Small: THz surface Wave Based Interconnect Technology for Ultra-fast Data Transfer
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Pinaki Mazumder, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 449,645.00

Technological advancements in data transfer mechanisms need to stay abreast of
the exponential growth in high-bandwidth, exascale computing used in almost all
aspects of modern life. This project aims at high speed information transfer
through an unconventional yet promising technology based on terahertz surface
wave, and chalk out the plan for developing software machinery in order to
support the physical design of the novel system. A number of Python-script based
applications that will be developed during the proposed research will be also
leveraged for interactive tools that will help K-12 students visualize the
essence of our data-driven modern science. The educational tools such as books,
videos, hardware demonstrations, which will be developed during the research
activities will be disseminated to other research and educational communities
and to the general public. The big research community on high-speed electronics
will benefit as a whole out of this project, as the corresponding outcomes will
be conveyed to them through the journals and conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves developing terahertz-spoof surface
plasmon interconnect technology: a new pathway for digital data transmission for
high speed and energy efficient communication among electronic chips. Like all
sophisticated systems, this technology also requires development of special
computational software and computer aided design (CAD) tools in order to test,
validate, and automate the design process which can remarkably save the time and
cost needed to establish this technology. However, the standard commercial CAD
tools are optimized for mostly either gigahertz electronics, or optical devices,
leaving a technology gap for terahertz. Being aware of the fact that the
electro-dynamic analysis of terahertz electronics is fundamentally more critical
than other frequencies, the project aims to adopt special strategies, such as
implementation of modular space analysis in conjunction with multi-level
simulation methodologies for efficient analysis of communication systems
operating in terahertz spectrum. The development of software analysis tools will
be paired with the simultaneous hardware implementation of the terahertz-speed
interconnect system, and validate the theory produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.