* 1910471
* Collaborative Research: Disentangling the Cosmic Web with Fast Radio Bursts
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Regina Jorgenson, Nantucket Maria Mitchell Association
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 169,698.00

For many years, astronomers have been trying to understand and observe the
diffuse gas between galaxies, also known as the intergalactic medium (IGM) or --
more colloquially -- the cosmic web. A research collaboration between the
University of California-Santa Cruz (UCSC) and the Maria Mitchell Observatory
(MMO) will use precise observations of a recently discovered type of short
astronomical event called fast radio bursts (FRBs) to investigate and attempt to
disentangle the cosmic web. This project will involve the acquisition and
analysis of optical and infrared follow-up observations of over 100 well-
localized FRBs, discovered using the leading FRB experiments for precise
localization (ASKAP, realfast, and DSA-110) and then observed with large
aperture telescopes. Using the planned dataset, the astronomers will focus on
three main activities: (i) obtain follow-up imaging and spectroscopy of the
galaxies hosting FRBs, (ii) resolve the distribution of ionized gas in the Local
Group of galaxies, and (iii) disentangle the cosmic web. The project will
support the education and training of a full-time PhD student at UCSC in
observational astronomy. The Bridge program at MMO, meanwhile, will provide
postgraduate students from underrepresented communities the opportunity to build
the skill set (e.g. programming, statistics, observing) needed to transition
into a PhD program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical simulations on cosmological
scales (~100 Mpc) now purport to capture all of the salient physics required to
accurately predict the astrophysics of the IGM. These simulations predict that
about 50% of the gas is in a warm-hot ionized medium (WHIM), shock-heated during
its collapse onto large-scale structures. Despite several decades of
observational searches for the WHIM, however, it remains the most elusive
baryonic reservoir of the universe. Meanwhile, on the scales of individual dark
matter halos (~100 -- 1000 kpc), theorists debate on the mass and distribution
of gas within them. The program will leverage a new opportunity to disentangle
the cosmic web through a comprehensive, observational survey of FRB events. The
three main research areas arising from the three observational activities listed
above are: (i) establish the FRB redshift and provide new insights into the
progenitors that generate these enigmatic phenomena; (ii) use the observed FRB
dispersion measures to perform a series of experiments designed to survey the
halo gas of our Galaxy and M31, while also searching for the putative Local
Group medium; and (iii) directly test the modern paradigm for the IGM (and its
WHIM) and assess the baryon fraction of dark matter halos as a function of their
mass, morphology, and environment. To support the great breadth of science
derived from FRB observations beyond the focus of the project, all of the data
obtained with this program will be disseminated to the community through one or
more channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.