* 1910411
* AF: Small: New Efficient Algorithms for Complex Data
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Elena Grigorescu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2023
* USD 268,072.00

The goal of this research project is to develop new super-efficient, reliable,
and robust algorithms solving modern challenges that arise in mastering complex
data. For example, to successfully employ technological innovations such as
autonomous vehicles it is necessary to synergistically and quickly operate with
data that may be high-dimensional, distributed, erroneous, or even incomplete.
This research project will advance the state of the art in computing with such
diverse data by developing new theoretical foundations for problems that lie at
the heart of communication-efficient distributed computation, coding and
information theory, and machine learning. The project will also involve graduate
and undergraduate student research and mentoring, and the results will achieve
wide dissemination though workshops, conferences, online venues, and as teaching
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on four specific goals.
The first one consists in abstracting global and local models that capture real-
world data pertinent to distributed computation, learning and testing, and
error-correction. The second goal is to design efficient algorithms and
demonstrate limiting lower bounds in these models. The third goal is to
illuminate the interplay between structure and fast computation, especially in
the models mentioned above. Finally, the project aims to develop novel analysis
techniques that are both data-specific, as well as unifying. These goals will
likely be achieved by bridging insights from diverse areas of mathematics and
computer science, including learning and coding theory, sublinear algorithms,
cryptography, geometry, statistics and optimizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.