* 1910040
* RI: Small: Generalizing Learned Manipulation Skills to Unseen Situations by Balancing Uncertainties
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Yu Sun, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2022
* USD 334,823.00

Programming a robot to perform a manipulation task requires a great deal of
robotics knowledge and programming skills. Even for an expert, it would take a
significant amount of time to carefully craft an algorithm and a controller for
a robot to perform a particular task in a specified situation. Giving robots the
capability to learn from human demonstrations would remove the need for
programming and its cost. However, current approaches can only replicate the
human's motion or strategies of the learned task in its demonstrated situations
but cannot transfer them to unseen conditions. Since it is unrealistic to teach
robots all tasks in every possible situation, robots need to be able to
generalize the manipulations kills learned in one situation to unseen
situations. The goal of the project is to develop a manipulation skill
generalization approach that takes into consideration both the variations in the
demonstrations and uncertainties in the unseen situation. By balancing them, the
robot can adapt the learned manipulation skills to new situations. The project
advances the effort of giving robots the capability to learn and continue their
learning in practice. With that capability, robots will be able to perform daily
living tasks and provide needed help to people with disabilities and seniors
without the cost of programming. The project will also produce new teaching
materials for robotics courses and train both graduate and undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main idea of the project is that the robot
should learn from the demonstration data in the form of a broader probability
representation rather than an optimized but narrowed fitting, so that it is easy
to incorporate the probability-based learning from demonstration with the
predictions in unseen situations. The project has four objects: learning motion
distribution inference model from demonstrations; learning the distributions of
two manipulation estimated outcomes and desired outcomes; generating an optimal
action by incorporating both motion distributions and outcome distributions; and
evaluating the approach on real physical system for daily manipulation tasks.
The project not only gives robots a capability to learn and generalize their
skills in practice, but also produces new tools for research and applications
involving making a decision based on experiences and predictable
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.