* 1910275
* A Systematic Large-Scale Survey of the Overlooked Population of Small Objects Between the Orbits of the Outer Planets.
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Richard Wainscoat, Planetary Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2023
* USD 405,252.00

Centaurs are small bodies residing on unstable orbits between Jupiter and
Neptune. They have been scattered out of their original orbits far from the Sun
and offer an opportunity to learn about the nature of the more distant objects
to which they are related. Understanding these objects will give astronomers an
opportunity to constrain models of Solar System formation. The PI and her team
will use data from the Pan-STARRS catalog to find more small Centaurs as well as
using large telescopes to study these objects. They will look for signs that
these Centaurs show some sort of comet-like activity, and they will use
numerical models to explain this activity. The PI will work with professional
education staff at the Planetary Science Institute to develop and deliver 3-day
workshops to teachers of grades 3-8 in southern Arizona.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will conduct a systematic Centaur population
study utilizing data from a single, well-characterized all-sky survey, Pan-
STARRS1, that will allow them to shed light on the evolution of Centaurs from
the Scattered Disk to Jupiter Family Comets by calculating their debiased size-
frequency distribution (SFD), and to better understand the effects of dynamical
history of Centaurs on their activity. They will: 1) Search for new Centaurs in
the Pan-STARRS1 detection catalog to obtain targets of opportunity, and to
collect a statistically adequate sample for calculating a debiased size-
frequency distribution; 2) model the Pan-STARRS1 survey biases with a synthetic
Centaur model and apply the resulting detection efficiency to the real data in
order to calculate a debiased SFD down to kilometer-size regime; 3) make deep-
imaging observations of Centaurs with a wide range of perihelion distances to
search for and to characterize their activity using photometric analysis and
numerical dust modeling; and 4) run dynamical integrations and utilize thermal
modeling to investigate correlations of Centaur activity with their orbital
history, with implications for the activity triggers and
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.