* 1910696
* CHS: Small: Promoting Unexpected Information Discovery: An Interactive Framework for Computational Serendipity
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mary Lou Maher, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 512,041.00

Serendipity is a concept associated with unexpected discoveries that are
valuable. However, most existing recommendation and information retrieval
algorithms, including those used by common search tools and social media, do not
include serendipity as an element they use to choose which content to show.
Instead, the criteria used to build and evaluate these algorithms rewards
choices that reinforce what people already know or believe, rather than
promoting unexpected, serendipitous discoveries. This project's goal is to make
progress on how to predict and foster serendipity when people interact with
information online. One key challenge is how to measure potential serendipity;
to do this, the team will create measures that capture important subcomponents
of serendipity such as surprise, value, and curiosity. Another is how to develop
algorithms that promote serendipity while still addressing people's needs for
relevant information; toward this, the team will create algorithms that balance
relevance and serendipity over time and that develop better models of the values
and curiosity of the people who use them. Doing this promises to make
contributions to the study of recommender systems, information retrieval, and
human-computer interaction, along with developing real tools to support
serendipity and knowledge discovery in
libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigators will first
develop an interactive framework for computational serendipity that is
independent of application domain. The framework consists of four components:
Surprise, Value, Curiosity, and Sequence Composition. For the Surprise
component, we hypothesize that users will be surprised when presented with items
that violate their expectations as predicted by our computational model of them.
We will study two computational models of surprise based on recent advances in
text mining and deep learning techniques. The Surprise component will be
balanced by a Value component, implemented with a traditional collaborative
filtering (CF) recommender approach to ensure that the surprising item is liked
by the user. The Curiosity component reasons about personalized levels and
patterns of surprise that stimulate users' curiosity and sustain their interest
to explore. The Sequence Composition component synthesizes the outputs from the
other three components, identifying how much surprise is just surprising enough
to be approachable, but not so much to generate anxious feelings. The output is
a sequence of suggestions that guides the user toward increasingly surprising
concepts, to engage their curiosity over time. User feedback will be
incorporated to update the Surprise, Value, and Curiosity components for
discovering new sets of serendipity sequences. As a use case, the investigators
will implement and evaluate the framework as a serendipity recommender,
SerenCat, designed to promote and study students' discovery in learning
materials in a university library environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.