* 1910321
* AF: Small: Learning Theory for a Modern World: Transfer Learning, Unsupervised Learning, and Beyond Prediction
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Maria-Florina Balcan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 399,830.00

Machine learning studies the design of automatic methods for extracting
information from data. It is a highly successful technique that has transformed
several fields including computer vision and information retrieval, and it holds
great promise to transform many other areas across science and technology. This
project aims to substantially advance machine learning by providing new
theoretical foundations and algorithms that are required both for new
applications and to cope with the current massive amounts of available data.
This includes developing well founded techniques for learning more complex
objects (than classic techniques that are often limited to prediction), learning
from very small amounts of annotated training data, and efficient transfer (of
representations and other useful information) among tasks in order to aid more
efficient learning of future tasks. These topics are of significant practical
importance and expose fundamental statistical and computational issues. This
project will impact not only theory of computing and machine learning, but also
many application areas where machine learning is used. In addition to advising
both graduate and undergraduate students on topics connected to this project,
research progress will be integrated in the curricula of several courses at
Carnegie Mellow University and course materials will be made available on the
web worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key research directions of this project
are: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)Providing formal guarantees and algorithms for
transferring internal representations (such as a portion of a deep network)
learned while solving an earlier task to new related tasks, in ways that can
significantly reduce both data requirements and run-time for solving the new
tasks. This project will analyze both a direct transfer of a learned
representation, and additional fine-tuning steps using a small amount of data
from the new task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2)Developing foundations and algorithms
for transfer learning in unsupervised and partially supervised learning
scenarios, in order to reduce reliance on difficult-to-verify assumptions in
cases where labeled data is scarce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3)Developing new
algorithms for online learning of complex, non-convex functions, which do not
satisfy standard conditions such as convexity or Lipschitzness. This project
will consider online learning of such functions under various forms of feedback,
including full information, bandit, and semi-bandit settings, and will also
explore implications of these techniques to transfer learning in partially
supervised scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.