* 1910588
* AF: Small: Distributed Optimization Beyond Worst Case Topologies
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Anupam Gupta, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

The modern computation and information processing systems shaping our world are
ever increasing in scale and have become massively distributed. A fundamental
understanding of distributed algorithms and optimization problems has in the
past and inevitably will in the future lead to more efficient, more scalable,
and overall vastly more powerful systems and applications with broad impacts on
society. With this goal in mind, this project is developing an algorithmic
toolbox for designing distributed optimization algorithms which drastically
outperform state-of-the-art algorithms on non-worst-case topologies, common in
practice. The project will also contribute greatly to the education and
professional training of students in this critical field. The project plans to
integrate research and education through curriculum development activities
spanning graduate and undergraduate courses and provides initiatives and
concrete steps taken by the project team to attract, excite, mentor, and support
students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shift towards
massively distributed systems in practice has led to an increased interest and
fast acceleration in our theoretical understanding of distributed optimization
problems. However much of this work focuses on the algorithmic performance in
worst-case topologies. Real world networks, however, do not always exhibit
worst-case behavior and most networks of interest do not share the limiting
bottleneck characteristics which dominate the current analyses of worst-case
algorithms and their provable performance guarantees. In particular, there is no
known barrier for ultra-fast polylogarithmic round distributed algorithms on any
network of interest, while most current algorithms require Theta(sqrt(n)) rounds
on any (such) topology, mostly because such a running time can be shown to be
necessary on some practically irrelevant pathologically bad topologies. This
almost exponential gap between worst-case-optimal Theta(sqrt(n)) algorithms and
the ultra-fast performance which is likely possible in many, if not all, real-
world settings motivates this project. This project provides a detailed program
for designing instance-optimal distributed algorithms. Instance-optimal
algorithms are competitive with the best algorithm on any given topology and
thereby constitute the strongest possible form of algorithmically adjusting to
non-worst-case topologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.