* 1910327
* CNS Core: Small: Byte-Addressable I/O Everywhere
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Peter Desnoyers, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,585.00

The file system interface provided by today's operating systems has not kept up
with available hardware. Consequently, the applications do not take full
performance advantage of the current capabilities. This project will explore new
software and hardware architectures to improve the storage interface with the
potential to provide a uniform, secure and performant interface across a range
of storage mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;?&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the project
will explore novel kernel- and user-space mechanisms to access storage systems
ranging from local persistent memory to remote key-value stores. Further,
research thrust will examine means of providing the flexibility of these two
storage classes in bus-attached devices such as solid state drives, which are
mostly limited to a fixed-size block storage interface. New mechanisms will be
evaluated via software implementation in a research operating system and full-
system simulation of proposed hardware features.&lt;br/&gt;?&lt;br/&gt;The rapid
adoption of cloud models such as serverless computing has resulted in a wide
range of applications which are free of the backwards-compatibility constraints,
creating opportunities for novel research in this area to benefit cloud
computing systems, which may result in technology transfer. Further, the project
will involve and mentor students at the undergraduate, masters, and PhD levels,
and in particular will seek to involve masters degree students from a
departmental program that actively recruits from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software developed as part of this project will be
made available under an open-source license. When possible, traces collected
during this work will be submitted to the trace repository at
http://iotta.snia.org. A project website
(http://khoury.northeastern.edu/~pjd/nonblock) will be used to make available
artifacts, code, and data resulting from this project, including containerized
versions of key simulations for reproducibility. The website will be maintained
beyond the duration of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.