* 1910108
* III: Small: Promoting Reuse and Retargeting in Data Science
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Zachary Ives, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The past decade has brought a sea change in the availability of data. Devices
and data acquisition tools make it easy to acquire new data, cloud hosting and
"data lakes" make it easy to centralize and share files, and cloud data
analytics and machine learning tools have driven a desire to integrate and
extract value from that data. Data scientists must operate within a plethora of
datasets, versions, and representations that span users, groups, and
organizations. They often end up doing redundant work because they have no
effective way of finding appropriate resources to reuse and retarget to new
applications. Data scientists need a set of holistic data management tools to
find, standardize, and reuse the existing resources in the data lake. The
proposed work will address these needs, and it will enhance the widely-used
Jupyter Notebook and JupyterLab data science environments. The tools will also
be integrated and evaluated with the PI's existing life-science collaborations,
with neuroscientists (including the IEEG.org portal with over 3000 users),
geneticists, and radiologists. The proposed work will leverage Penn's efforts to
involve female students, and those from underrepresented groups, in summer
research; and the research will be incorporated into the curriculum of Penn's
Data Science Master's program and online degree
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop the Juneau system, a novel
data management platform for data lakes. It will provide efficient versioned
storage of source, intermediate, and final datasets and data products, making it
easy to index, search, and compare different results. A rich set of search tools
and ranking algorithms for taking an existing table fragment, schema, or task,
and finding related tables will make it easier for users to reuse the results of
prior work. The project will develop techniques that learn from past data
schemas and processing pipelines, and help users design new ones that do not
need to start "from scratch," making it easier for users to reuse the data
models and tools that were previously developed. It will also develop techniques
for analyzing computations performed by the user community, and developing
schemas and representations for sharing, making it easier to promote data
modeling based on how data is actually being used. Finally, the researchers will
create models and tools for "retargeting" limited classes of data pipelines from
one data processing platform to another, making it easier to share and reuse
code across different languages and tools. Juneau will be accessible to a broad
user community because it will layer underneath the popular Jupyter Notebook and
JupyterLab platform, which can be deployed locally or on the
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.