* 1910390
* CNS Core: Small: Scaling Coordination for Microservices with Pangaea
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Wyatt Lloyd, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

An increasingly popular way to design applications is using an architecture that
splits out the functionality of an application into many distinct micro-
services. It remains challenging, however, to implement micro-services that
store and update because building them requires solving many hard problems each
time: providing fault tolerance, handling many concurrent operations, and
scaling up the work they can do. This proposal aims to solve these hard problems
in a way that can be reused across many micro-services that store and update
state. It builds on an emerging design that uses a single machine, called a
sequencer, to order operations to state. Compared to more traditional designs,
sequencers provide better scaling of the work the micro-service does, but make
providing fault tolerance and handling concurrency harder. This proposal seeks
to address the shortcomings of sequencers by finding a general way to provide
fault tolerance, tame concurrency, and provide even greater
scaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has the potential to improve the
performance and decrease the development time of micro-service-based systems.
Given the popularity of micro-service-based systems, this has the potential to
improve many applications that are an integral part of modern life. The project
plans include developing software prototypes and working with large Internet
services to increase the likelihood of technology transfer. In addition, the
research in the project will be conducted by graduate students and undergraduate
students that will learn how micro-service-based systems work as well as how to
build and improve them. Each of these skills is likely to be increasingly
important in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.