* 1910486
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Robust High Order Meshing and Analysis for Design Pipeline Automation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Xiuwen Liu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 276,722.00

The simulation of many real-world phenomena (such as elastoplastic deformations,
sound propagation, and heat diffusion) relies on an explicit discretization of
the space, which allows storage of physical quantities and performance of
computations upon them. However, the Computer Aided Design (CAD) tools used to
design shapes rely on a different discretization, usually a collection of
disconnected high-order polynomial patches, which cannot be used in simulations.
It is thus necessary to convert CAD models into simulation meshes, a procedure
that can introduce geometric errors due to the use of linear elements and
requires manual interaction, which limits its use to high-end applications. This
research will develop a novel, automatic approach to tackle this conversion
"exactly" by using high order elements, thereby avoiding unnecessary geometric
approximations. The project will study high-order mesh generation and simulation
as a single problem, building upon recent advances in robust linear meshing and
developing new finite element method techniques that will allow non-expert users
to benefit from simulation at a fraction of the time and cost currently needed
to accomplish that task, which in turn will open the doors to new applications
in medicine and digital fabrication. The project will involve extensive testing
of the developed algorithms on a large collection of real-world CAD models. Both
the data collected during this project and the reference implementation of the
algorithms will be released in the public domain to foster adoption of the new
technique as well as future research in this direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop a robust meshing pipeline that generates
curvilinear elements that can reproduce both CAD models and subdivision surfaces
with high fidelity, uses a direct measure of approximation errors, leading to
coarse meshes that are designed to match the simulation accuracy required by
applications, and can robustly and automatically process large collections of
real-world CAD models. For interactive applications, the combination of the
generated curved elements and the new error estimate will lead to extremely
coarse models ideal for fast simulation. In CAD settings, it will for the first
time enable precise modeling of complex scenarios such as the driving of a screw
or the simulations of the stress concentration on fillets. The approach will
close the gap between design tools, providing an automatic conversion of curved
geometry to analysis-suitable curved meshes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.