* 1910880
* III:Small: Outlier Discovery Paradigm
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Elke Rundensteiner, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 531,558.00

Staggering volumes of data sets collected by modern applications from financial
transaction systems, smart health sensors, and Internet of Things devices
contain critical insights from rare phenomena to anomalies indicative of
financial fraud, health alerts to system failure, respectively. To decipher the
valuables from the counterfeit, analysts need to interactively sift through and
explore the data deluge. By discovering anomalies, analysts may detect financial
fraud, identify behavior irregularities, or prevent catastrophic sensor
failures, thus touching the lives of citizens in countless ways. While a
treasure trove of stand-alone algorithms for detecting particular types of
outliers exists, they tend to be variations on a theme. This research project is
game-changing in that it will offer the first end-to-end outlier services that
bring this wealth of algorithms to bear in an integrated infrastructure to
support effective anomaly discovery. The broader impact of this project also
includes: the integration of the PI's project activities with the training of a
STEM workforce; impacting the PI's WPI REU data science summer site; and
impacting the new interdisciplinary degree programs from PhD, MS to BS in Data
Science spearheaded and led by the PI. The PI has a long history of working with
diverse student populations at all levels and is determined to similarly foster
diversity of the participants involved in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will go well beyond developing yet
another outlier detection algorithm by instead demonstrating the feasibility of
outlier discovery as a service. It will break fundamentally new ground in
supporting outlier discovery from identification, refinement to explanation. The
proposed end-to-end anomaly discovery paradigm will support all stages of
anomaly discovery by seamlessly integrating outlier-related services within one
integrated platform. The result is a database-system inspired solution that
models services as first class citizens for the discovery of outliers. It
integrates outlier detection processes with data sub-spacing, explanations of
outliers with respect to their context in the original data set, user feedback
on the relevance of outlier candidates in the domain, and metric-learning to
refine the effectiveness of the outlier detection process. Evaluation using
outlier benchmark data sets and real-world data sets and workloads explored in
partnerships with collaborators from industry will be conducted to establish the
utility of the innovation. The resulting system will enable the analyst to steer
the discovery process with human ingenuity, empowered by near real-time
interactive responsiveness of the platform during exploration. Our solution aims
to be the first to achieve the power of sense-making afforded by outlier
explanation services and human feedback integrated into the discovery
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.