* 1910397
* RI: Small: Information-theoretic Multiagent Paths for Anticipatory Control of Tasks (IMPACT)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Hyoshin Park, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2023
* USD 240,000.00

This project promotes the scientific and engineering value of intelligent
navigation systems by finding the best routes of autonomous robots based on the
desired level of exploration, risk, and energy constraints. High-performance
onboard computing enables fundamentally new computational research on
cooperative navigation between unmanned aerial and ground vehicles in real-time
but also raises new challenges in using acquired, but imperfect information of
the system. Robots analyze images for autonomous driving feature detection and
assist scientists by selectively collecting data without interrupting drives.
This project discovers informative paths during the journey, updated as
information about the terrain is discovered. The simulation will provide
valuable insights into utilizing the map. Understanding how information can be
learned throughout navigation will produce a guide to robotics planners, and
offer substantial benefits to society in improved choice modeling. This research
will have a positive impact in emergency situations when some of the road
networks are disconnected. Future autonomous vehicle driving will incorporate
energy efficiency by considering the tradeoff between energy efficiency and
congestion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces a set of novel
techniques for probabilistic information gain by predicting potential speed
classification of future arrival locations to improve rover productivity by
extending travel distance, allowing more time for non-driving activities, and
reducing the required solar cell area. Route planning of Mars robots depends on
a traversability estimate, based on orbital imagery, which varies in confidence
level at different locations. Typically, a visual inspection of images reveals a
finite number of distinctive terrain units, where the traversability is likely
near-homogeneous within each unit. Therefore, once a robot visits a part of a
terrain unit and images it, the uncertainty in traversability of the other parts
of the same unit is reduced. This reasoning results in the concept of
information-theoretic route planning: visiting high-uncertainty areas at the
early stage of a mission to resolve uncertainty (i.e., information gain) and
benefit the future route planning. However, such exploratory behavior is
justified only when the benefit from uncertainty reduction exceeds the cost of
exploration. Particular considerations include 1) a sequential information gain
from single observation against multiple observations, 2) a mixture of
information gain in multiple univariate probability distributions against the
multi-variate setting, and 3) implementation to energy-aware planning with
information gain. When a robot travels through a grid map, information can be
gained by visiting unclassified or uncertainly classified cells, observing the
condition in those cells, and estimating the entropy in other cells. Each agent
updates its path plan every time it moves to a new grid cell. By sharing
information about the state of the grid cells, each agent helps to define the
optimal parameters to be used in other agents' utility functions. If an
identical cell is visited by another agent and found to be in the same state as
the original cell of that type, then all agents have confirmation that the
assumption that these cells are correlated is more likely to be true. The degree
of uncertainty in the map depends on the time-dynamics of the agents' visits,
information obtained through satellite imagery, and the upper and lower bound of
travel times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.