* 1910532
* CNS Core: Small: Language Runtime Support for Energy-Aware Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yu David Liu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 478,592.00

As energy consumption becomes a unifying concern for modern computing platforms,
concerted efforts on energy optimization are required from all layers of the
computing stack. Lower-layer solutions offer innovative designs on hardware and
systems software to improve energy efficiency, whereas higher-layer solutions
rely on innovations over programming models and application software design.
Unfortunately, few solutions exist to bridge the gap in between, leading to
missed opportunities for lower-layer solutions and limited deployment of higher-
layer solutions. The goal of this project is to streamline the higher-layer and
lower-layer solutions through innovations at a crossroads where the logical
world of the application and the physical world of the systems meet, namely,
language runtimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project
lies in a number of runtime-centric cross-layer energy optimization solutions
that judiciously draw from both higher-level application information and lower-
level system information. Concretely, this project will address two fundamental
problems in streamlining application-level energy management with underlying
systems: (1) interference: how application-level energy management can remain
effective in the presence of complex multi-threading and multi-processing, and
(2) uncertainty: how solutions from different layers can compose in an
environment where each layer may introduce its own share of uncertainty. The
highlights of the solutions include a bi-directional energy mediator to
gracefully mediate the interference from threads and processes, and a stochastic
energy optimizer service to continuously optimize energy consumption in the
presence of uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project
constitute several dimensions. First, studying energy optimization at the level
of managed language runtimes has the potential to impact a majority of computing
platforms we use today, ranging from Android-enabled smartphones, to graph
processing engines deployed on data centers, to Javascript-powered web
applications. Second, the cross-layer nature of this project will bring
researchers from different communities together, through workshops and seminars.
Third, the project presents research opportunities for underrepresented
students, and will lead to curriculum enrichment at the frontier of
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will yield a number of algorithms,
compiler implementations, managed runtime implementations, and tools that form
the ecosystem of an energy-aware language runtime. All software artifacts
produced from the project will be open-source, and their repositories - together
with all experimental data and publications - will be made available at
http://www.cs.binghamton.edu/~davidl/GreenRuntime throughout the duration of the
project, and continuously maintained for an additional 3 years after the
completion of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.