* 1910830
* III: Small: Regret-Bounded Query Evaluation via Reinforcement Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Immanuel Trummer, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,999.00

Database systems try to shield their users from the intricacies of data
processing. Users specify queries at a high level of abstraction, describing
desired results rather than the way in which they are generated. Hence, given a
query, database systems need to find efficient data processing plans
automatically. Those plans are generated based on simplifying assumptions about
queries and data. All too often, those assumptions turn out to be overly
simplistic and generated plans do not finish within reasonable amounts of
processing time. In such cases, efficient processing plans must be generated
manually, based on expert knowledge. This creates high overheads for
organizations which employ database experts. Laymen users who have no access to
such expertise may be unable to execute certain queries altogether. The proposed
project will overcome those challenges by a novel approach to plan generation.
This approach makes no simplifying assumptions and therefore guarantees near-
optimal plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will explore the potential
for "intra-query learning," a new approach combining query execution and plan
generation. Intra-query learning divides the execution of a single query into
many micro-episodes in which different plans are tried. Each episode serves two
purposes. First, it generates query result fragments that will be collected to
form complete query results. Second, it yields information on the quality of
plan alternatives. This information will be leveraged to select better plans for
the remaining episodes. The project will use methods from the area of
reinforcement learning to select plans in each episode. Those methods offer
formal guarantees on making near-optimal decisions under uncertainty. This
project will translate such guarantees into guarantees on near-optimal expected
processing cost. The research outcomes will be integrated into SkinnerDB, a
novel database system designed from the ground up for robust performance without
manual interventions. SkinnerDB will entirely abandon tools such as coarse-
grained data statistics, or simplifying cost and cardinality models, that are
traditionally used to select query plans. Instead, it will rely exclusively on
reinforcement learning in combination with an execution engine that is tailored
to the needs of intra-query learning. This will enable it to learn near-optimal
plans from scratch even for queries that execute on freshly loaded data or
contain newly introduced user-defined functions. Starting from a first approach
showing promising performance, the project will explore various extensions such
as parallel and distributed processing, query plan compilation, and disk-based
data processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.