* 1910983
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Scalable Deep Bayesian Tensor Decomposition
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Shandian Zhe, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 298,370.00

Many applications in the real world, such as online &lt;br/&gt;shopping,
recommendation, social media and information &lt;br/&gt;security, involve
interactions among different &lt;br/&gt;entities. For example, online shopping
behaviors can &lt;br/&gt;be simply described by the interactions between
&lt;br/&gt;customers, commodities and shopping web sites. These
&lt;br/&gt;interactions are naturally represented by tensors, &lt;br/&gt;which
are arrays of multiple dimensions. Each &lt;br/&gt;dimension represents a type
of entities (e.g., &lt;br/&gt;customers or commodities), and each element
describes &lt;br/&gt;a particular interaction (e.g, purchased/not
&lt;br/&gt;purchased). The project aims to develop flexible and
&lt;br/&gt;efficient tensor decomposition approaches that can
&lt;br/&gt;discover a variety of complicated relationships &lt;br/&gt;between
the entities in tensors, handle a tremendous &lt;br/&gt;amount of data from
practical applications, and adapt &lt;br/&gt;to rapid data growth. The developed
approaches can be &lt;br/&gt;used to promote many important prediction and
&lt;br/&gt;knowledge discovery tasks, such as improving the
&lt;br/&gt;recommendation accuracy, predicting advertisement &lt;br/&gt;click
rates, understanding how misinformation propagation &lt;br/&gt;through social
media, and detecting malicious cell- &lt;br/&gt;phone apps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the success of the existing tensor
&lt;br/&gt;decomposition approaches, they use multilinear
&lt;br/&gt;decomposition forms or shallow kernels, and are &lt;br/&gt;incapable
of capturing highly complicated &lt;br/&gt;relationships in data. However,
complex and nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;relationships, effects and patterns are
ubiquitous, &lt;br/&gt;due to the diversity and complexity of the practical
&lt;br/&gt;applications. Furthermore, there is a lack of &lt;br/&gt;efficient,
scalable nonlinear decomposition algorithms &lt;br/&gt;to handle static tensors
nowadays at unprecedented &lt;br/&gt;scales, and dynamic tensors that grow fast
and &lt;br/&gt;continuously. The project aims to develop scalable
&lt;br/&gt;deep Bayesian tensor decomposition approaches that
&lt;br/&gt;maximize the flexibility to capture all kinds of &lt;br/&gt;complex
relationships, efficiently process static data &lt;br/&gt;at unprecedented
scales and rapid data streams, and &lt;br/&gt;provide uncertainty quantification
for both embedding &lt;br/&gt;estimations and predictions. The research will be
&lt;br/&gt;accomplished through: (1) the design of new Bayesian
&lt;br/&gt;tensor decomposition models that incorporate deep
&lt;br/&gt;architectures to improve the capability of estimating
&lt;br/&gt;intricate functions, (2) the development of &lt;br/&gt;decentralized,
asynchronous learning algorithms to &lt;br/&gt;process extremely large-scale
static tensors, (3) the &lt;br/&gt;development of online incremental learning
algorithms &lt;br/&gt;to handle rapid data streams and to produce responsive
&lt;br/&gt;updates upon receiving new data, without retraining &lt;br/&gt;from
scratch, and (4) comprehensive evaluations on &lt;br/&gt;both synthetic and
real-world big data. The proposed &lt;br/&gt;research will contribute a markedly
improved tensor &lt;br/&gt;decomposition toolset that are powerful to estimate
&lt;br/&gt;arbitrarily complex relationships, scalable to static
&lt;br/&gt;tensors at unprecedented scales (e.g., billions of &lt;br/&gt;nodes
and trillions of entries) and to fast data &lt;br/&gt;streams with efficient
incremental updates. Moreover, &lt;br/&gt;as Bayesian approaches, the toolset
are resilient to &lt;br/&gt;noise, provide posterior distributions for
&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty quantification, and integrate all possible
&lt;br/&gt;outcomes into robust predictions. Once the toolsets are
&lt;br/&gt;available, the understanding of the high-order
&lt;br/&gt;relationships in tensors, and the mining of associated
&lt;br/&gt;patterns, such as communities and anomalies, will be
&lt;br/&gt;enormously enhanced; the predictive performance for &lt;br/&gt;the
quantify of interests, such as social links, &lt;br/&gt;click-through-rates, and
recommendation, will be &lt;br/&gt;dramatically
promoted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.