* 1910999
* Line Intensity Mapping with the CO Mapping Array Pathfinder - Probing Two Key Epochs in Cosmic Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Anthony C. Readhead, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 990,971.00

The Universe began with a Big Bang 13.8 billion years ago. 400,000 years after
the Big Bang the Universe had no stars or galaxies, but was filled with gas -
mostly hydrogen atoms. Over the next few billion years these atoms formed
themselves into the first stars, galaxies and groups of galaxies, eventually
resulting in the kind of Universe we see around us today. We can't see the
starlight from these first galaxies because at this time the hydrogen atoms
between the galaxies acted as a kind of fog. Radio waves from carbon monoxide
gas in the galaxies can pierce the fog. We have built a new kind of 'radio
camera' and will use it to measure these radio waves and unveil the hidden
galaxies. This is important because it will transform our understanding of the
way stars and galaxies formed over cosmic time and help train the next
generation of radio astronomers and instrumentalists designing other more
powerful radio cameras. The COMAP team will communicate their results to the
public in a variety of formats including a public lecture series, a local
newspaper column, web pages, local science fairs, activities at the telescope
(e.g. open house, tours and star-gazing parties) and an annual visit and tour
for the United American Indian Involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CO Mapping
Array Pathfinder (COMAP) will open new windows on both the Epoch of Reionization
(EoR) and the Epoch of Galaxy Assembly by using carbon monoxide (CO) lines to
trace the evolution of star formation in galaxies through these two important
epochs. COMAP is a pioneering instrument that exploits a novel technique called
"Line Intensity Mapping" (LIM), which will provide a new way to study the
properties and evolution of galaxies over cosmic time, using tracers such as CO,
neutral hydrogen or ionized carbon. The first LIM auto-correlation detection is
within reach and this proposal will put COMAP in a competitive position in this
regard. COMAP Phase I comprises a 10.4-m telescope, located at the Owens Valley
Radio Observatory (OVRO), equipped with a 19-pixel spectrometer array that will
map a total of about 16 square degrees of sky in the frequency range 26-34 GHz,
with spectral resolution of 2 MHz. In Phase I, COMAP is thus sensitive to
CO(2-1) emission from the EoR and CO(1-0) emission from the epoch of galaxy
assembly. The Phase I receiver has been commissioned and science observing began
in June 2019. This award will be used to complete a 2-year observing campaign,
analyze the data and publish the results. The analysis will focus on the CO(1-0)
signal from z=2.4-3.4, which could be detected at high
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.