* 1910110
* CIF: Small: ESTRELLA: Exploiting Structure in Tensors for Representation, Estimation, and Limits of Learning Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Waheed Bajwa, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 511,476.00

Tensors are multidimensional mathematical objects that generalize vectors (one
dimensional) and matrices (two dimensional) to higher dimensions. Tensors, which
can be written as multiway arrays, are ubiquitous in applications involving
complex-structured data. The data themselves may be tensor-valued in some
applications: for example, a grayscale video is a three-dimensional tensor with
two spatial dimensions (horizontal and vertical) and one temporal dimension.
Tensors can also be used in other applications to represent higher-order
correlations between statistical variables; as an example, correlations among
all triplets of variables correspond to a three-dimensional tensor. Although
tensors have been used for decades in a variety of disciplines, statistical and
signal processing methods using structured models for tensor data are less
mature than their vector and matrix counterparts. This has immediate
consequences for data science practitioners: they lack a theoretical framework
for choosing a good model when working with tensor data. This project pursues a
comprehensive theory for tensor data by focusing on a family of structured
statistical models in which the number of parameters can be controlled in a
principled manner. In particular, the project reaps the benefits of structured
modeling of tensor data by quantifying the number of data samples needed to
obtain a given parametrized structured tensor model and developing efficient
algorithms for estimating the associated parameters. In the process, the project
seeks also to simplify the measurement, storage, and statistical modeling of
tensor-structured data. The outcomes of this project should impact many areas in
which tensor data are being used, such as medical imaging, climate science,
machine learning, computer vision, text and speech processing, and radar
systems. Because of the wide-ranging uses of tensor data, this project also
facilitates interactions between multiple research communities from statistics,
engineering, and basic sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws on the
tight connection between tensor decompositions and structured matrix models in
order to formulate the estimation of structured tensor models as nonconvex
optimization problems over highly structured spaces of matrices. The work
focuses on developing a fundamental understanding of structured models for
tensor data along three research tracks: understanding the geometry of the
resulting nonconvex problems, developing computationally efficient algorithms
for solving the optimization problems, and quantifying the number of samples
required to estimate the parameters within the structured model in a minimax
sense. The first track develops a mathematical understanding of the nonconvex
optimization problems that arise when using structured models for tensor data.
These will inform the design strategies for effectively identifying a good
structured model that fits the data. The second track entails the design of
numerical methods and algorithms that implement these strategies to efficiently
find models that best describe the tensor-valued data. The third and final track
characterizes the fundamental limits of the proposed models and their
relationship to the metrics of representation, reconstruction, and prediction
errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.