* 1910022
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Retraining-free Concurrent Test and Diagnosis in Emerging Neural Network Accelerators
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Wujie Wen, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/29/2020
* USD 235,000.00

Neural networks have become the go-to tool for solving many real-world
recognition and classification problems in computer vision, language processing,
life sciences and finance. While promising, smart and intelligent data
interpretation via deep learning is extremely power hungry. To conduct power-
efficient deep learning on battery-constrained edge platforms, one promising
solution is to use hardware accelerators built with emerging non-volatile memory
(NVM) devices, which offer high density, extremely low power consumption, as
well as in-situ and parallelized data processing. While these advances are
enticing, NVM devices also impose extra challenges, as their design and
manufacturing technology are far less mature than CMOS. Furthermore, NVM
technologies are likely to exhibit new types of errors, such as read/write
disturbance, values drifting over time, and short data retention time. These
errors can accumulate while the accelerator is running a deep learning
application, and without careful mitigation could lead to significant accuracy
degradation. To assuage these concerns, this project will develop a self-healing
framework for NVM-based neural network accelerators integrating a test,
diagnosis, and recovery loop that monitors and maintains the health of the
accelerator. Results of this project will (1) deepen the understanding of
interactions among hardware defects and errors, NVM-based accelerators, and
machine learning, (2) increase community awareness of post-fabrication error
debugging and fixing techniques, (3) enrich the computer engineering course
curriculum, and (4) train and promote students of diverse backgrounds for both
the workforce and research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate,
characterize, and mitigate errors that will affect the adoption of NVM-based
neural network accelerators. While existing solutions focus on fixing errors
observed at fabrication time, this project targets the NVM-specific errors that
will occur over the life of the accelerator, not just at the time of
manufacturing. The project will lead to four outcomes, namely, (1) measurement
and characterization of the error resilience capability of neural networks with
different topologies and data types, (2) cost-effective approaches for deploying
neural networks alongside NVM-based accelerators which exhibit new and diverse
error patterns without involving costly retraining, (3) methods for generating
neural network inputs as test vectors which will be tuned to be sensitive to
different levels of error accumulation and accuracy loss and will provide real-
time accelerator health statistics, and (4) an algorithm and device level co-
diagnosis procedure which identifies and protects the most critical and
vulnerable components of the neural network and the
accelerator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.