* 1910385
* CIF: Small: A Simple and Unifying Optimization Framework for Signal and Information Processing Problems with Min-Max Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mingyi Hong, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 409,989.00

Over the past two decades, advances in signal and information processing have
been heavily influenced by new developments in optimization. Modern optimization
methods, from linear programming to convex optimization, have become
indispensable tools to approach problems that arise in a number of core
application areas such as compressive sensing, bioinformatics, wireless
communication, and data analytics. Meanwhile, the tremendous growth in
optimization algorithms for signal processing applications calls for the
development of unifying frameworks, which can help simplify our understanding of
algorithmic behavior, predict performance, and streamline the design of
application-specific algorithms. The framework developed in this project will
benefit a wide range of applications well beyond signal processing, including
machine learning, data mining and computer vision. The proposed efforts also
offer rich and varied opportunities for engaging undergraduate students in
cross-disciplinary research, as well as in K12 outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on designing a framework that
deals with a challenging class of block Minimization-Maximization problems,
which involves jointly minimizing and maximizing a particular class of
structured objective functions. This covers many signal processing applications,
old and new, such as min rate utility maximization and robust data analytics.
This project will take a bottom-up approach, where starting from a relatively
simple formulation, problem-specific features and properties will be gradually
built. Rigorous performance analysis will be conducted, and the resulting
algorithms will be specialized and evaluated in a number of signal processing
applications, including wireless resource allocation in the presence of
jammers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.