* 1910519
* CNS Core: Small: Towards Ubiquitous Sensing With Commodity Wi-Fi
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jie Yang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 458,702.00

The prevalence of Wi-Fi devices and ubiquitous coverage of Wi-Fi networks
provide the opportunity to extend Wi-Fi's capabilities beyond communication,
particularly in human sensing. As Wi-Fi signals travel through space, they
modulate with the human body and undergo wave phenomena such as reflection and
diffraction, which carry a rich set of information about the physical
environment including human activities and gestures. This project aims to reuse
commodity Wi-Fi devices to capture such wave phenomena to sense multiple persons
simultaneously and to provide quantifiable gesture recognition. Exploiting
commodity Wi-Fi devices for human sensing enables ubiquitous sensing for easy
and large-scale deployments without requiring users to wear or install any
specialized sensors. The outcome of this project can be directly adopted by
industry and will have a societal impact by facilitating a variety of
applications such as Human-Computer Interaction, smart home, mobile healthcare,
and security surveillance. This project will lead to new technologies for human
sensing and provide new insights on developing emerging mobile applications. The
research activities will be integrated into Florida State University's Computer
Science education program and will include curriculum development, female and
minority students involvement, and K-12 education and industry
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on building a commodity Wi-
Fi based ubiquitous sensing system that can simultaneously sense multiple
persons and provides quantifiable gesture recognition without requiring
environment-dependent training. The proposed work enables multiple people
tracking and activity recognition by extracting the signal reflections from each
individual person based on fine-grained signal reflection paths. The periodical
change of the reflection signal is further exploited to derive quantitative
measures such as the movement distance and speed for quantifiable gesture
recognition. Moreover, the motion-induced Doppler effects that reflect the
signal dynamic due to human body movements are leveraged to perform environment-
independent sensing. Next, it applies the proposed sensing technologies to
develop human-computer-interface applications by considering issues such as
environmental interferences. In addition, the project expands the Wi-Fi sensing
capabilities from human sensing to sensing bio-information of fruit crops. It
leverages the frequency diversity to capture the physiological changes of fruit
due to ripening and develops mechanisms to extract multipath-independent
features for ripeness detection. Finally, the system will be evaluated using
real-scale test-beds. The techniques, algorithms, and software resulting from
this research will deepen our understanding of mobile sensing and provide
practical value by enabling emerging applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.