* 1910037
* RI:Small:Collaborative Research:Scalable Decentralized Planning for Open Multiagent Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Prashant Doshi, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 145,497.00

Automated planning is about finding a sequence of actions that is anticipated to
successfully complete the task at hand or maximize earned rewards. Planning
becomes difficult when the outcomes of actions are uncertain. It is further
complicated in the presence of other agents whose actions also affect the
environment and reward outcomes. While both these challenges have received much
attention from researchers, real-world contexts often exhibit another property
-- that of agent and task openness. Agent openness comes about when agents exit
the environment, resume, or new agents enter, and task openness occurs when the
tasks that agents must complete change with new tasks appearing and some
disappearing. Such openness complicates the planning process as agents now need
to optimally consider, for example, the possibilities of existing teammates
leaving the environment or a successfully rewarding task disappearing from the
environment. The research is systematically generalizing automated planning to
consider these new and practical challenges while still keeping the methods
computationally feasible. This research involves investigators at Oberlin
College (a primarily undergraduate institution), Universities of Nebraska and
Georgia collaborating closely to develop methods for planning in open multi-
agent systems and demonstrating them in domains such as wildfire suppression,
dynamic ridesharing, and others that exhibit openness. The principal
investigators are using the outcomes of this research to inform their classroom
instructions, and artificial intelligence camps for elementary and middle school
students are planned at Oberlin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach
involves gaining a fundamental understanding of the impact of agent and task
openness on the environment, and utilizing this understanding to develop and
learn stochastic models that represent the openness. These models are being used
to build new algorithms for tractable agent-level planning in such contexts. The
methods will exploit system-level properties such as agent anonymity and
statistical population sampling that allows modeling large populations from
small samples, which has been successful in the social sciences to make the
approaches scalable to many agents. This research is advancing our understanding
of how intelligent agents should perform scalable, decentralized planning in
complex environments, and developing a framework--with empirical results and
insights--that could lead to more robust intelligence for personal assistant
agents for human-agent interactions, robots, and autonomous vehicles, where the
agents reason about challenging environmental dynamics as the actors and their
tasks change over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.