* 1910820
* Spectral Stability and Oscillations of Dynamical Systems, Boltzmann-Like Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Alim Sukhtayev, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 116,698.00

This project aims to develop the mathematical tools that can help investigate
stability and instability mechanisms affecting the solutions of partial
differential equations. In particular, these tools can be used to assess
stability of distinguished states of a nonlinear partial differential equation,
which is a key step in understanding the behavior of the physical system modeled
by the equation. Stability here means the robustness of the dynamics to
perturbations in initial conditions from a particular state. The distinguished
state may be a nonlinear wave, pattern, or coherent structure arising in
applications such as optics, fluids, neuroscience, ecology, chemical reactions,
or shallow water dynamics. The stability of the given state indicates its
physical realizability, while any instability suggests more complex dynamics.
Understanding the nature of such instabilities can be used as a starting point
for understanding the organization of the nonlinear dynamics away from the
unstable state. The project includes research activities that will train
undergraduate student&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's goal is to
generalize the oscillation-type results for eigenvalue problems that are
associated with partial differential equation models. These range from nonlinear
eigenvalue problems arising in spectral stability of shock profiles of
hyperbolic systems of balance laws to problems in multi-dimensional spatial
domains. In particular, he exploits a new set of ideas that cast general multi-
dimensional problems in a dynamical systems framework and thus offer a new
characterization of the underlying issues of existence and stability of
solutions. One of the key directions of the project is the introduction of the
Spatial Evolutionary System, which can be viewed as a far-reaching extension of
the spatial dynamics framework to general multi-dimensional domains.
Undergraduate students are engaged in the research of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.