* 1910522
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Foundations for Gradual Typing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Amal Ahmed, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2022
* USD 249,995.00

Type-safe programming languages report errors when a program applies operations
to data of the wrong type---e.g., a list-length operation expects a list, not a
number---and they come in two flavors: dynamically typed (or untyped) languages,
which catch such type errors at run time, and statically typed languages, which
catch type errors at compile time before the program is ever run. Dynamically
typed languages are well suited for rapid prototyping of software, while static
typing becomes important as software systems grow since it offers improved
maintainability, code documentation, early error detection, and support for
compilation to faster code. Gradually typed languages bring together these
benefits, allowing dynamically typed and statically typed code---and more
generally, less precisely and more precisely typed code---to coexist and
interoperate, thus allowing programmers to slowly evolve parts of their code
base from less precisely typed to more precisely typed. To ensure safe
interoperability, gradual languages insert runtime checks when data with a less
precise type is cast to a more precise type. Gradual typing has seen high
adoption in industry, in languages like TypeScript, Hack, Flow, and C#.
Unfortunately, current gradually typed languages fall short in three ways.
First, while normal static typing provides reasoning principles that enable safe
program transformations and optimizations, naive gradual systems often do not.
Second, gradual languages rarely guarantee graduality, a reasoning principle
helpful to programmers, which says that making types more precise in a program
merely adds in checks and the program otherwise behaves as before. Third, time
and space efficiency of the runtime casts inserted by gradual languages remains
a concern. This project addresses all three of these issues. The project's
novelties include: (1) a new approach to the design of gradual languages by
first codifying the desired reasoning principles for the language using a
program logic called Gradual Type Theory (GTT), and from that deriving the
behavior of runtime casts; (2) compiling to a non-gradual compiler intermediate
representation (IR) in a way that preserves these principles; and (3) the
ability to use GTT to reason about the correctness of optimizations and
efficient implementation of casts. The project has the potential for significant
impact on industrial software development since gradually typed languages
provide a migration path from existing dynamically typed codebases to more
maintainable statically typed code, and from traditional static types to more
precise types, providing a mechanism for increased adoption of advanced type
features. The project will also have impact by providing infrastructure for
future language designs and investigations into improving the performance of
gradual typing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will apply the GTT
approach to investigate gradual typing for polymorphism with data abstraction
(parametricity), algebraic effects and handlers, and refinement/dependent types.
For each, the team will develop cast calculi and program logics expressing
better equational reasoning principles than previous proposals, with certified
elaboration to a compiler intermediate language based on Call-By-Push-Value
(CBPV) while preserving these properties, and design convenient surface
languages that elaborate into them. The GTT program logics will be used for
program verification, proving the correctness of program optimizations and
refactorings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.