* 1910488
* SHF: Small: Whole-application Coordiated Parallelization Through The Optimization Of Abstraction Hierarchies
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Shouhuai Xu, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,510.00

Large computer software is based on programming abstractions, e.g., functions
and object-oriented types, to organize computation and data, which are in turn
parallelized by invoking a variety of lower-level library support. A correct and
efficient software implementation requires meticulous attention to coding
details and is often error-prone. However, these implementations frequently need
to be adapted to run on different hardware platforms as part of the software
evolution and maintenance process. This project develops new cutting-edge
compiler technology to automatically enhance the parallelization efficiency of
large computer software, thereby simultaneously enhancing their productivity,
correctness assurance, performance, and hardware portability. This project is
aligned with object-oriented design principles in modern software engineering
and therefore is expected to impact a modern software practices by enabling
automatic exploration of alternative parallelization and data structure designs
for better performance, maintainability, and hardware portability. The compiler
toolsets developed in this project will be disseminated open source and will be
used as an educational toolkit in the teaching of programming languages,
compilers, high performance computing, and parallel programming
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research methodology of this project explores
a new scope of optimization at the user-defined abstraction level, by grouping
and encapsulating related operations into hierarchies of abstractions, and by
adapting a set of concepts traditionally used in the practice of software
engineering, specifically abstract data types, abstraction adapters, and
application abstraction hierarchy, to automatically discover higher-level
semantics of user-defined abstractions and to isolate algorithm-level structures
and logistics from their lower-level implementations. Pattern-driven analysis
techniques are then developed to automatically discover a whole-application task
graph, and coordinated optimizations are applied across abstraction boundaries
to maximize overall application efficiency. A uniform interface is designed to
concisely document the higher-level semantics of abstractions. Empirical
performance tuning is used to support the performance portability of
applications on a variety of modern computing
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.